Mr. Dembassa Worogagoi (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): Allow me, first ofall, to pay
tribute to the international community's commitment
to the pursuit of lasting solutions to the Central African
crisis. That commitment has shown itself in recent
months through the adoption of resolutions 2121
(2013), 2127 (2013) and 2134 (2014), authorizing the
deployment of the African forces of the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA), supported by French and European
troops, with a robust mandate under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations.

The presence of the African forces of MISCA,
supported by the French troops of Operation Sangaris,
helped to prevent the Central African Republic from
descending into complete chaos. I would like to express
the deep gratitude of the Central African people to the
countries that committed troops on the ground, who
paid a heavy price in human lives during the operations
to secure the cities of Bangui and Boassangoa, which
were at the heart of the crisis.

However, even if the worst has been avoided in
Bangui, the capital, the situation remains volatile. The
capital still faces the problem of maintaining public
order, which should be the responsibility of the police
supported by a functional judiciary. That is forcing
much of the population to remain in camps for internally
displaced persons on the outskirts of the airport and in
churches and mosques.

In the rest of the country, where the majority of the
4.5 million Central Africans live, the security challenge
is enormous. Taking advantage of the State's collapse in
this vast country of 623,000 square kilometres - which
is the size of France and Belgium combined - hordes
of criminals of all kinds are murdering, raping, looting
and committing other serious violations of human
rights. The civilian population is forced to flee into the
bush, where they fall prey to hunger and disease. We

fear the worst, with the imminent arrival of the rainy
season.

Beyond the security issues, there is a State to rebuild
in the Central African Republic. The task is huge, as the
administration of the State must be relaunched, civil
order restored and elections prepared for.

In order to help meet those challenges, the Central
African authorities have formally requested from the
Secretary-General, in a letter dated 27 January 2014
and transmitted to the Secretariat on 3 February 2014
(S/2014/83, annex), the rapid deployment of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation. The deployment of a
multidimensional peacekeeping operation in Central
African Republic seems to be the best solution to the
current challenges for three main reasons.

First, it would provide the troops involved with the
means for sufficient mobility, namely, vehicles and air
transportation, to operate in an area with few roads.

Secondly, such a deployment would provide access
to the resources and expertise required to deal with the
situation in the Central African Republic while relying
on United Nations experience in managing complex
crises. In that regard, I am referring to the challenges
in the humanitarian sphere and in terms of monitoring

violations of human rights, combating impunity and
restoring the State's capacities throughout the country.

Finally, it would lend credibility to the process
of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation.

The establishment of a peacekeeping operation in
the Central African Republic must be decided upon
as quickly as possible, given the time required for its
effective deployment and the extreme volatility of the
security situation in the Central African Republic.

I would like to conclude by highlighting that there
is no contradiction between deploying a United Nations
peacekeeping operation and the work of the troops of
the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic (MISCA). I believe they can
only complement each other, as MISCA's purpose is
to become the core of a peacekeeping operation in the
Central African Republic.

