Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): We thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive briefing and his
outstanding commitment to addressing the issue
at hand.

The unprecedented level of global humanitarian
needs, exemplified by the food crises that more than
20 million people are facing in Yemen, Somalia, South
Sudan and north-eastern Nigeria, is an urgent problem.
The conflicts and violence in those countries present
both short- and long-term obstacles to an effective
humanitarian response and as a result represent the
main drivers of hunger.

The situation in Yemen is especially alarming.
Millions of people there are facing a triple threat of
food shortages, cholera and violence. Fifteen million
lack adequate access to clean water, sanitation, hygiene
and health services, and 7 million are at risk of famine.
Ukraine commends the United Nations and other
humanitarian actors for delivering lifesaving assistance
to the Yemeni people, and we especially appreciate the
efforts of the World Food Programme, which provided
aid to 7 million people in August alone. We urge the
parties to ensure the sustainable delivery of commercial
and humanitarian supplies.

We are no less concerned about the plight of the
millions of Somalis who are in need of assistance
owing to malnutrition and food insecurity, armed
conflict and climate issues. As a result, nearly half
of the population, most of them women and children,
require humanitarian assistance, and not just with
food; even water has become a luxury for more than
4.5 million people.

Ukraine commends humanitarian actors' collective
efforts to ease the famine conditions in South Sudan,
but, with a record-high 1.7 million people still on
the brink of famine, that does not mean that the food
insecurity there is over.

North-eastern Nigeria is another example of acute
food insecurity. During the Security Council's visit
to the Lake Chad basin, we saw that challenge at first
hand, together with its complex root causes, which
include aspects related to security, terrorism, climate
change and development.

The single biggest factor depriving local populations
of access to even the most basic needs is violence. In
other words, the current hunger crises unfolding before
our eyes are, above all, man-made, which means that
they would be fully preventable if it were not for the
irresponsible actions of human beings. In the light of
that fact, we welcome and fully support the joint efforts
of the Security Council and the Secretary-General to
pursue every possible way to end the conflicts in these
countries, including by addressing their underlying root
causes comprehensively and sustainably. At the same
time, we deplore the fact that in the conflict-afflicted
countries of Yemen, South Sudan, Somalia and north-
eastern Nigeria, the parties to those conflicts have all
too often failed to ensure unfettered and sustained
access for deliveries of vital food assistance and other
forms of humanitarian aid. We call on all the parties
to armed conflicts to respect and protect civilians. It
is also important to recall that the obligation to uphold
international humanitarian law applies not only to
direct participants in conflicts but also to those who
have influence on them. Another imperative is the
security of humanitarian personnel in conflict-affected
countries. We therefore call on all parties to respect and
protect medical and educational facilities and personnel.

Ukraine highly appreciates the efforts of the
international community aimed at the long-term
recovery and resilience of the countries in question.
Ukraine stands ready to contribute to that vital
endeavour with the goal of keeping famine and human
suffering at bay.

