Mr. Lucas (Angola): I would like to welcome
and to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Timor-Leste, Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, for his comprehensive presentation of the
report of the Secretary-General. We express our
heartfelt appreciation for the progress achieved by the
Timorese people, as portrayed in the report, and for the
good prospects ahead in building a stable, modern and
democratic society in Timor-Leste.

We would like to dwell briefly on some crucial
aspects referred to in the report of the Secretary-
General. First, we support the recommendation
contained in the report, which corresponds with the
wishes of leadership of Timor-Leste namely, that of
retaining the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) with its current tasks
configuration and size until 20 May 2005, allowing the
Mission to complete key tasks and consolidate gains
made thus far. Thus, we are in full agreement with the
draft resolution on the extension of UNMISET'S
mandate, presented by the Brazilian delegation.

Secondly, despite the progress achieved by
Timor-Leste during UNMISET's consolidation phase,
the country has not yet reached the critical threshold of
self-sufficiency. The public administration and justice
systems are still weak and fragile, demanding
continued international assistance and a coherent and
effective exit strategy when the mission departs in May
2005. This will ensure that advances in those key areas
are not put in jeopardy.

Thirdly, when dealing with the great challenges
faced by law enforcement concerning security and
stability in Timor-Leste, the report underlines the need
for further training of the national police to bring it up
to a desired level of professionalism, competence and
skills, as well as the need for full implementation of
the training programmes currently under way.

Fourthly, the main tasks of UNMISET in its final
mandate which the Security Council will soon approve,
will be centred on the preparation of its exit strategy.
That strategy should be based on the increased
ownership and involvement of the Timorese in systems
of public administration, justice, law enforcement and
national security and, concurrently, on the mobilization
of bilateral and multilateral partners, whose assistance
will be crucial in further efforts towards a sustainable
development assistance framework for Timor-Leste.

Timor-Leste will face, from next year on, a new
phase of its existence as an independent nation, with
basic changes in the character of international
assistance. My delegation urges bilateral and
multilateral donors to continue providing timely and
appropriate assistance for the consolidation of peace
and the development of Timor-Leste.

We took note with satisfaction of the scheduling
of the donors' conference for March 2005. It is our
expectation that the conference will not fail the
Timorese people and that it will be a fundamental
instrument in the framework for sustainable
development assistance for Timor-Leste.
We commend the role played by UNMISET and
the funds, programmes and specialized agencies of the
United Nations system in promoting the rehabilitation
of infrastructures, in enhancing public services,
ensuring full security and in institutional capacity
development.

To conclude, we view the relations between
Timor-Leste and its neighbours - particularly
Indonesia and Australia - as very important factors in
its overall situation, particularly for its security,
stability and development. We praise the commitments
made by those two key countries to the future of
Timor-Leste and the constructive dialogue they have
undertaken on issues of mutual interest, in particular,
concerning border demarcation and management. My
delegation hopes that the process will proceed quickly
and that substantial progress will be achieved before
the end of UNMISET's mandate.

