Mr. Qureshi (Pakistan): At the outset, I would like
to extend my gratitude to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Russian Federation for organizing this ministerial
debate. Cooperation between regional organizations
and the United Nations is critical to combating the
emerging security threats, particularly terrorism.

Let me congratulate States members of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and the
United Nations, on the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 73/334 on cooperation between the United
Nations and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization,
on 30 August. Pakistan was one of the sponsors of
the resolution.

The resolution builds on the strong foundations
laid down by the five previous such resolutions since
2009 in strengthening dialogue, cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and the
SCO. We support and welcome the SCO's burgeoning
cooperation with various United Nations specialized
agencies, organizations, funds and programmes with a
view to achieving common goals. The SCO also affords
us an important channel to underline our interest in
regional peace, stability and development for regional
cooperation against terrorism and extremism.

Pakistan condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, including against people under illegal
occupation. Pakistan has proactively and successfully
taken action to eradicate the scourge of terrorism
and will continue its efforts in the same spirit, in
coordination with regional and international partners.
However, we also believe that there is a need to focus
on certain elements and factors indicated in the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. such as
the first of the four pillars, namely, addressing the
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism.

That is more pertinent to South Asia, which
continues to be challenged by common enemies: poverty,
illiteracy, disease and underdevelopment. Political
differences and unresolved disputes further compound
this predicament. Enduring peace and prosperity
in South Asia will remain elusive until the main
dynamic in South Asia is shifted from confrontation to
cooperation. It is important to seize the opportunities
for the peaceful resolution of outstanding disputes and
collective endeavours for regional prosperity.

Terrorism and organized crime continue to pose
serious threats to our countries. Despite the successes
achieved against Da'esh in Iraq and Syria, the group
continues to manifest and evolve its outreach and
tactics. In our region too, Da'esh has emerged as a major
security threat, which can be a major destabilizing
factor for all regional countries. The group continues to
be strengthened by returning foreign terrorist fighters.

Countering such threats requires greater
international cooperation, including among regional
organizations and the United Nations. In that regard,
we welcome the recent signing of the memorandum
of understanding between the SCO Regional
Anti-terrorism Structure (RATS SCO) and the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED). The memorandum provides an
important platform to enhance the strategic cooperation
between those two bodies in the fight against terrorism.
RATS SCO has also signed memorandums of
understanding for cooperation with the Commonwealth
of Independent States (CIS) and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO). It will be important to
use such cooperation mechanisms to develop strategies
and address the capacity needs of Member States in
the fight against terrorism and organized crime. In that
regard, Pakistan would like to propose the following.

First, several States members of the SCO, the CIS
and the CSTO have extensive experience in fighting
terrorism. The secretariats of the three organizations
should develop synergies, whereby those countries can
contribute to the capacity-building needs of others.
Pakistan stands ready to contribute to such activities.

Secondly, the movement of foreign terrorist
fighters from Iraq and Syria to other parts of the world
is a major challenge. The United Nations and the three
organizations must come up with innovative means for
countering that threat, including through mechanisms
for the sharing of information on the movement of
such persons.

Thirdly, as highlighted above, Da'esh in particular
relies on the use of modern communication technologies
for spreading its ideology. The United Nations and the
three regional organizations must develop strategies for
countering such activities.

Fourthly, the memorandum of understanding
between RATS SCO and CTED must be operationalized
at the earliest opportunity. Activities should be planned
for assisting SCO members in accordance with the
scope of the memorandum.

In conclusion, Pakistan firmly believes that the
goals and ideals espoused by the SCO are completely
in line with the principles and purposes of the United
Nations. Our membership ofboth those organizations is
an acknowledgment of the common principles, ideals,
aspirations and goals for which the United Nations
and the SCO stand. We will continue to follow those
guiding principles.

