Mr. Kafle (Nepal): Allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on this
important issue, which is a true tribute to marking the
seventieth anniversary of the 1949 Geneva Conventions
and the twentieth anniversary of the inclusion of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict on the Security
Council's agenda. I also thank the Secretary-General,
the President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the Executive Director of the Center
for Civilians in Conflict for their respective briefings.
I am grateful to the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2019/373) on this issue.
Durable peace can be secured only through
dialogue and engagement, not through ravaging war or
military actions. The loss of lives and human dignity
in wars and violent conflicts is irreparable. Injury and
pain inflicted upon innocent civilians is deplorable.
We must act to protect civilians during conflicts. The
primacy of politics, and particularly inclusive politics
and constant dialogue, should be upheld to address the
root cause of conflicts. While a State has the primary
responsibility to protect its civilians, it is the shared duty
of the international community, including the relevant
United Nations bodies, to prevent Violence against them
should the State fail to do so. As recommended by the
Secretary-General in his report, national capacities to
develop policy frameworks on the protection of civilians
should be strengthened. The sharing of experiences and
good practices will be helpful in that regard.

Nepal expresses its support for the international
normative framework for the protection of civilians
and underscores the need for reinforcing existing
standards and their effective implementation. Children,
women, the wounded and other vulnerable groups
should be provided special attention, as they suffer
disproportionately in armed conflicts.

The provisions of the 1949 Geneva Conventions
and their Protocols Additional should be observed
in letter and spirit by all parties in conflict. Human
rights law and international humanitarian law are
inviolable even in the worst-case scenarios. Those who
promote indiscriminate and disproportional attacks
on civilian populations and civilian objects should be
held accountable.

Nepal's own experience in its nationally led peace
process has shown the significance of the promotion
of social harmony, tolerance and understanding for
ensuring the protection of civilians during conflicts
and peace processes. Local communities should be
informed and involved, as they are directly or indirectly
affected by conflicts and their aftermath. Local leaders
and youth and women organizations have a crucial role
to play in strengthening the social fabric and increasing
the opportunity costs ofrelapse into conflict. Likewise,
investment in education and generating awareness and
employment can make a difference in the long run.

As one of the major contributors of United Nations
peacekeepers, Nepal takes every possible measure to
train its peacekeepers in the protection of civilians.
We have put in place a thorough vetting process and
predeployment and in-theatre awareness training on
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
as well as robust punitive measures for those convicted
in cases of sexual exploitation and abuse.

In conclusion, I wish to highlight the importance of
providing adequate resources to peacekeeping missions
to carry out their mandate of the protection of civilians,
as it is a challenging mandate in the face dwindling
resources. To enable peacekeepers to fully shoulder that
responsibility, we must ensure the safety and security
of peacekeepers themselves so that we can boost their
morale to achieve enhanced performance.

