Mr. Ward (Jamaica): My delegation wishes to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate to discuss
the issue of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR), which constitute key elements in the transition to
sustainable peace and development in post-conflict
societies.
We are also grateful to the Secretary-General for his
report and for his statement to the Council today. He has

 

underscored the need to strengthen the role of peacekeeping
operations in helping create the appropriate environment for
successful disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes.

My delegation believes that today's discussion offers
an important opportunity for the Council to reassess the
outcome of DDR efforts that have been incorporated into
relevant peacekeeping arrangements, with a view to
ensuring that lessons learned in the past are not overlooked
in future operations.

We wish to recall that with conducive conditions,
DDR programmes can effectively achieve their objectives
for effective post-conflict peace-building. In this regard, the
United Nations can be proud of its successes in El
Salvador, Guatemala, Mozambique and, more recently, the
Central African Republic. These cases clearly demonstrate
the capacity of the United Nations to achieve effective
reintegration of ex-combatants when appropriate steps are
taken to include clear and well-defined DDR programmes
in peacekeeping operations.

In an effort to expand this record of successes, it is
clear that a number of crucial elements must be taken into
account. First, DDR must be seen as an integrated process,
with each activity being given sufficient attention by the
international community. There is ample evidence to
suggest, as highlighted in the Secretary-General's report,
that DDR must be addressed comprehensively and that
adequate political, financial and material support for each
phase of the process is essential in ensuring a peaceful
transition.

Secondly, in addition to the swift provision of ample
resources, the strong political will of the parties involved
and of the international community to the DDR process are
indispensable. The critical and complex task of
rehabilitation and reconstruction must be approached from
this perspective and be viewed as an inclusive process,
involving the full cooperation of the civilian population,
non-governmental organizations, regional bodies,
international financial institutions and, particularly, private
businesses.

Thirdly, among the most important criteria for the
success of any DDR process is the need to ensure that
peacekeeping operations continue to be clearly defined and
that the impartiality, legitimacy, political momentum and
resources they provide to the DDR process be fully
sustained. A clear definition of DDR tasks must be included
with peace agreements with the consent of the parties, with
such tasks being carefully defined at the outset of peace
negotiations to ensure a secure and safe environment for
ex-combatants.

Fourthly, the Council must monitor closely current
DDR programmes. Only last week, the Council was
apprised of the slow development of DDR in Sierra
Leone and the low quantity of weapons being surrendered
by armed groups. The Security Council must continue to
send a strong message to armed groups that their
cooperation in these endeavours is critical to the
restoration of sustainable peace and long-term economic
development.

There are several issues identified in the Secretary-
General's report which deserve special mention.

Adequate and timely funding of the DDR process is
critical to ensuring its success. The practice of financing
demobilization and reintegration exercises from voluntary
funding continues to present a serious resource problem
and my delegation is inclined to support the provision of
funding, within the assessed budget of a peacekeeping
operation, to facilitate the process.

Addressing the special needs of child soldiers,
including girl soldiers, has important long-term
implications for social and economic rehabilitation.
Providing appropriate services for the security, health,
education and psychological treatment of disarmed child
soldiers, as well as refugees and other displaced persons,
should constitute a major element of any reintegration
process.

My delegation concurs with the Secretary-General's
recommendation that child protection officers should be
included in the staffing and mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and we are pleased at the efforts
to include within all operations personnel with appropriate
training in international humanitarian and human rights
law, including child and gender-related provisions.

The linkage between DDR and the flow of arms into
conflict areas continues to be an area of concern. As
recent experiences clearly show, DDR cannot be effective
if arms continue to flow into conflict areas. We support
the need for an enhanced role of the Security Council in
curbing the illicit flow of arms, including small arms,
through the imposition of arms embargoes, where
appropriate, and coordination with regional bodies and
other relevant actors in addressing the illicit flow of arms
and their collection and destruction. The international

 
community must ensure that priority attention is given to
addressing the economic dimensions of arms flows and that
appropriate measures are taken in this regard.

Support for long-term economic reconstruction and
rehabilitation must also be given full attention. This is a
critical element in fostering an appropriate environment for
the full reintegration of ex-combatants. Commitment to the
goals of peace and security is meaningless without a plan
to foster economic growth and sustainable development.
The search for peace and development requires efforts well
beyond the withdrawal of peacekeeping missions, and
strengthening the capacities of societies emerging from
conflicts must be placed at the centre of sustainable peace.
We therefore support the notion of the deployment of
follow-on missions to help support advances made in
securing durable peace and development.

My delegation supports the adoption of the presidential
statement, which focuses the attention of the international
community on the importance of the DDR process in
consolidating peace and security in countries emerging from
conflict.

