Ms. Salah (spoke in French): I would like to
congratulate the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Olara Otunnu, for the excellent
advocacy work he has been doing for several years in
order to advance the cause of children in armed
conflict.

I would like to begin by telling Council members
the story of a young girl named Alison, a child of
Sierra Leone. That is not her real name. She is an
ordinary girl, 16 years old, and interested in everything
that girls of her age throughout the world are interested
in - school, sports, boys and the latest fashion.
However, since she was kidnapped at the age of 13, she
only thinks about one thing: survival. Alison recounts,

"I was forced to walk through the
mountains around Freetown, and I was brought to

a house where I was shut up for three days. There

were many other girls and boys there that had

also been kidnapped, and we were all afraid. We

did not know what was going to happen to us. A

short while later, a group of vehicles took us to

the town of Masiaka, where the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) has a lot of supporters".

Alison worked there as a "housekeeper" for the
Commander. She tells us simply that she had to do the
cooking, wash dishes and do the laundry and that she
had to carry heavy loads for the Commander, but we
know the truth. She tried to escape several times but
was re-captured each time. The day after one of her
escape attempts, to punish her the Commander
engraved the letters "RUF" on her chest with a razor
blade. It took weeks for her to recover. Since then, she
has been released and has tried by all means, including
surgery, to make these marks disappear.
Today she has gone back to class, and she enjoys
playing basketball with her friends. She says, "I have
to study a lot, because I want to be a doctor later on. I
think you know why".

(spoke in English)

Armed conflict exacts a terrible toll upon
children. Caught up in conflicts that have multiple
causes and little prospect of early resolution, children's
rights continue to be violated. They fall victim to
disease and malnutrition and are subjected to forcible
displacement and brutal violence. Whether they are
drawn in as fighters, deliberately targeted as civilians
or forced to become perpetrators of atrocities
themselves, it is children who bear the most appalling
consequences of armed conflict.

Violence has uprooted more than 20 million
children from their homes and deprived them of basic
services, including food, shelter and education. Sexual
abuse and exploitation, wielded as weapons of war,
inflict lasting psychological wounds and contribute
directly to the spread of HIV/AIDS. Such horrors etch
themselves into young minds, with terrible
consequences for children's values, identity and
beliefs, and for their ability to function as leaders and
decision makers in the future. Yet children remain our
greatest hope and our most precious resource in the
struggle to rebuild war-affected communities and to
promote peace and security over the long term.

We must do more to protect them. As Graca
Machel observed in her landmark study of 1996
(A/51/306), our collective failure to protect children
must be transformed into an opportunity to confront
the problems that cause their suffering. The impact of
armed conflict on children is everyone's responsibility,
and it must be everyone's concern.

Allow me to express, on behalf of UNICEF, our
deep appreciation for the Council's continued
commitment to addressing the alarming situation of
children in armed conflict. We thank Council members
for their continued support, which has ensured that the
peace and security agenda includes children affected
by armed conflict. Unfortunately, the situation of these
children is not improving, a harsh reality that the
Secretary-General's report on children and armed
conflict (S/2005/72) underscores.

Allow me to provide a snapshot of UNICEF's
activities on behalf of children affected by armed
conflict around the world. UNICEF provides assistance
before, during and after conflict, working to protect
and support children, families, communities and
Governments. At all times, we work closely with many
partners, often at great risk to our dedicated staff.

In Liberia, the back-to-school campaign has
enabled more than 600,000 students to return to school,
renewing a sense of stability and hope for communities
across the country.

In Somalia, amidst continued instability, UNICEF
has helped to establish 10 regional child protection
networks and has mobilized 80 communities, enabling
Somali children to experience an enhanced protective
environment.

In Afghanistan and in Nepal, against a backdrop
of violence, we continue with our programmes in
health, education and, particularly, protection.

And yet, as noted by Mr. Olara Otunnu, despite
the best efforts of UNICEF and other local and
international humanitarian organizations, children and
women continue to face ongoing violations of their
rights. The Security Council has the ability to take
decisive action to protect children in situations of
armed conflict by translating the commitments of
international legal and other standards into action.

Several targeted measures recommended in the
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict are helpful to the realization of that objective
and should be considered by the Council, including:
close monitoring of, and reporting on, States'
compliance with international standards; holding
perpetrators accountable; and a strong focus on the
rights of all children, not only during a conflict but also
after it ends.

The time has come to subject those who recruit
and use child soldiers to the full force of national legal
systems and the International Criminal Court. UNICEF
is committed, with all of our partners, to ending
impunity and to addressing accountability. Our
protection mandate and human-rights-based approach
to programming demand that we work towards the full
protection of children's rights, including monitoring of
violations and advocating that those who commit
violations be held responsible.

Another way to protect children's rights in
conflict areas and to better address accountability is by
improving our understanding of the problems facing
children and women affected by armed conflict. The
development of a systematic mechanism to monitor
and report on violations of the rights of children in
armed conflict that is linked to response will represent
a significant step in that direction. We thank Mr. Olara
Otunnu very much for that initiative.

In addition to developing effective monitoring
and reporting procedures and an effective system of
justice for children, we need to pay specific attention
to some of the most hideous crimes confronting
children. Sexual violence has often been regarded as a
routine part of conflict, but it can no longer be
dismissed. We must respond to the crime of sexual
violence as a matter of urgency. We need to enhance
community-based measures to monitor the situation
and needs of the victims, improve their immediate
security and provide them with immediate,
compassionate and committed support and protection.

We need clear standards of behaviour for all
peacekeepers, pre-deployment training on sexual
exploitation and abuse and prosecution of perpetrators.
I urge the Council to take action to ensure that
peacekeeping forces adhere to the rules, monitor and
report on sexual violence and are held accountable for
their crimes.

We can also protect children by working to stem
the flow of small arms and light weapons and by
advocating against the use of indiscriminate weapons
such as landmines and cluster munitions.

We can further protect children by preventing the
recruitment of children in armed forces and by working
to secure their release, demobilization, rehabilitation
and reintegration. We should seek commitments from
parties to refrain from recruiting and using children
and should negotiate the release of children who have
already been recruited.

In Burundi, through the Child Soldiers National
Structure, with the support of UNICEF and other
partners, more than 2,000 child soldiers from the
Forces armees burundaises and allied civil defence
militias were demobilized. The demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation of child soldiers are
crucial to ensure that children are not re-recruited.

(spoke in French)

The experience of UNICEF in a large number of
countries in conflict has confirmed that there has been
significant progress in the protection of children in
armed conflict. But, unfortunately, much progress
remains to be done. Two actions come immediately to
mind. First, we must ensure that justice is done for
children whose rights have been violated. In that
respect, I would like to repeat the words of the
Secretary-General in his statement to the Security
Council with regard to the situation in the Sudan.
"The Commission strongly recommends
that the Security Council immediately refer the
situation of Darfur to the International Criminal
Court, to ensure that those responsible for these
heinous crimes are held to account. It is vital that
these crimes not be left unpunished." (S/PV.5125, 
p. 2)

Protecting the rights of children, while at the
same time ensuring that justice is done is an essential
basis for bringing about and maintaining sustainable
peace in conflict and post-conflict situations.

Secondly, UNICEF calls on the Security Council
to guarantee that child protection elements be included
in all peacekeeping missions and that the protection of
children be taken into account in Council debates
pertaining to the establishment of new peacekeeping
missions, such as in Darfur.

By working together we will be able to guarantee
that our responsibility towards children is fully met.
Children are far too often victims of war, and it is our
duty to protect them. Together, we have already made
enormous progress in this area, as Mr. Olara Otunnu
has pointed out. I would nevertheless ask the Security
Council to remain vigilant and cognizant of the
specific needs of children, as well as of the central role
they play in the future of humankind. I am certain that,
together, we shall be able to build a world fit for
children.

