Mr. Mekel (Israel): Mr. President, at the outset I
would like to congratulate you on the assumption of the
presidency and express our appreciation for your wise
stewardship of the Council's deliberations.

The past year has been characterized, among
other things, by two major developments in the field of
non-proliferation. The first is the exposure of
violations committed by States regarding their
commitments, and henceforth the international
recognition of the limitations of the traditional
mechanisms to ensure compliance. The second major
development, which complements the first one, is the
revelation of proliferation networks through which
dual-use materials, equipment, technologies and know-
how are being distributed to States and non-State
actors.

Therefore, beyond the threat of proliferation by
States, there is a growing threat that terrorists might be
able to obtain sensitive materials, technologies and
know-how. As one of the countries that faces these
threats, Israel welcomes the international effort to
identify concrete and effective steps aimed at
preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) and in particular the growing threat
of WMD terrorism.

As a full partner in the effort to prevent this
phenomenon, Israel has recently adopted legislative
measures in order to control the export of dual-use
materials, technologies and know-how that could be
used for the development of WMD. These measures
include controls on items in accordance with lists based
on international standards in this field. They also
include materials based on lists of relevant
international standards that prohibit the export of any
item designed for chemical, biological or nuclear
weapons.

This step provides a legal framework and
constitutes an improvement to the stringent export
control system that currently exists in Israel. This
supplements Israel's export control legislation on
missiles and related materials. We believe that the way
to prevent the spread of WMD, in particular to
terrorists, is first and foremost to increase national
controls and to improve the protection of sensitive
facilities at the national level.
Therefore, as mentioned before, we support this
initiative and the objectives of this draft resolution.
Taking into account our support for the current draft,
we have a few suggestions which we believe can
improve the text and which, we hope, will enjoy the
support of other delegations.

In regard to the fifth preambular paragraph, Israel
believes that there should be a distinction between
legitimate cooperation for purposes of promoting
peace, and cooperation that only serves as a veil to hide
illegitimate plans. Therefore, we believe that it is
desirable to add the word "legitimate" between the
words "hamper" and "international", so that
cooperation is limited to legitimate cooperation. We
would also like to suggest that the words "legislative
measures" substitute for the word "laws" in operative
paragraph 2.

Taking into account the experience that we have
gained during the past year as regards the non-
obedience of States to the traditional mechanisms to
assure obedience to international commitments and
responsibilities, Israel believes that it would be correct
to add the following sentence at the end of operative
paragraph 6 (a): " as well as the compliance of
States to their obligations under these treaties".

We also believe that the definitions segment at
the end of the draft resolution should include the word
"services" in the definition of "related materials".

At this time, I would like to reiterate my support
to this international effort. As mentioned here today,
this draft resolution could make an important
contribution to the struggle against proliferation and
provide long overdue attention to the growing threat of
the use of non-conventional weapons and terrorism.

