Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to begin by thanking the United States presidency
for agreeing to our request to convene an emergency
meeting of the Security Council and to congratulate
you, Madam, on your accession to the presidency. I
also thank Mr. Kim Won-soo for his briefing and his
efforts over the past two years as High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs.

After six years of conflict in Syria, marked by the
most appalling violence against the civilian population,
and in particular by the prolonged and repeated use of
chemical weapons - in particular chlorine gas - by
the Syrian regime against its own people, we awoke
yesterday to learn yet again that an ignoble attack had
just been committed at Khan Shaykhun, south of Idlib.
This can only remind us of the terrible day of 21 August
2013, following the chemical attacks by the regime
in Ghouta, a suburb of Damascus, whose unbearable
images haunt our memories.

This chemical horror, which is hardly new and
should therefore surprise no one, marks the latest phase
of the Syrian tragedy's descent into the abyss. The
facts are extremely shocking and extremely serious.
Once again, lethal toxic substances have been used and
released from the air. The sordid outcome is now over
100 people killed by asphyxiation, including more than
10 children, and there will undoubtedly be more victims.
The symptoms reported by those on site and visible
in the images of the attack are not characteristic of
chlorine but suggest the use of a much more aggressive
substance. This is the most deadly incident of violence
since the large-scale attacks by the Syrian regime in
August 2013 in Ghouta, where more than 1,000 people
have lost their lives.

France, through its highest authorities, has firmly
condemned this carnage, which is further proof of the
barbarity that has stricken the Syrian population for
several years. While some claim that what occurred was
a strike against a chemical weapons depot belonging to
the "terrorists", I would like to recall three simple facts.
First, there was no conflagration, while such a strike
would have caused a fire whose consequences would
have been far more serious for civilians. Secondly, the
incident occurred in an area where the Syrian army and
air force are currently active; moreover, new strikes
were observed in the Idlib area yesterday. Lastly, the
responsibility of the Syrian air force has already been
irrefutably called into question for the use of chlorine
as a chemical weapon at least three times by the
conclusions of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism, mandated by the Council.

Yesterday's atrocities, which constitute war crimes,
come in addition to new suspicions of chlorine use late
last month and the multiple cases reported over several
months, in particular in Aleppo in December 2016.
They tragically illustrate the self-destructive folly of the
Bashar Al-Assad's regime that even its supporters - as
we have seen today - are unable to prevent, and whose
silence is tantamount to endorsing these barbaric acts.
This new outbreak of violence confirms that until there
is a credible political transition, no one can guarantee
the peace and security of the Syrian people or the return
to stability in the Middle East. We must therefore set
in motion without delay the political transition that the
Council sought and approved by unanimously adopting
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex). That has been France's position
from the very outset.

All light must be shed as soon as possible on the
details of this shameful massacre. The Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
immediately addressed these allegations. My country
fully supports the OPCW's Fact-finding Mission in
the Syrian Arab Republic and the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism to enable them
to investigate as soon as possible. All allegations
of chemical weapons use must be duly investigated
and monitored.

But that, ofcourse, is not enough. Those responsible
for these attacks answer for their deeds and be
brought to justice. It is high time for the international
community to put an end to the crimes of the Syrian
regime. No political alliance can justify turning a blind
eye to mass atrocities, procrastinating, equivocating or
diverting the world's attention to other tragedies - in
short, denying the evidence.
Russia, as the guarantor ofthe ceasefire established
on 29 December 2016 and as a permanent member
of the Security Council, has a special responsibility
that it must now assume, alongside all members of
the Council. That is why France, the United Kingdom
and the United States have taken the initiative to
introduce a draft resolution that we hope will unite the
international community around a clear, firm position
rejecting the unaccptable.

Faced with evidence ofthe repeated, methodical and
barbaric use of weapons of mass destruction - in this
case chemical weapons - against civilian populations,
inaction and paralysis cannot be options. Our collective
credibility as the guardians of international peace and
security and as individual States committed to fighting
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is at
stake. This is a question of respect for international
humanitarian law and our ability to restore a collective
norm that has been openly flouted - the ban on the
use of chemical weapons against civilian populations,
which the international community sought to prohibit
for all time almost a century ago.

We have a collective responsibility to protect the
chemical non-proliferation regime that had been the
subject of a responsible consensus in the Council until
now, but which is disintegrating today before our very
eyes. The risk is that all the non-proliferation regimes
we have patiently built together, day after day, over the
recent decades will fall apart with it. The re-emergence
of these weapons in Syria, including in the hands of
Da'esh, while the international system fails to react
sends a signal of impunity that is extremely dangerous
and not acceptable. All of Syria's chemical capacities
must be dismantled in order to protect the Syrian people
and our collective security.

Out of this fog of uncertainty emerge moments
of reality when we can no longer prevaricate or shirk
our responsibilities. The very bases of our values, the
law and our security are at stake. As to our values,
who would fail to condemn those who have murdered
women and children in cold blood and in such abject
and horrendous circumstances? Is this not the very
negation of civilization in its entirety? As to the law,
the Security Council unanimously agreed to condemn
those responsible for these deaths by chemical weapon.
What are we waiting for to apply the law that we
ourselves helped to formulate? As to our security, if we
close our eyes to the use of chemical weapons against
civilians, what legitimacy will we have in future to
condemn nuclear terrorism or a potential bacteriological
apocalypse? Who will be ready to assume that kind of
responsibility in the face of history?

Just a few weeks ago, I called on all of us here
to take stock of and assume their responsibilities
(see S/PV.7893). Let us make no mistake: the lack of
consensus in the Security Council on 28 February to
sanction the proven use of chemical weapons by the
Syrian regime was, unfortunately, a clear signalling
of impunity. The despicable massacre in Khan
Shaykhun is a terrible reminder of reality and of our
responsibility. The time has therefore come for us to
act collectively, with a sense of conscience and all the
necessary firmness, in the face of the use ofweapons of
mass destruction. I would like to express the hope that
we can at last join together to reiterate collectively our
rejection of the use of chemical weapons. The world is
watching us - and in particular watching those who
would protect an indefensible regime, and who would
be complicit for this most heinous crime.

