Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland): Switzerland would
like to thank the French presidency for organizing this
open debate. My country particularly commends the
specific focus on child victims of armed groups.

Like States, armed groups, as parties to armed
conflicts, are required to respect international
humanitarian law. They are responsible for taking
the necessary measures to prevent the recruitment of
children and to ensure that children are adequately
protected. Such actors are often unaware of their
obligations, and direct or indirect contact with them is
therefore essential. In certain conditions and according
to specific criteria, Switzerland is convinced that
dialogue with armed groups is possible and can lead to
concrete results. My country appreciates the important
work being carried out by Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
encourages her efforts to raise the awareness of States
and armed groups with respect to their commitment to
the protection of children. Switzerland calls on Member
States and all other actors in a position to provide
access to United Nations personnel and ensure their
safety to undertake a dialogue on the establishment and
implementation of action plans, as well their subsequent
monitoring.

Switzerland supports the organization known as
Geneva Call, which aims to encourage armed groups to
respect their obligations. To that end, the organization
relies on dialogue, consciousness-raising and training.
Geneva Call has also adopted an innovative mechanism
known as the Deed of Commitment for the Protection
of Children from the Effects ofArmed Conflicts, which
offers armed groups the possibility to commit to a
signed declaration to respect a specific set of standards.
Switzerland also supports the International Committee
for the Red Cross, the organization that also upholds
international humanitarian law and that plays an
active role in the protection of children, as for example
through its visits to detention centres with a particular
focus on children.

Switzerland is concerned by the indoctrination of
children as well as by the scale of the acts of violence and
the atrocities committed against them by armed groups
over the past months. In response to that development,
a good number of States have taken measures to
combat terrorism that seek at the same time to protect
children. However, some of those measures criminalize
all humanitarian action or any contact established to
humanitarian ends with armed groups considered
extremist. Children in areas controlled by such groups
therefore directly suffer the horrific consequences of
those measures, and children deemed to have presumed
or real links with armed groups are placed in detention.

Switzerland commends the work of the Global
Coalition to Protect Education from Attack and
welcomes the conclusion of the Lucens Guidelines.
The Guidelines provide a solid basis for the prevention
of the use of schools and universities by armed forces
and armed groups during armed conflicts. There is an
urgent need for us to mobilize in order to better enforce
international law and to put an end to serious violations
of the rights of children.

The Security Council must strengthen measures
regarding the protection of children as part of mission
mandates. It is also essential to train peacekeeping
staff in the issues related to the protection of children
and to write specific provisions into the operational
procedures adopted as well as into the rules of
engagement. Switzerland welcomes the programme of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
that provides appropriate training for soldiers prior to
their deployment. The programme should be compulsory
for all troop-contributing countries. Switzerland will
contribute funds to evaluate the impact of deploying
child protection advisors within the framework of
DPKO missions.

In conclusion, Switzerland appreciates the initiative
of the French presidency to summarize in a non-paper
the specific operational idees proposed by Member
States and welcomes the Security Council's intention
to pursue this discussion in the context of the next
open debate on children and armed conflict in June.
Switzerland will submit its proposals in writing.

