Ms. Moses (Nauru): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum member States
represented at the United Nations.

I would like to begin by thanking and congratulating
the Dominican Republic, a fellow small island
developing State, on demonstrating such commendable
leadership by placing the issue of climate change
squarely on the Security Council agenda. Few countries
wanted to discuss the security implications of climate
change one decade ago, but it is now impossible to
ignore that this once manageable challenge has become
a world-changing crisis.

The Pacific Islands Forum leaders met in Nauru
in 2018 under the theme, "Building a Strong Pacific:
Our People, Our Islands, Our Will", and adopted the
Boe Declaration on Regional Security in September.
The Pacific region knows that it is stronger when it
works together, and it has shown collective leadership
to address the impact of climate change-related
disasters. The Declaration reaffirms that climate
change remains the single-greatest threat to the
livelihoods, security and well-being of the peoples of
the Pacific. It also recognizes an expanded concept
of security - that climate change poses multifaceted
challenges to human security, humanitarian assistance
and environment security.

We are already seeing dangerous impacts in our
countries and communities, with the most vulnerable
among us bearing the greatest burden. According to
scientists, climate change has contributed to many of
the recent extreme weather events that have devastated
communities around the world. Notwithstanding
the Paris Agreement, climate change is not going
away. There will be no return to a normal climate
in our lifetimes. In fact, the situation will continue
to deteriorate, even if we achieve our goal to limit
temperature rise to 15°C. From the perspective of
our leaders, the institutions needed to respond to the
security implications of climate change are not in place,
in part because we know very little about how our human
systems will respond to growing climate impacts.

For our purposes here at the United Nations, we
must recognize that this type of problem cannot be
tackled by countries individually. Through the Boe
Declaration the Pacific is committed to working
together on coordinated actions that build resilience to
the security risks posed by climate change. For better
or for worse, our fates are now linked through a global
system that often leaves the poorest in a very precarious
situation. Our national response matters, but a problem
of this magnitude requires much greater regional and
international cooperation than what exists today. It also
requires the United Nations to work more effectively
across institutions with related mandates

I would like to focus for a moment on food
production and distribution, because we have some
recent experiences to draw upon. The food crisis in
2007 and 2008 provoked social unrest in countries
around the world and prompted some to declare states
of emergency. Our global supply chains are often
celebrated as a marvel of modern capitalism. However,
during the food crisis they were unable to get food to
the people who needed it at a price they could afford.
Many variables contributed to the food crisis, but they
included climatic factors in key food producing regions
of the world. Scientists are projecting agricultural yields
to fall dramatically in a warmer world, and therefore it
is only a matter of time before the next food crisis hits.

The food system is not alone in its vulnerability
to climate change. Water distribution, international
transport, industrial production, finance and insurance
markets are complex human systems that are
inter-connected, global in reach and often quite fragile.
A breakdown in any one of those human systems
might be more dangerous than the climate impact that
provokes it.

In our view, the appointment of a special
representative on climate and security is a critical next
step to prepare for the security implications of climate
change. I should note that that is not a new proposal;
the small island developing States of the Pacific first
raised it in 2011. Such a special representative of the
Secretary-General would serve the following functions:
keep the Secretary-General and Security Council well
informed about emerging climate risks that threaten
international peace and security; facilitate greater
regional and cross-border cooperation on issues that
might be affected by climate change; monitor potential
tipping points at the climate-security nexus; engage
in preventive diplomacy, as appropriate; and support
post-conflict situations when climate change is a risk
factor that could undermine stability. The special
representative would also be well placed to coordinate
the efforts of the relevant United Nations bodies in
this area, including the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the United Nations Office
for Disaster Risk Reduction, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

We need the courage to grapple with the reality
of our present situation, no matter how politically
inconvenient it may be. Climate change will be the
biggest security challenge of the century. This is not
just about containing a handful ofhot spots; it will often
require a fundamental rethink of how we cooperate in
our highly integrated and increasingly dangerous world.
