The Secretary-General: We are meeting today to
discuss once again one of the biggest challenges
currently facing Africa and the United Nations - the
challenge of bringing peace and stability to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to the region
around it.

Let me begin by welcoming President Joseph
Kabila to the United Nations and congratulating him on
his inauguration as Head of State of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I have already had the
opportunity of extending to President Kabila my
sincere condolences on the loss of his father.

The Lusaka Agreement, signed in July and
August 1999 by six States and three rebel movements,
has yet to be translated into action, but for the last two
weeks the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) has
reported almost no ceasefire violations throughout the
country. This is surely a moment of opportunity, which
must be seized by the parties and those who wish to
help the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The time appears ripe for a resolute effort to
implement the Lusaka Agreement, including through a
genuine dialogue among all Congolese on the future of
their country.

I welcome the calm that has descended on the
confrontation lines between the various forces in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and hope that all
the parties concerned, and all their military
commanders, will take the necessary measures to
ensure that it continues. Any regional initiative aimed
at achieving this objective is to be commended.

In this regard, I urge the parties to adhere to the
plan for the disengagement of forces they agreed to in
Harare on 6 December. Within its current resources,
MONUC has already begun to take the measures
necessary to support the disengagement. In my
forthcoming report to the Security Council, as
requested in resolution 1332 (2000), I will propose the
elements of a revised concept of operations for
MONUC deployment in support of the disengagement
plan. Once the Council has adopted the new concept,
MONUC will take the necessary steps to carry it out.

Peace and stability will not return to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its neighbours
unless and until all Congolese are engaged in a
meaningful dialogue to decide how their country is to
be governed. By the same token, all countries of the
region should continue to engage in dialogue to resolve
this conflict. This requires the new Congolese
authorities to confirm their strong commitment to
peaceful negotiation, notably by taking steps to
liberalize the political climate in the country. I am glad
to note that the new Government is prepared to work
with Sir Ketumile Masire, the neutral Facilitator
appointed under the Lusaka Agreement, with the help
of a co-Facilitator. I look forward to the early
identification of such a co-Facilitator by the Congolese
parties, with the help of the Organization of African
Unity. Any support that can be provided by other heads
of State in the subregion will surely also be welcome.

By its resolution 1304 (2000) of 16 June 2000,
and reaffirmed in resolution 1332 (2000), the Security
Council demanded the withdrawal of Ugandan and
Rwandan forces from the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in conformity with the
timetable of the Ceasefire Agreement and the Kampala
disengagement plan of 8 April. I look forward to the
early withdrawal of all foreign forces, as provided for
by the Lusaka Agreement. In future phases of its
operations, with the approval of the Security Council,
MONUC will be ready to deploy to assist in this
important objective.

The commitment to peace that President Joseph
Kabila has already demonstrated is welcome for many
reasons. Respect for the ceasefire could permit
humanitarian agencies to gain access to populations in
need. Greater attention can then be paid to human
rights and the rights of children, including child
soldiers, once the fighting has stopped. It would also be
possible to address outbreaks of communal violence
not directly related to the main conflict, such as those
in Ituri and South Kivu.

Finally, it remains only for me to wish President
Kabila every success. I am sure I speak for the
international community as a whole in assuring him
that he will enjoy our full support in his efforts to
restore peace and promote democracy and development
in his great country in the heart of Africa.

