Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to congratulate you, Madam President, for your
work as President of the Security Council for this
month, as well as to express our appreciation for the
convening of this debate. We are grateful for the
briefings made by the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and the High Commissioner for
Human Rights. My delegation would also like to
express special appreciation to Under-Secretary-
General John Holmes upon the end of his tenure to
strengthen the humanitarian work of the United
Nations.

The establishment of more concrete conditions
for the protection of civilians and the enjoyment of
theirs rights in the face of the violence committed by
illegal armed groups is a priority for Colombia. The
Government of my country has concentrated its efforts
in reinforcing and ensuring the rule of law throughout
our territory by implementing our democratic security
policy. After eight years of implementation of that
policy, we can assert that we have helped to reduce the
gap between the formal recognition of rights and their
effective implementation.

Strengthening democratic authority and State
control over its territory have resulted in a dramatic
reduction of all acts of violence and crime that deprive
citizens of the enjoyment of their rights. In addition to
those efforts, we have put in place a comprehensive
policy on human rights and international humanitarian
law, which includes effective preventive measures and
ensures appropriate penalties in case of possible
violations, including those involving members of the
public security forces. An essential component of that
effort by the Colombian Government has been the
collective and individual demobilization of 51,407
members of illegal armed groups since 2002. That
process, embodied in special legislation, has allowed
for the implementation of principles of justice, truth
and redress for victims.

Assistance to displaced persons continues to be
one of the areas requiring greater attention from the
Colombian State, and it poses ongoing challenges. To
address them adequately, we have a legal and
institutional framework and a comprehensive care
policy for displaced persons, including humanitarian
approaches to rights and social and economic
integration. The allocation of resources to this policy
significantly increased from 2007 to 2010, reaching
annual averages of over $500 million from the national
budget.

This framework has been strengthened recently,
given the needs on the ground and its established
objectives. To this end, modifications were made to the
policy components of prevention and protection;
comprehensive assistance; truth, justice and redress;
and the return or resettlement of displaced persons. The
implementation of public policies in this area takes due
account of the different needs of people according to
gender, ethnicity, age or disability. We have also
designed mechanisms to ensure the effective
participation of the displaced population through the
adjustment, restatement or enhancement of public
policies. Additionally, efforts have been made to
coordinate programmes defined at the national level
with those carried out by regional authorities at the
local level, seeking to ensure that the regions adopt and
coordinate the necessary measures in terms of budget
and institutional capacity to assist the displaced
population.

Colombia reaffirms its commitment to the
Cartagena Action Plan adopted at the second Review
Conference of the States Parties to the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and
Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their
Destruction in December 2009. My country has
undertaken a high-level presidential programme that
coordinates and supervises the activities of the
institutions responsible for implementing the Ottawa
Convention.
The Colombian population has experienced the
dire consequences of anti-personnel mines planted by
illegal armed groups. The Government is working
intensively on prevention and humanitarian demining.
It also supports the affected communities through the
recovery of productive lands, the return of their
inhabitants, the reconstruction of the public services
network, and physical and psychological rehabilitation
aimed at facilitating the full social and economic
reintegration of the victims.

Colombia reaffirms its support for efforts to
protect civilians and ensure their rights, in conformity
with the Charter of the United Nations and
international legal norms. The activities of the
Government of Colombia are guided by the essential
premise that the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians rests with each State.
Consequently, each State may turn to international
support when necessary. In this context, the United
Nations and the international community in general
have a supporting role to play in the strengthening of
national protection efforts.

My delegation wishes to stress the importance for
the humanitarian system, in observing the principles
that govern its actions, to avoid circumstances that
could compromise the neutrality, impartiality and
independence of its work. These principles are of
particular significance in the case of possible contact
of humanitarian actors with illegal armed groups. The
recommendations concerning such contact must take
national contexts into account when their viability is
assessed on a case by case basis, taking fully into
account the decisions of the democratically established
authorities.

The Government of Colombia reiterates the
commitment of its democratic institutions in
consolidating the protection of the population against
the actions of illegal armed groups. We reiterate our
call on the international community to vigorously
condemn the crimes committed by these violent groups
against Colombians.

