Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation listened attentively to the
briefing by Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu. The
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty,
signed between the United States and the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics in 1987, is an important
treaty on arms control and disarmament. With
the objective of strengthening strategic stability,
the Treaty effectively mitigated the arms race in
intermediate-range missiles between the United States
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in Europe.
It helped to enhance strategic mutual trust between
the major Powers, eased international tensions and
advanced nuclear disarmament.

As we enter a new century, safeguarding the
effectiveness of the INF Treaty is of great practical
significance, not only to the United States and the
Russian Federation but also to international and regional
peace and security. The two countries should have
properly handled differences over Treaty compliance
through dialogue and consultation in order to diligently
safeguard the Treaty's effectiveness.

However, the unilateral withdrawal of the United
States from the Treaty led to its demise, which will
have a far-reaching negative impact on global strategic
balance and stability, regional security in Europe and
the Asia-Pacific region, as well as the international
arms control regime. The international community
should be clear-headed about the impact.

With regard to the INF Treaty, China has made
clear its position on many occasions. It is unacceptable
to use China as an excuse for withdrawing from the
Treaty. China rejects the baseless accusations made by
the representative of the United States.

The world is undergoing profound and
unprecedented changes, as has never been seen in this
century. Peace, development and win-win cooperation
remain the irreversible trends of the times, with forces
for peace predominating over elements of war. At the
same time, destabilizing factors and uncertainties
in international security are increasingly prominent.
Multilateralism is the most effective means to address
our common challenges.

All countries should resolutely safeguard the
international order, with international law and the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations at its core; embrace the new concept of common,
comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security;
fully respect the legitimate and justified security
concerns of all States; work hard towards a peaceful
and stable international security environment; and
promote the building of a shared future for humankind.

The Charter of the United Nations entrusts the
Security Council with the important responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security,
and Council members should earnestly fulfil their
responsibilities in that regard. All countries should
refrain from taking any action that could undermine the
security interests of other countries.

Prior to its formal withdrawal from the INF
Treaty, the United States had already announced its
plan to accelerate its development and deployment of
intermediate-range missiles, and recently it conducted
a test launch ofa new type ofland-based cruise missile.
China strongly urges that country to adopt an attitude
of utmost responsibility, exercise restraint and earnestly
preserve the existing arms-control regime, in an effort
to safeguard the global strategic balance and stability,
and international and regional peace and security. That
is a shared message from the international community.

The United States withdrawal from the INF Treaty
is another negative act in the pursuit of unilateralism
and the shirking of international obligations by the
United States. Its true intention is to render the Treaty no
longer binding and seek a unilateral, absolute military
advantage. China has always pursued a national defence
policy that is defensive in nature. China's land-based
intermediate-range missiles are all deployed within
Chinese territory. They are for defence purposes only
and pose no threat to any other country. China firmly
opposes the United States attempts to deploy land-
based intermediate-range missiles in the Asia-Pacific
region and hopes that the United States will exercise
restraint and be rational in that regard.

The international arms-control and disarmament
treaty system, as the cornerstone of global strategic
balance and stability, is key to international peace and
security. Nuclear disarmament, as one of the three
pillars ofthe Treaty on the Non-Proliferation ofNuclear
Weapons, constitutes an important part of global
governance in the nuclear field. All countries should
follow the principles of maintaining global strategic
stability and undiminished security for all and advance
the disarmament process step by step.

Countries possessing the largest nuclear arsenals
should earnestly fulfil their special and primary
responsibility for nuclear disarmament. We support the
political and diplomatic efforts undertaken by Russia in
that regard. We support and encourage Russia and the
United States to maintain dialogue on strategic security
and bilateral nuclear-disarmament issues; commit to
the extension of the new Strategic Arms Reduction
Treaty; and continue to make substantive reductions
in their nuclear arsenals in a verifiable, irreversible
and legally binding manner, with a view to creating
the necessary conditions for advancing multilateral
nuclear-disarmament processes.

I would like to stress that any arms-control
negotiations should take into full consideration overall
national military strengths and respect the principle of
undiminished security for all, which is a key principle
of international arms control. China has repeatedly
made clear our position on arms-control negotiations.
At the current stage, China has no interest and will not

participate in the so-called China-United States-Russia
trilateral arms-control negotiations.

China unwaveringly pursues a national defence
policy that is defensive in nature. China's nuclear
strategy for self-defence is completely transparent, and
its nuclear policy is highly responsible. China's nuclear
arsenal is extremely limited in scale and in no way
poses a threat to international peace and security. For
decades, China has actively participated in arms-control
consultations and negotiations, under multilateral
mechanisms and frameworks, including that of the
United Nations and the Conference on Disarmament.
China opposes an arms race and works to safeguard
global strategic balance and stability. Moving forward,
China will continue to firmly uphold multilateralism
and actively participate in multilateral arms-control
processes to contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

