Mr. Phan (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for her briefing. Let me first start by reiterating my delegation's categorical condemnation of the use of chemical weapons in any form, by anyone, anywhere, under any circumstance or for any reason. The use of such weapons is undoubtedly a flagrant violation of international law and an unacceptable threat to the life and living environment of innocent civilians. Viet Nam believes that, as State parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), we all share the same goal and bear the same responsibility to fully implement the Convention. We would therefore like to reiterate our support for the work of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in assisting State parties to fully implement the Convention. In doing so, the OPCW and all of its relevant mechanisms must strictly abide by the Convention. Investigations into any possible use of chemical weapons are to establish facts, determine possible violations and deter future ones. To achieve those goals, investigations need to be comprehensive, objective, impartial and non-politicized so that conclusive and incontestable facts can be established. With regard to the issue of chemical weapons in Syria, we would like to stress the following points. First and foremost, further cooperation between the OPCW and Syria should be a matter of priority. While there has been continued cooperation between the OPCW Technical Secretariat and the relevant Syrian authorities since 2013, substantial progress is still needed to solve all outstanding issues. Viet Nam takes note that, during the last reporting period, there was continued engagement between the OPCW Technical Secretariat and Syria. We also note the further steps taken by the Syrian Government in addressing the outstanding issues relating to its initial declaration. Those include further information regarding 8 of the 22 outstanding issues, including amendments to Syria's initial declaration, as well as current deployment of the Declaration Assessment Team in Syria. The initial declaration is one important step in the implementation of the CWC. It has an important bearing on and is an area for cooperation between a State party and the OPCW. We therefore call on the Syrian National Authority and the OPCW Technical Secretariat to continue to make further meaningful steps to enhance their cooperation. Secondly, unity including that of the Council - on this matter is of paramount importance. It is regrettable that there is disagreement among parties on the Syrian chemical weapons file. We are of the view that it is essential to ensure engagement and promote dialogue among relevant stakeholders. More importantly, we need to ensure a constructive, impartial and non-politicized approach to pave the way for further developments.
