President Vizcarra Cornejo (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to greet Mr. Donald Trump, as well as all
other dignitaries and senior officials present.

Peru welcomes today's high-level meeting to draw
the attention of the world and the Security Council to
the need to halt the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery, as we mark the
International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear
Weapons. Throughout its history, the Council has
remained united in the fight against the proliferation
of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, as well
as their means of delivery, in keeping with its primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security, as entrusted to it under the Charter of the
United Nations.

The work of the Council is based on the gradual
development of international instruments, which,
in turn, are based on a series of binding instruments
adopted by the Organization and its Member States.
The most recent of those instruments is the Treaty on
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, adopted in 2017,
which we hope all countries, in particular those with
nuclear arsenals, will one day be able to join. Indeed,
this is not a utopia. Thanks to the Treaty of Tlatelolco,
Latin America and the Caribbean is a nuclear-
weapon-free region, which has enabled it to make
progress in consolidating a region of peace.

As a country committed to non-proliferation
regimes, Peru fully complies with the obligations
established by the respective instruments, as well as with
the provisions of the Council, as stipulated in relevant
resolutions. As members of this principal organ, we
strongly encourage that they be strictly observed. We
believe that ensuring international peace and security
means eliminating the risk posed by weapons of mass
destruction. There is no better way to do that than to
make sure that they do not exist. In that regard, we
stress that non-proliferation must go hand in hand with
disarmament and strict conventional arms control.

It is our view that that implies, first ofall, addressing
the challenge posed by the nuclear and ballistic
programmes of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. In that regard, we again commend the high-
level diplomacy that you personally, Mr. President,
and your Administration have demonstrated in
an effort to achieve the complete, verifiable and
irreversible denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
We believe that the continued validity of the nuclear
non-proliferation regime should also be observed
through the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action on the Iranian nuclear programme,
endorsed by the Council in resolution 2231 (2015).
Furthermore, we must deplore and condemn the use of
chemical weapons in the Syrian conflict, as well as in
the British city of Salisbury.

In conclusion, given the complex context, we wish
to stress the importance of diplomacy, multilateralism,
international law, confidence-building measures and
universality in strengthening non-proliferation and
disarmament regimes. We note that, in many cases, it
is the perception of insecurity that leads to weapons
build-up, and even to the development of new means
of warfare. We believe that it is necessary to work
on that perception in order to halt proliferation and
promote disarmament by investing in international
cooperation and development. Technology must serve
to promote peace and progress, not dehumanization
and destruction.

