Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity you have offered us to consider in a public
debate the situation in Kosovo. I should also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno
for his detailed, up-to-date briefing.

The international community has ministered to
Kosovo since the adoption of resolution 1244 (1999).
Many sacrifices have been made. Today, it seems clear
that real progress has been accomplished, and that is
evidence of the effectiveness of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and Mr. Steiner in their roles and their activities.

For UNMIK's total success, we think that
multidimensional support is essential. Such support
could be manifested at three levels: the level of
Kosovo's socio-political components, that of Kosovo's
immediate neighbours, and that of the international
community.

First, the socio-economic components must
understand that nothing lasting can be built without
reconciliation achieved through dialogue, tolerance,
recognition and acceptance of one's own identity and
that of others, and integration. Only respect for those
cardinal virtues will enable Kosovo to move beyond
hatred, to combat crime and violence effectively and to
know a harmonious political life, taking into account
the interests of everyone. To that end, an integrated
multi-ethnic civil service is essential, and my
delegation would like to support decentralization,
which can promote a truly multi-ethnic society. We
support Mr. Steiner's initiatives in that area.

The second level of support should come from
Kosovo's immediate neighbourhood. In fact, the
inclusion of that province in the great family of the
Balkans depends on greater, frank and sustained
cooperation with its neighbours. Here I should like to
mention, and indeed to welcome, agreements signed
recently with Albania and Slovenia on the
establishment of future partnerships in the areas of
trade, tourism and police and transport cooperation.
However, Cameroon expresses certain concerns,
particularly at the forced repatriations of mentally ill
Kosovars and at the persistent tension on Kosovo's
borders with its neighbours, despite existing
agreements.

Finally, the third level of support should come
from the international community. Despite the
undeniable sacrifices made by the international
community in Kosovo - efforts and sacrifices that
have thus far produced positive results - the
international community must remain vigilant, prudent
and patient in the pursuit of the noble objectives that it
has set for Kosovo. It must continue its work or risk
seeing all its efforts reduced to naught. There must be
greater financial support in order to strengthen the
social and educational structures, the rule of law and
police training. There must also be more substantial
participation in the economic recovery and measures to
address the severe trade deficit, to encourage foreign
investment, to promote job creation and to strengthen
the active population's capacities for education and
training.

We welcome the municipal elections held on 26
October in Kosovo. We appreciated the calm that
surrounded the preparations for those elections, as well
as the fact that they proceeded according to democratic
norms, as Mr. Guehenno emphasized. However, we
deplore the assassination of the President of the Suva
Reka Municipal Assembly and of two members of his
security staff.

An assessment of the elections, while generally
positive, nevertheless reveals certain characteristics
that give rise to concern. One of them is the low
participation of Kosovo Serbs; at this point, we do not
believe that was the best way to state their demands or
to defend their cause. Another is the return of political
violence, and the third is the ethnically motivated vote.
In that regard, we believe that the ethnic majority has a
fundamental role to play in promoting a multi-ethnic
society, taking into account the interests of all the
components of society. We appreciate the strong and
unequivocal condemnation of the murders in Suva
Reka by all the local political leaders, and we think that
all of the province's political actors must understand
that the future of Kosovo depends on tolerance,
integration and participation.

We should like in conclusion to assure Mr.
Steiner of our full support.

