Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Under-
Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings today.

The United States position on the humanitarian
situation in Idlib is simple: we need to see a full and
immediate de-escalation of violence by all sides, and in
particular the Al-Assad regime forces and the Russian
Federation in and around Idlib province. The regime's
military escalation is unacceptable and poses a reckless
and irresponsible threat to the security and stability of
the region.

We were hopeful that the Russian Federation's
announcement on 13 June of a ceasefire between Turkey
and the Russian Federation would bring a reprieve to
the civilians of Idlib. However, as we just heard from
the United Nations, this latest ceasefire appears already
to have broken down, and the Syrian regime is showing
no signs of stopping its offensive push into Idlib, in
clear violation of the 2018 Sochi agreement reached
between Turkey and Russia.

Reports of Al-Assad regime forces shelling Turkish
positions in the Idlib demilitarized zone resulting in the
injuries of Turkish soldiers are alarming. The United
States is gravely concerned about the threat that this
offensive poses to Turkey and Turkish military forces.
Such acts are increasing tensions and the threat of a
wider escalation ofthe conflict, which would ultimately
put millions of Syrian civilians at risk inside Syria.

The United States stands with our NATO ally
Turkey in calling for the preservation of the 2018 Sochi
agreement ceasefire as agreed by Russia and Turkey
last September and confirmed at the Istanbul Summit
in October. Furthermore, the United States strongly
supports Turkey's efforts to de-escalate the violence. It
is essential that the parties restore the September Sochi
ceasefire line.

Over the past four years, the Russian Federation
has announced at least 10 ceasefire agreements that
it has gone on to violate or disregard despite the
risk to civilian lives and humanitarian conditions
on the ground. The Al-Assad regime and its allies
have used those ceasefires to seek a tactical military
advantage - to acquire ammunition, reposition forces
and send in reinforcements - while it has ultimately,
every time, resumed its brutal offensives against
civilian populations and moderate opposition groups,
which have resulted in mass displacement, civilian
casualties and restricted humanitarian access.

The United States is gravely concerned that, absent
an immediate and full return by all parties to the 2018
Sochi agreement ceasefire line and the immediate
restoration of the de-escalation agreements, the
humanitarian conditions in Idlib and north-west Syria
could soon surpass the international community's
ability to conduct a robust humanitarian response.

Reconstituting the 2018 Sochi agreement ceasefire
is also essential for the safety of medical workers and
humanitarians, and the continuation of the United
Nations ability to freely implement cross-border aid
deliveries throughout all agreed border crossings, and
in accordance with resolution 2449 (2018).

The United States and our partners are steadfast
in our position that there is no military solution to the
Syrian conflict: not to the conflict in Idlib any more
than to the conflict in Syria more broadly. The United
States is determined to see a lasting and immediate
return to the Sochi agreement ceasefire in order to
protect civilian lives and preserve the current ceasefire
lines while the United Nations pushes ahead to
implement the political transition outlined in resolution
2254 (2015).

The United States therefore reiterates its calls on
all parties, including Russia and the Syrian regime, to
abide by their commitments outlined in the September
2018 Sochi memorandum of understanding to end the
violence, avoid a large-scale military offensive, return
to a de-escalation of violence in the area and allow
for unhindered humanitarian access to address this
humanitarian disaster. The Security Council and the
Syrian people cannot accept anything less.

