Mr. Kingibe: At the outset, may I welcome the
remarks that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General just made regarding Darfur. The
report of the Secretary-General to which he referred
was circulated this morning, but, listening very closely
to his remarks, I cannot but fully share his very deep
analysis of the situation in Darfur. He has conveyed
this analysis with great insight, characteristic passion
and commitment. I have taken note of his
recommendations, which the leadership of the African
Union (AU) will, no doubt, fully and carefully consider
and reach a conclusion thereupon.

I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of February. I should also like to express
my appreciation for the kind invitation extended to me
in my capacity as the Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union
in the Sudan to participate in this important briefing
session on the two reports of the Secretary-General on
the Sudan.

The significance of this day and of this meeting
of the Security Council is aptly underscored by the

participation of the First Vice-President of the
Republic of the Sudan, His Excellency Mr. Ali Othman
Taha, and of the Chairman of the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A), His
Excellency Mr. John Garang. These two statesmen are
the architects of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
that we are all celebrating. By directly negotiating the
final phase of the Naivasha process between
themselves, with great wisdom and patience and
patriotism, they have ensured Sudanese ownership of
the process and the outcome. Now that they are both
going to play crucial roles as partners in the incoming
Government of National Unity, the AU salutes their
Excellencies and looks forward to their again bringing
the "Midas Touch" to the Darfur and other contentions
simmering in their great country.

Again, this morning's meeting is timely because
the signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement on
9 January 2005 turned a new chapter in the history of
the Sudan. The briefing meeting today offers all of us a
window of opportunity to reassess our collective
efforts and thus demonstrate to the people of the Sudan
that the Security Council and the wider international
community remain committed to accompanying them
as they strive to implement the landmark Agreement
between the Government of the Sudan and the
SPLM/A. No less importantly, this briefing meeting
should also signal to the Sudanese parties the
expectations of the Security Council and the
international community that they should continue to
stay the course towards the speedy conclusion of the
few outstanding issues, and thereby pave the way for a
start on the implementation modalities.

This is the reason we welcome the report of the
Secretary-General dated 31 January 2005 (S/2005/57)
and note with satisfaction the observations and
recommendations contained therein. We welcome in
particular the comprehensive proposals for the
deployment of a United Nations peace support
operation in the Sudan, as outlined in section VI of the
report. President Konare strongly supports the
Secretary-General's proposals for a united, unified
approach for the coordination of the United Nations
activities by pulling together the critical resources of
the agencies, funds and programmes of the United
Nations.

That unified approach and unity of effort are all
the more vital for the envisaged working relationship
between the AU and the United Nations, and the
African Mission in the Sudan and the United Nations
Advance Mission in the Sudan, as defined in Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter. In this regard, the
Chairperson confirms with satisfaction the ongoing
discussions aimed at strengthening not only
institutional cooperation between the two
organizations' Missions in the Sudan, but also between
the relevant policy organs and officials at all levels. He
appreciates this initiative of the Secretary-General,
whose objective is to maximize the full exploitation of
our complementarities through mutually agreed joint
coordination and cooperation mechanisms.

Furthermore, President Konare appreciates the
acknowledgement by the Secretary-General in his
various reports, and indeed by this Council, of the
leading role the African Union plays, and will continue
to play, in the efforts to find negotiated, political
solutions to the security and political problems in
Darfur. The AU takes this role with all seriousness, and
we are conscious of our historic responsibility. With
continuing understanding and cooperation on the part
of the international community as a whole, which it has
so far so generously extended, our ultimate success in
this regard is assured.

We also welcome the Secretary-General's two
reports dated 7 January 2005 (S/2005/10 and Corr.1)
and 31 January 2005 (S/2005/57). The detailed and
comprehensive report of 7 January fully accords with
the African Union's own observations and conclusions
as reported by the Chairperson of the Commission to
the just-concluded Abuja summit of the African Union.
The Secretary-General shares the concern at the
continuing violation of the N'Djamena Ceasefire
Agreement by all sides in Darfur and at the increasing
deterioration in the security situation over the past four
months. However, since the recent arrival of more
troops, there has been some respite in the past 10 days
from the prevailing and widespread cycle of violence.
Here, it is appropriate to acknowledge the solemn
undertaking that the First Vice-President, His
Excellency Mr. Ali Othman Taha, gave the African
Union troops when he visited their headquarters in
Naivasha four days ago that he would personally take
responsibility for Darfur and ensure that peace returns
as soon as possible.

The African Union and, I am sure, the
international community as a whole will give Mr. Taha
their full cooperation in this, his commitment and
endeavour. Indeed, it was because the African Union
recognized early - as Mr. Jan Pronk just mentioned -
the need to commit sufficient troops to the task in
Darfur that the AU Peace and Security Council, at its
meeting of 20 October 2004, decided to ramp up its
personnel to a strength of 3,320. Because of logistical
and other constraints, full deployment status has not
yet been achieved. However, as of yesterday,
7 February, the African Union has deployed on the
ground in Darfur 370 military observers, a protection
force of 1,410, 35 military police, 11 Ceasefire
Commission staff officers and 81 civilian police. An
additional 300 troops will soon be deployed from
South Africa and Chad. Ultimately, with the continuing
indispensable material and financial support of our
partners - especially the United States, the European
Union, Canada, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom,
Germany and others - every effort will be made to
accelerate the current programme of full deployment of
the total strength of 3,320 by the middle of April 2005.

However, although the mere presence and the
proactive initiatives of the African Union troops -
which Mr. Jan Pronk has praised - have appreciably
helped to avert a worsening of the security and
humanitarian situations, it is also clear that, no matter
how many troops are committed in Darfur, it is only
the Sudanese parties themselves who can bring the
crisis there to an end. So far, I cannot affirm that the
parties have demonstrated sufficient political will or
commitment to find a lasting solution to the crisis.

And yet, however much such a solution is
delayed, the truth that there can be no military solution,
but only a political one, to the conflict in Darfur will
prevail. In that regard, we appreciate the contribution
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
of the United Nations Advance Mission in the Sudan as
a whole and of our other partners in the wider
international community who are actively encouraging
the parties to come to terms with that reality. We urge
that those efforts continue in order to create an
enabling environment for an early resumption of the
adjourned Abuja inter-Sudanese peace talks.

We cannot ignore the fact that, prior to the
convening of this Security Council meeting, the report
of the International Commission of Inquiry on Darfur
was submitted to the Secretary-General on 25 January
2005. The African Union is concerned about some
aspects of the initial comments that followed. It
appears that the debate as to what label to give the
serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law committed in Darfur has not - and
cannot - stop the continuation of those violations or
bring their perpetrators to account. By whatever name
they are called, the crimes committed in Darfur were
heinous and must not go unpunished. As matters stand,
the international community risks allowing the guilty
to escape punishment simply because there is no
consensus on the appropriate forum in which to
prosecute the crimes.

In our view, the central consideration should be
how to obtain speedy but comprehensive justice in the
most cost-effective way so that clear lessons are
learned and salutary examples are set such that, after
Rwanda and now Darfur, we can truly say, "No more".
In that regard, we welcome the steps that the
Government of the Sudan is undertaking to implement
some of the recommendations of the report, as
confirmed this morning by the First Vice-President in
his intervention.

In concluding my remarks, I should like to state
that, in the view of the African Union, the coming
weeks are critical not only for the prospects for
progress in resolving the Darfur crisis, but also for the
smooth launching of the implementation of the north-
south Comprehensive Peace Agreement. In that regard,
I should highlight as very critical the need for
continuing international commitment to the ongoing
efforts by the international community as a whole, led
by the Government of Norway, to mobilize resources
for the construction and reconstruction of southern
Sudan and the other war-affected areas of the Sudan.
We urge everyone to contribute generously to the
various funds that will be set up for that purpose.

Indeed, how the implementation of the north-
south Comprehensive Peace Agreement unfolds will
determine not only the future of Darfur and the other
unresolved contentious issues elsewhere in the Sudan,
but the future of the country as a whole. Fortunately,
however, we are pleased to note that the Secretary-
General's report provides a viable, holistic framework
to deal with those interrelated matters. The African
Union is committed and ready to extend maximum
cooperation in the realization of the objectives set out
for the proposed United Nations peace support
operation in the Sudan.

