Mr. Enkhsaikhan (Mongolia): It is a great honour for
me to have the opportunity to participate in this open
debate of the Council on this item. At the outset, I would
like to express my delegation's appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for this timely initiative to follow-up last
year's open debate of the Council on this important issue
with the participation of the wider membership of the
Organization.

My delegation's thanks and appreciation also go to
the Secretary-General for his report to the Council in
response to last year's open debate held under Malaysia's
presidency. My delegation welcomes the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report on the question of increasing the role of United
Nations peacekeeping in the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants as an integral part of
overall United Nations peacekeeping operations and post-
conflict peace-building.

My delegation fully agrees with the view that
effective disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
are instrumental in building lasting peace and security in
post-conflict societies. In this respect, the set of
recommendations proposed by the Secretary-General in
his report are crucial in identifying the appropriate
principles and guidelines for a practical disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme in a
peacekeeping environment. Therefore we hope that
today's consideration of this item will prove useful for
future peacekeeping operations and post-conflict peace-
building activities.

My delegation has on numerous occasions made
statements in the Council's open debates on the issues
related to the maintenance of international peace and
security, as well as on post-conflict peace-building.
Today, I would like to touch upon some elements that
seem to be essential, from Mongolia's perspective, to
effective disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
measures in post-conflict situations.

First, any post-conflict peace-building programme
should include short-term measures, such as the
disarmament and demobilization of ex-combatants and the
social integration of political rivals into post-war society
on the basis, of course, of their goodwill and mutual
confidence. Furthermore, these short-term measures need
to be followed-up by long-term programmes and
strategies aimed at strengthening national institutions,
good governance and civil society; promoting democracy
and human rights; eradicating poverty; and, of course,
ensuring sustainable development.

Secondly, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, in our View, should form an interrelated and
integrated programme within the mandate of a specific
peacekeeping mission that is supported by sufficient

 

financial and human resources and other necessary
facilities. It is our belief that only such a peacekeeping
mission would be able to fully cope with the tasks assigned.

T hirdly, overall disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes should lay the foundation for a
comprehensive peace agreement that is to end the conflict.
In our View, the plan of measures to be taken, both
nationally and internationally, to implement the tasks of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration should be
clearly reflected in that peace agreement.

Fourthly, ensuring the participation of international
organizations and Member States and the coordination of
their activities are very important factors in tailoring those
specific peace-building measures and programmes. In our
view, the international community and regional
organizations should play an important role in addressing
the problems of various post-conflict groups on the basis of
new power-sharing or other agreed arrangements. We
believe that, bearing in mind their nature, obligations and
interests, regional organizations have a special stake and
role to play in post-conflict peace-building - a role that no
other international body can effectively fulfil. We hope that
this will be borne in mind.

Fifthly, as far as disarmament is concerned, we attach
great importance to the United Nations conference on the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its
aspects that is to be convened in June and July 2001. In
this respect, my delegation agrees with others in urging the
international community to spare no effort in bringing the
conference on this crucial issue to a positive outcome.

Sixthly, my delegation would like to support the
Secretary-General's special focus on the problem of child
soldiers and their integration into society.

Today, about 300,000 children under the age of 18 are
involved in armed conflicts around the world. This is a
truly challenging problem facing the international
community at the dawn of this new century. Therefore,
Mongolia strongly endorses the Secretary-General's
proposal that the question of child soldiers' disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration be fully included in overall
peace-building programmes. In this connection, we also
welcome the agreement recently reached in the Working
Group on a draft optional protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, raising the minimum age for participation in
conflict from 15 to 18, and setting the age limit for
compulsory recruitment to 18 and the minimum age for
voluntary enlistment to at least 16.

Lastly, my delegation would like to underline that,
while the United Nations undertakes peacekeeping and
peace-building activities, the principles of political
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity are to
be fully respected and all States should comply with their
obligations under international law, as is rightly noted in
the draft presidential statement on this issue. My
delegation finds this draft document useful and practical
and hopes it will be adopted soon.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate once again my
delegation's support for United Nations efforts aimed at
conflict prevention and resolution, peacekeeping and post-
conflict peace-building in different regions affected by
armed conflicts. We expect concrete input from today's
discussion of this important issue.

