The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Croatia in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nobilo
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the further
report of the Secretary-General on the situation of human
rights in Croatia pursuant to Security Council resolution
1019 (1995), document S/1996/1011 and Corr.1.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General of 5 December 1996
(S/ 1996/ 1011 and Corr.1), submitted pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1019 (1995) on Croatia.

"The Security Council acknowledges notable
progress in the humanitarian situation, in particular
measures taken by the Government of Croatia to meet
the most urgent humanitarian needs of the Croatian
Serb population.

"Although the security situation has improved
slightly, the Security Council, however, expresses its
concern at continued acts of harassment, looting and
physical attacks against Croatian Serbs and, in
particular, involvement by Croatian uniformed
military and police officials in a number of those
incidents. It calls upon the Government of Croatia to
intensify its efforts to improve the security situation
and to ensure adequate security conditions for the
local Serb population including the urgent re-
establishment of a functioning court system in the
former sectors North and South.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned that
in spite of its previous requests there has been little
progress on the issue of the return of the Croatian
Serb refugees and urges the Government of Croatia
to adopt a comprehensive approach in order to
facilitate the return of refugees originating from
Croatia to their homes of origin throughout Croatia.
It deplores the continued failure by the Government
of Croatia to safeguard effectively their property
rights, especially the situation where many of those
Serbs who have returned to the former sectors have
been unable to regain possession of their properties.
The Council calls upon the Government of Croatia
to apply immediately proper procedures to the
question of property rights and to stop all forms of
discrimination against the Croatian Serb population
in the provision of social benefits and reconstruction
assistance.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned at
reports that the new amnesty law is not being
implemented in a fair and equitable manner. It
underlines that equitable application of that law is
Vital for building confidence and promoting
reconciliation in Croatia as well as for the peaceful
reintegration of the Region of Eastern Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Sirmium.

"The Security Council stresses the importance
of the commitments undertaken by the Government
of Croatia in relation to the Council of Europe,
including its signature of the Framework Convention
for the Protection of National Minorities, and
expects that the Government of Croatia will
implement those commitments fully and without
delay.

"The Security Council reiterates its call upon
the Government of Croatia to cooperate fully with
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and to conduct investigations into and the prosecution
of all persons accused of serious violations of
international humanitarian law, especially those
committed in the course of military operations in
1995.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter and requests that the Secretary-General

continue to report on the situation, in any case no
later than 10 March 1997,"

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1996/48.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.55 pm.

