Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine): Since this is the first time I
have spoken in the Security Council in the month of
November, I should like, on behalf of the delegation of
Ukraine, to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the most important and responsible post of the presidency
of the Security Council. We believe in your diplomatic
experience and skills and hope that they will help you to
overcome successfully all the difficulties the Security
Council could face in the performance of its duties.

Ukraine granted the initialling of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Annexes thereto with a feeling of
deep relief and satisfaction, and the President of Ukraine
today issued a statement in this connection. After
43 months of fratricidal war in the Balkans, the ordinary
people - children, women and the elderly - finally
have a chance to wake up in the morning without fear of
being killed and to look to the future with well-grounded
optimism. By initialling the provisions of the Peace
Agreement, the leaders of the three Balkan States made
a choice in favour of peace. In his statement on the
Agreement, the President of Ukraine stressed that
"its implementation may be reached only on the
condition of the continuation of intensive

 

negotiations and if all the parties back, by real deeds,
their aspirations to peace".

Common sense and the logic of life have prevailed
over the irrationality of war. We pay tribute to the courage
and political wisdom of the Presidents of Croatia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Serbia, who managed to rise above
the existing mutual mistrust, suspicion and feelings of
revenge and frustration and take a step towards each other.

We cannot but agree with the words that Mr. Richard
Holbrooke said yesterday in Dayton:

"On paper we have peace; to make it work is our
greatest challenge".

The delegation of Ukraine believes that the main
responsibility for the further development of the peace
process rests with the parties to the conflict. Without their
political will, it will be impossible to make this process
irreversible and break the vicious circle of violence in the
Balkans. We hope that all of the parties to the Peace
Agreement will faithfully honour the obligations they are
going to undertake by signing it.

At the same time, we are convinced that the
international community must contribute to the process of
implementing the Peace Agreement. Ukraine supports the
idea of deploying a peace implementation force in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and will participate in its mission along
with troops on the ground.

The initialling of the Peace Agreement is only the first
step on the road to rehabilitation and renewal. This includes
not only the rebuilding of the destroyed houses and
factories, but also the restoration of confidence among the
peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Ukraine is ready to join in the efforts of other States
in reconstructing that war-torn country in order to
contribute to the normalization of the lives of the ordinary
people. We hope that the feelings of traditional friendship
and mutual understanding that have always existed between
the peoples of Ukraine and the peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina will help us in this process.

In addressing the Security Council a few weeks ago,
the Ukrainian delegation raised the issue of the suspension
of the economic sanctions against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. We are deeply satisfied at the fact that our
confidence in the good will of its leaders and in their
aspiration to peace in the Balkans proved to be correct
and was again reconfirmed by yesterday's events.

The initiation of the process of suspending the
economic sanctions will, in our opinion, contribute to the
confidence-building process in the Balkans and give an
additional, powerful impetus to the faithful
implementation of the Peace Agreement.

The suspension and eventual lifting of the sanctions
regime against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is an
event of extreme importance. It will give a powerful
incentive for the economic development of the
neighbouring countries and to the re-establishment of the
traditional economic links between the countries in the
region. We are confident that peace will bring prosperity
to all.

We believe that it is time to start the process of
reintegrating the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia into the
international community. The delegation of Ukraine hopes
that all the successor States to the Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia can arrive at appropriate and
mutually acceptable decisions.

The delegation of Ukraine finds the tribute paid by
the Security Council in the draft resolution to the
neighbouring States for their significant contribution to
the achievement of a negotiated peace exceptionally
important from the political and moral point of view.
Ukraine, as well as a number of other States, has suffered
huge economic losses but has strictly observed the
sanctions imposed by the international community.

The delegation of Ukraine has some doubts
concerning the provisions of the resolution on the lifting
of the arms embargo. At the same time, we understand
that it is a part of a compromise reached by the parties
that gives us grounds to support it. We would like to look
at this decision of the Security Council in the light of the
confidence-building measures and we hope that the
meeting on arms control in Bonn will make a military
build-up in the region redundant.

The delegation of Ukraine wants to express its
sincere gratitude and appreciation to all those who by
consistent efforts and deep convictions, regardless of their
despair, doubts and hesitations, went on until the end and
finally succeeded. We pay a special tribute to the United
States of America, the Secretary of State,
Mr. Christopher, his assistant, Mr. Richard Holbrooke and
his devoted team, to the members of the Contact Group,

 

to Mr. Stoltenberg and Mr. Bildt, as well as to dozens of
others who helped to bring peace to the region.

Let me remind you, Mr. President, of the words from
the Holy Book - the Bible:

"Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called
the children of God". (The Holy Bible, Matthew 5:9).

