Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I join the speakers who
preceded me in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix and Commissioner Chergui for their very
informative briefings.

Allow me at the outset to congratulate the sisterly
Republic of the Sudan on the agreement signed on
17 August between the Forces of Freedom and Change
and the Transitional Military Council in the Sudan on
the establishment of a transitional Government, headed
by a Prime Minister who will govern the State jointly
for 39 months and should lead the country towards
reconciliation, reconstruction and free and inclusive
elections. We would like to highlight and commend the
important and constructive role played by the African
Union and the Ethiopian Government in mediating and
negotiating the achievement of that historic agreement.

Equatorial Guinea commends the commitment
of the people of the Sudan to a peaceful transition
and to ensuring the effective implementation of the
transitional agreements. We also appreciate the support
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the United Nations, the League of Arab States and the
other members of the international community.

The agreement is concrete proof of the importance
of subregional and regional organizations and the
surrounding countries in terms of resolving disputes,
given that they have a better understanding of the
situation on the ground. In other words, Africans, local
governments, regional and continent-wide institutions
and African leaders are better off and are the main actors
in dealing with the continent's problems and conflicts.

However, despite the satisfaction we have just
expressed, we must not underestimate the major
problems and challenges that the new Government will
face. That is why it is urgent to establish without delay
the strategies and mechanisms needed to improve the
local economy, entrench lasting peace and stability
and promote inclusion and national reconciliation,
while at the same time reaffirming the Government's
commitment to a transition process that effectively
leads to inclusive and transparent elections, with a view
to ensuring the advent of sustainable peace throughout
the country.

Moreover, we encourage the parties to acknowledge
the need to rapidly resume the negotiations for a peaceful
resolution to the conflicts in Darfur, South Kordofan and
Blue Nile states. We encourage all the parties to engage
constructively, immediately and without preconditions
in those discussions. The Security Council must support
such efforts. In that regard, we commend the joint visit
that the African Union and the United Nations will
make to the region. We also appreciate any effort made
towards the consolidation of the situation in the Sudan.
The Sudanese have understood that they must put the
overriding interests of their country and their people
before any other consideration, and that commitment
merits praise.

In the context of UNAMID, it is essential to
emphasize that one of the main tasks of the Government
is to address the issue of Darfur, ensure a continuous
decrease in violence throughout the region and continue
the reconciliation processes. The Doha Agreement for
Peace in Darfur remains the basis for the process in
Darfur, and Khartoum must commit to continuing along
that path. We already know that the new authorities
have already prioritized peace.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea lends its full
support to the transitional Government of the Sudan
and invites it to liaise as soon as possible with the
representatives of the United Nations and the African
Union in the Sudan, as well as to cooperate closely
with UNAMID, working together in coordination and
harmony to achieve the objectives set for the next 39
months of the transitional Government.

Lastly, we call on the transitional Government to
ensure that Sudanese women are provided the space
in which they can play their role in this new political
dynamic in which the brotherly country of the Sudan
is entering.

