Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I should like at the outset to congratulate
you and sincerely to thank you for having convened
this debate.

The rule of law is a system in which the law
provides a standard common to all individuals. The
rule of law and justice legitimize the actions of
Governments, securing dignity, security and prosperity
for all citizens, without any distinction.

In the past decade a very significant change has
taken place in the way of thinking of the international
community. The Security Council today is clearly
aware that, in a society without guarantees of the rule
of law, peace will prove ephemeral or difficult to
achieve. If, moreover, in such a society there arises a
conflict, the matter may go to the agenda of the
Council. That trend may be seen, for instance, in the
classical concept of peacekeeping operation applied
during the cold war, which today has undergone a far-
reaching change.

Unlike their traditional role of monitoring
observance of ceasefire lines, peacekeeping operations
today have become missions with multidimensional
capacities and mandates involving a growing complex
of elements and actors - State actors, international
and private actors, all pursuing the ultimate goal of
ensuring the construction of a lasting peace in societies
emerging from conflicts.

In this new kind of peacekeeping operation, we
can clearly see the fundamental role that is being
played by the rule of law, reparations for injustices and
the creation of police, legal and judicial structures
aimed at building a society in which the rule of law can
prevail.

It is clear today that, for a society emerging from
conflict, the long-term viability of peace and
democracy very often, if not always, implies the reign
of justice. A society that has not, in some effective and
generally accepted way, overcome the injustices
besetting it, although it may enjoy social peace and
security, will not truly recover.

Justice and its opposite, impunity, have decisive
relevance in the pacification of societies torn by
conflicts. Impunity, unfortunately, was very common in
the latter half of the twentieth century, and undoubtedly
that situation encouraged perpetrators to continue with
their crimes.

In the early 19903, the Security Council, after
decades of inaction, brought about a significant
change. Resorting to a more creative interpretation of
its powers under Article 39 of the Charter, the Council
decided to create special jurisdictions designed to try
the major perpetrators of the most heinous crimes. It
thus established the international tribunals for Rwanda
and Yugoslavia, the Special Court for Sierra Leone and
various other jurisdictional mechanisms designed to
respond to situations in Kosovo, Timor or Afghanistan.

In adopting these types of measures, the Council
finally addressed head-on the most complex issue in
the pursuit of justice and the rule of law in all societies,
namely, definitively overcoming injustice. The
subsequent actions taken by the jurisdictions created by
the Council showed that this step, despite all the
attendant difficulties, proved to be a substantial step
towards a return to peace.

Despite the redress provided by these new
jurisdictional mechanisms, they applied only limited,
special and provisional solutions to specific cases,
generally superimposed on the local justice system and,
moreover, subsequent to the crimes.

The fight against impunity required a universal
jurisdictional mechanism, one that existed prior to the
commission of the crime and one that was permanent.
For those reasons, the international community decided
to create the International Criminal Court, a decisive
tool for the rule of law and the safeguarding of
fundamental human rights.

That Court is complementary to national
sovereignties. It is not in competition with them. It is
based on the consent of the State, freely given upon
ratifying the Rome Statute. Before zealously
undertaking its own prosecutions, it endeavours to see
States set in motion their own courts in the full
exercise of their sovereignty and combat impunity
through their own systems of justice. Thus it ensures
that local authorities applying accepted principles of
justice are universalizing the effective application of
the rule of law.

The Criminal Court thus constitutes the
embodiment of the historic aspiration for justice on the
part of all the peoples that make up the United Nations.
For that reason, we must continue to insist that the
profound meaning of this institution be understood,
which will revitalize the international legal edifice,
ensuring that the application of the law around the
world is not thwarted.

In the operational sphere, the Security Council
should ensure that its mandates adequately take into
account the justice and rule of law component. It
should do so by adapting to the requirements imposed
by the society that needs assistance, and the Council's
action should seek to restore to that society the
capacity to be the master of its own fate - not to
impose imported solutions.

To that end, the Council, before adopting any
mandate, must have a sufficient understanding of the
characteristics and needs of that society, evaluating
them with care. Prior evaluation, then, is very
important.

In the context of the mandates, we should seek to
revitalize, insofar as it is acceptable, local mechanisms
and solutions. We should seek to help wounded
societies to restore justice by applying and improving
their own legal systems. This may prove to be a more
lasting solution than seeking to impose exogenous
formulas. After all, what we are seeking is that, in such
a society, a transition should take place towards
governability based on the rule of law - its own law,
the law that was violated. The certainty that such a
society's own laws will be restored could contribute to
restoring the dignity and honour of that community.

The training of local police is key. Society will
trust their police only if citizens perceive them to be
professionals that are independent in relation to
political or other factions. Conscious of that reality,
Argentina has assisted by sending hundreds of police
instructors to participate in various peace missions.

Finally, imagination, flexibility and resources will
always be indispensable. But perhaps the most
important of all is for the Security Council, the
Secretariat and all organs of the United Nations to
institutionalize once and for all in their procedures,
strategies and policies the elements that the United
Kingdom has invited us to consider today. Justice and
the rule of law are prerequisites for community Life.
Peace is not possible without them.

