Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): My
delegation warmly welcomes you to the chair, Madam
President, in this your first meeting presiding over the
Council. We will work very closely with you during the
month of July. You follow the notably effective
presidency of France, under the extremely competent
leadership of Ambassador Levitte, to whom we are also
very grateful, in particular for helping us to take
forward the work on this draft resolution.

Diamonds are at the heart of the tragedy of Sierra
Leone. A precious resource, which should be a source
of wealth for national development, has become a
cause of human suffering on a terrible scale, and the
Ambassador of Sierra Leone has very eloquently
pointed that out. The draft resolution we are voting on
is a robust and imaginative response by the Security
Council to that tragedy. The Council has shown itself
ready to take a strong lead in addressing this problem
and to have learned lessons from previous experience,
especially Ambassador Fowler's excellent work on
Angola.

Building partly on his experience, this draft
resolution will send a powerful signal about the need to
end the trade in conflict diamonds from Sierra Leone.
It includes a number of practical and, indeed, ground-
breaking measures to achieve that aim. One of those is
the exploratory hearing of the sanctions Committee,
which we hope will be held within the next month.
This offers a real opportunity to shine a powerful light
on an illicit trade which prefers to operate in the
shadows. The United Kingdom is ready to offer all
possible assistance to Ambassador Chowdhury, as
Chairman of the sanctions Committee, in order to make
this hearing a success.
The draft resolution will also provide for a panel
of experts to look at violations of the arms embargo
and the link between diamonds and arms - a very
important step and a clear signal that the international
community will no longer tolerate sanctions-busting,
particularly in circumstances like these.

The role of the international diamond industry
will also be crucial. The draft resolution is unusual in
its direct appeal to the diamond trade. Many in the
industry have already shown great responsibility in
responding to the problem of conflict diamonds,
including from Sierra Leone. We look to all parts of the
industry to do likewise and to fully commit themselves
to ending this cynical commerce.

The role of Sierra Leone's neighbours is equally
critical. Action elsewhere will be meaningless if illicit
Sierra Leone diamonds still flood out of the country,
over its borders. This resolution makes clear where the
Council's concerns lie. The widely held view that the
bulk of Sierra Leone diamonds at present flow out of
the country via the RUF through Liberia is well
founded. This resolution will now impose international
obligations on all Governments to put a stop to this
illicit trade. So we now look to the Governments in the
region most closely involved to share a strong
commitment to peace in Sierra Leone and to act now to
cut off this trade. Their long-term interests will
undoubtedly be served, in terms of the region's security
and its future prosperity, if they take this approach.

We are taking these steps and considering other
important measures to follow in the search for peace
and a normal life for the people of Sierra Leone. The
aim of this draft resolution is to ensure eventually and
at long last that diamonds bring benefit and not misery
to that long-suffering population, and in particular, that
diamonds are not used to pay for arms to undermine the
legitimate authority and attack either innocent civilians
or United Nations peacekeeping forces.

This is a creditable move by the Council upon
which we must build further.

