The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Morocco for the kind words he
addressed to me.

The next speaker is the representative of the United
Arab Emirates. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

Mr. Al-Suwaidi (United Arab Emirates)
(interpretation from Arabic): It give me great pleasure on
behalf of the delegation of the United Arab Emirates to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
have full confidence that your expertise and your skills
will guarantee the success of the Council's deliberations.
That confidence is reinforced by the prominent role that
your friendly country, France, is playing in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

I also commend your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of the Czech Republic, for the wisdom he
showed in conducting the business of the Council's
meetings last month.
The Security Council is meeting today to discuss the
illegitimate, expansionist measures adopted by the Israeli
Government in the territories of occupied Palestine,
measures aimed at bringing about radical demographic
change and imposing this on the international community
and forcing it to deal with such practices as a fait
accompli, based on force alone. All this is done without
any legal basis and to gain further territory by
expropriating Arab land and establishing settlements at
the expense of the legitimate rights of the Arab-
Palestinian people in their homeland.

The international community considered the Madrid
peace conference held in 1991 and the Israeli-Palestinian
agreements that followed it to be positive steps towards
forcing Israel to halt the confiscation of additional

 

Palestinian land and establish a new climate that would
make possible the restoration of the legitimate rights of the
Palestinians on the basis of Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the principle of land for
peace.

Nevertheless, we find today that the Israeli
Government has taken a new decision to confiscate nearly
53 hectares of Palestinian land within the eastern part of the
city of Al-Quds, thus flouting all its commitments to the
principles and the basis of the peace process, and at the
same time using empty and unacceptable pretexts in an
attempt to justify these violations.

The expropriation by the Israeli Government of this
eastern land to establish new settlements is aimed first at
uprooting the Arab Palestinian presence, usurping Arab,
Islamic and Palestinian rights in holy Al-Quds and
imposing a fait accompli before negotiations begin on the
issue of the city of Al-Quds in accordance with the
Palestinian-Israeli peace agreements.

My delegation considers these Israeli measures to be
a flagrant violation of all such agreements. They not only
have an impact on the Palestinian people and the countries
and peoples of the Arab and Islamic world but are also a
flagrant challenge to the international community since they
are in contradiction with the principles of international law
and the Fourth Geneva Convention.

The United Arab Emirates, as current President of the
Council of the League of Arab States and because it
attaches great importance to the continuation of the peace
process and the maintenance of Arab, Islamic and
Palestinian rights in holy Al-Quds, expresses to the Council
its strong condemnation of these Israeli decisions.
This condemnation is reflected in the statements made
by His Excellency El-Sheikh Al-Nahyan, Minister for
Foreign Affairs, in which he said that the United Arab
Emirates condemns any confiscations by Israel of
Palestinian territories in East Jerusalem. He also warned
that such practices not only threaten the peace process as a
whole, but also strip Israel of its credibility with regard to
its commitment to the Declaration of Principles which was
signed with the PLO in 1993.

The time has come for Israel to halt its continuous
expansionist policies aimed at expropriating more Arab
territories, and to halt the building of settlements,
particularly in the city of Holy Al-Quds, so that a climate
of peace may prevail in the Middle East and so that the
feeling of disappointment and failure experienced by the
Palestinian people and the peoples of the region may be
ended.

The practices of the Government of Israel, its
flagrant confiscation of Arab lands and the increase in
settlements constitute major obstacles to any tangible
progress in international efforts to reach a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace settlement in the Middle East.

The Arab group, which recognizes the importance of
the success of any settlement in the region, has strongly
expressed its collective position, namely, that it rejects
and refuses the Israeli decision to confiscate the lands of
East Jerusalem. It is clearly stated in the resolutions
adopted at the last ministerial meeting of the Council of
the League of Arab States, which calls for a collective
position at the international level to oppose Israeli
violations and to take immediate measures to halt such
decisions in accordance with the principles of
international law and the Fourth Geneva Convention. On
this basis, before this Council, my country calls upon the
international community to meet its obligations and calls
upon this august Council to consider the following
measures. First, there should be an international
condemnation of the Government of Israel's decision to
confiscate additional Palestinian land in Al-Quds and
outside the city, which constitutes a violation of relevant
Security Council resolutions, the principles of
international law and the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949. Second, Israel should be obliged to rescind the
decision to confiscate Palestinian land in the city of
Al-Quds, to end its settlement policies and plans, to
dismantle its existing settlements, to stop closing off the
city and to end all Israeli excavations which threaten the
foundations of the Al-Aqsa holy mosque, in order to
guarantee the continuation of the peace process and
ensure that its objectives are met on the basis of the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, of the
General Assembly and of United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). Third,
none of the changes made by Israel, as the occupying
Power, to the legal status, demographic structure or
geographical dimensions of the city of Al-Quds should be
recognized. Similarly, any Israeli claims that Al-Quds al-
Sharif is the eternal capital of Israel should be rejected.
Fourth, the Arab and Palestinian presence should be
supported, as should their institutions in the city of Holy
Al-Quds and international security measures should be
taken to protect Arab and Palestinian territories.

 

The United Arab Emirates hopes that this august
Council will adopt the draft resolution before us which
provides for appropriate machinery to deal with decisions
on settlement and confiscation in the city of Al-Quds
because of the religious, historic and political importance of
the city, not just to the Arab and islamic world but also to
the international community as a whole.

The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of the United Arab Emirates for the kind
words he addressed to me.

The next speaker is the representative of Israel, Mr.
Yaacobi on whom I now call.


