Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes your presence, Mr. President, at
this important meeting of the Security Council. We
thank the Secretary-General for introducing his very
important report (S/2009/304), which brings together
analysis and experience gathered over the past two
decades in countries emerging from conflict. We also
welcome Ambassador Heraldo Munoz, Mr. Jordan
Ryan and Mr. Alastair McKechnie.

My delegation agrees with the Secretary-General
that the period immediately following the cessation of
hostilities is a vital time for laying the foundations of
true peacebuilding. In that initial phase, cooperation
and coordination among lead actors is essential in
order to promote coherent, comprehensive strategies
and plans of action. Obviously, priorities must be
established during that crucial post-conflict phase.
Then, once there has been progress on security and on
meeting the basic needs of the population, it is
essential to take steps to restore legitimate government
institutions seen as representative of all national
groups, and to introduce political, legal, economic and
administrative reforms making possible a properly
functioning and harmonious relationship between the
State and society.

Mexico has always stressed that national
ownership is key to peacebuilding efforts. For that
reason, along with the need for collective support by
international actors, measures must be fundamentally
aimed at strengthening and promoting national
leadership and ownership, without ignoring an
appropriate balance between promoting local
responsibility and promoting international support, as
the Secretary-General points out.

In that regard, the development of political efforts
towards reconciliation is of particular importance.
Trust and national reconciliation are key elements in
defining a framework for action which incorporates
priorities set by the local actors themselves, has the
support of international teams and includes a
comprehensive view of the role of the United Nations
in the political, humanitarian, security and
development spheres.
The agenda outlined by the Secretary-General
highlights the importance of improving coherence and
coordination, clearly defining functions and
responsibilities, promoting national capacity, ensuring
predictable resources, preparing studies on a country's
needs and situation, and ensuring accountability. We
believe that those areas are crucial for improving the
response of the United Nations in its reconstruction
activities. Mexico supports measures aimed at attaining
those objectives and supports the Secretary-General's
initiative on seeking appropriately qualified personnel
to carry out the complex tasks needed for the
Organization's activities both at Headquarters and on
the ground, making use in particular of permanent staff
members and specialized peacebuilding professionals.

The initiatives regarding the recruitment of
trained personnel from the Southern Hemisphere and
regarding the participation of women - whose
involvement in peacebuilding tasks, we believe, is
essential - merit particular mention. Mexico supports
the report's well-considered proposal to create a senior-
1eve1 mechanism ensuring that both managers and
regional support teams will be ready to support post-
conflict activities. We propose that such a team could
be headed by an eminent individual from the South; we
look forward to hearing more specific information
about the membership and functions of this
mechanism.

My delegation sees the Partnership Framework
Agreement signed with the World Bank as a very
positive step forward; this will make possible improved
strategic coordination and enhanced impact of
collective endeavours.

With respect to donors, we agree with the
Secretary-General that measures should be taken to
find solutions that will establish flexible, rapid,
predictable and more risk-tolerant funding modalities.
In that regard, it would also be appropriate to
encourage donors to disburse resources in accordance
with the timetables that have been set, so that funding
will arrive on time for strategies that are already being
implemented.
Mexico believes that the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission is crucial for a coherent
and comprehensive approach to promoting
reconstruction in the immediate aftermath of conflict.
My country recognizes the Commission's
achievements to date and encourages it to continue to

enhance and broaden its advisory role in countries on
its agenda and to ensure timely follow-up with respect
to progress in implementing Strategic Frameworks for
Peacebuilding. My country believes that the
Commission must play a central role, in coordination
with other United Nations actors, in implementing the
recommendations of the Secretary-General. In our
view, it is not only the Security Council that must be
more proactive in seeking the advice of the
Peacebuilding Commission; the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council must do the same, in
terms of coherence, greater mobilization of resources
and coordination of efforts with entities outside the
system, along with working with local actors to devise
and implement peacebuilding strategies.

Mexico has participated in Lebanon, Timor-Leste,
Haiti, Iraq and Bosnia and Herzegovina, assisting those
Governments in their electoral institution-building
efforts. We have also put forward proposals for
electoral cooperation within the framework of the
peacebuilding strategies for Guinea-Bissau and
Burundi. Mexico will continue to make a contribution
to peace efforts in countries in the immediate post-
conflict phase by providing technical assistance and
training of decision makers in the electoral sphere
when such assistance is requested.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
express its support for the draft presidential statement
put forward by the Ugandan delegation.

