Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): It is my pleasure at the outset to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I assure you of our
full engagement and cooperation with your work.

We also express our appreciation for the excellent
work of Ambassador Le Luong Minh and the
delegation of Viet Nam in presiding over the Security
Council in July.

Allow me further to thank Under-Secretary-
General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing. We highly
appreciate the efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and thank Ambassador
Wolff, Deputy Permanent Representative of the United
States of America, for his briefing on the activities of
the Multinational Force in Iraq (MNF-I).

We welcome the improved security situation in
some regions of Iraq, as clearly reflected in the
statistics provided by Ambassador Wolff in his
briefing. We also welcome the positive political
developments in Iraq, including the end of the boycott
of the Government by the Tawafuq bloc. Nevertheless,
we wish to caution yet again that the stability of the
security situation is contingent on national
reconciliation and the conviction of all Iraqi parties
that they have the opportunity to contribute to and
participate in the governance of the country and to
share the country's wealth equally, beyond all sectarian
and ethnic considerations. The stability of the security
situation is also contingent on the end of the
occupation and on convincing Iraqis of their own full
sovereignty over their territory.

Regrettably, there is much of concern in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2008/495).

First is the rising level of violence. Operations
undertaken by the MNF-I and Iraqi security forces
continue to claim large numbers of civilian casualties.
That is perhaps best reflected in paragraph 27 of the
report.

Secondly, the human rights situation has been and
remains grave. The report notes that

"The human rights situation in Iraq remains
serious UNAMI remained concerned about the
physical safety and legal protection of hundreds
of suspects arrested, as well as detention
conditions and lack of due process following
detention. Those apparently rounded up as
suspects included a number of children."
(S/2008/495, para. 26)

Furthermore, as a representative of the MNF-I
noted recently, the Force is currently detaining 21,000
individuals under the pretext that the United Nations
mandate gives the Force the right to detain any person
it deems to be a threat to security.

Thirdly, ongoing abuses against children -
including their recruitment and attacks on schools and
hospitals - are widespread. The report states in
paragraph 29 that "[a]pproximately 1,500 children are
known to be held in detention facilities for alleged
association with armed groups".

Fourthly, it is also a source of concern that
refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs)
continue to face very difficult circumstances. The rate
of return - 10,000 per month - is extremely low,
which indicates that genuine efforts have not been
made to create conditions conducive to return. We hope
that the adoption of an Iraqi national policy on
refugees and returnees will lessen the suffering of
displaced persons and make resettlement easier for
them. There have been reports that there are 2.5 million
IDPs in Iraq and a similar number of refugees in
neighbouring countries. We believe that this issue too
merits special attention by the Security Council. We
hope that future reports of the Secretary-General will
contain greater detail on this matter.

Fifthly, yet another matter of concern is that the
adoption of some fundamental laws - such as an
electoral law making possible the organization of
elections to governorate councils - continues to be
delayed. We were delighted to hear the Permanent
Representative of Iraq speak of developments in that
regard. On other contentious constitutional issues, we
are also concerned about the ongoing dispute on the
status of Kirkuk.
Libya supports all ongoing efforts towards
national reconciliation in Iraq. We support a stable
security situation, an end to occupation and the
maintenance of Iraq's sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity. We greatly appreciate UNAMI's
efforts to assist Iraq, along with those of all other
United Nations entities. We attach importance to the
observations contained in the report of the Secretary-
General before us today. In particular, we support his
observation that
"Iraq can no longer afford continued delays in
finding viable political solutions. Long-term
stability will require significant political buy-in
from all segments of the population, many of
which are not yet fully engaged in the political
process". (S/2008/495, para. 56)

