Mr. Wetangula (Kenya): It gives me great
pleasure to attend and participate in this Security
Council meeting on the situation in Somalia.

May I commence by commending the Republic of
South Africa, as President of the Security Council for
the month of January, for having convened this
meeting and for having invited Kenya, as the current
Chair of the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union (AU), to participate. Before I make my
statement, I wish to also convey to you, Madam
President, to all members of the Council and, through
you, to their countries and people the very best wishes
for a peaceful and prosperous 2012. It is certain that
we cannot say the same for Somalia.

This meeting on Somalia could not have come at
a better time. It follows closely on the intense work
undertaken at the regional and continental levels in the
past three months that culminated in the
recommendations of the 306th meeting of the AU
Peace and Security Council, held on 5 January, which
have been communicated to the Council for
consideration. I personally look forward to the
outcomes of today's deliberations.

The Somali crisis is a matter of which the African
Union has remained seized since the start. While it has
generated a range of challenges, our resolve to turn
Somalia around has been unwavering. In that context, I
wish to pay special tribute to Uganda and Burundi -
two countries whose daughters and sons continue to
pay the ultimate price for the search for peace in
Somalia on behalf of the continent and the world at
large. I also want to recognize the commitment of
Ethiopia for its critical role and support to the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and allied
forces, Djibouti for the deployment of its first
contingent of troops to Somalia, and my country,
Kenya, for its ongoing operation, which has liberated
parts and populations in south and central Somalia.

Those efforts have been supported immensely by
the decisions taken by the Council that have endorsed
the mandate of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and improved the logistics package
available in support of that operation, as well as the
bilateral support that has been extended in support of

various activities, including the training of the Somali
National Security Forces.

Today's meeting has been convened at a time of
unique opportunity for Somalia. As we are all aware,
we have before us an unprecedented window of
opportunity to finally restore security, peace and
stability in Somalia. That has been occasioned by the
momentum created following the defeat and
withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from Mogadishu after its
defeat by AMISOM. and the TFG forces in August
2011. The operations of the Kenyan and TFG forces in
southern and central Somalia also dealt a devastating
blow to Al-Shabaab, and Ethiopia's assistance has
made its case even more precarious.

That concert of action was followed by another
first, that is, the cooperative effort among the troop-
contributing countries, regional countries, the African
Union and the United Nations that developed the new
strategic concept for future operations of AMISOM. in
Somalia (see S/2012/19, annex). As the Council is
aware, the AU Peace and Security Council approved its
new strategic concept, which details the elements of
the critical option for optimizing the operation in
Somalia. Of great significance is the need to endorse
the surge of troop levels from 12,000 to 17,731 and the
imperative to provide the required force enablers and
multipliers, as well as logistical support to the other
components ofAMISOM.

The AU request to the Security Council of
October 2010 to provide capabilities that could cut out
the Al-Shabaab supply lines, especially through the
port of Kismayo, and to diminish its ability and those
of its international terrorist allies from supplying arms,
fighters and contraband, is as relevant today as it was
then. It is my hope that it will find some positive
expression from the Council.

I take this opportunity to renew the request for
the Security Council and the international community
to help in the monitoring and inspection of all vessels
entering and leaving Kismayo to curb the menace. In
that regard, I wish to thank the Council for adopting
resolution 2023 (2011), which reinforces sanctions on
Eritrea in an effort to diminish the effects of spoilers
on the efforts to restore peace to Somalia. It is our hope
that that resolution, like others before it, will be
implemented in full.
In the experience of Kenya, Al-Shabaab is a force
that has visited very many destructive elements on the

region. It has attacked our tourist installations. It has
tossed grenades into churches, with human casualties.
It has kidnapped and captured Kenyan soldiers, whose
whereabouts are unknown. It has captured aid workers
in the Dadaab refugee camp, whose whereabouts are
also unknown. It has captured a tourist, who died in its
hands, and it still has the audacity to claim ransom for
a dead body to be released, among many other
atrocities. We are also worried by the current political
developments in Somalia that threaten to derail the
political process. Hence, the timelines of the
transitional period, as delineated in the Kampala
Accord and the Mogadishu road map, are upset.

The AU believes that the political process must
remain within the framework developed. Hence, it
hopes that the Council can join in bringing its weight
upon the Somalia political leadership, through the use
of alternative means of persuasion and incentives, to
safeguard it and to ensure that the gains made in the
military and security sectors add value to the overall
objective of achieving peace in Somalia.

As we pursue the political and military strategies
in Somalia, it is also imperative that we focus attention
on the humanitarian situation in the country. As
Council members are aware, Kenya hosts more than
600,000 refugees in the Dadaab complex, where
humanitarian assistance efforts continue to be
threatened, especially in view of the withdrawal of
some agencies following Al-Shabaab attacks and
threats.

Furthermore, the humanitarian needs in the
liberated areas of Somalia are great, in particular after
the expulsion of more than 20 humanitarian
organizations. I wish to draw the attention of the
Council to the need to encourage and urge
humanitarian actors to stand in solidarity with Somalia,
to exert pressure to ensure humanitarian access and to
take measures to hold accountable those who inhibit or
subvert humanitarian efforts. Kenya remains
committed to providing the necessary corridors and
support for humanitarian access to the needy in
Somalia.

Furthermore, it is critical to encourage activities
that restore normalcy and enable the resumption of
livelihood activities, especially in areas that have been
liberated. Such efforts will form the basis for extending
TFG governance to those regions, increase the
legitimacy of the transitional process and bolster
reconciliation activities. For its part, Kenya has
assisted by helping senior ministers of the Transitional
Federal Government to visit and address their nationals
in the areas that have been liberated.

In addition, we call on all parties concerned to
reflect on the next steps for Somalia after the end of
the transition period in August. In that regard, we
commend the United Kingdom and Turkey for their
efforts to show renewed interest in organizing meetings
on Somalia. We hope that such meetings will add value
to the ongoing process.

I wish to take this opportunity to thank the Prime
Minister of Turkey and the Secretary-General for
showing leadership by visiting Mogadishu. Subsequent
visits were made during the same period by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Minister of
Defence of Kenya.

As we prepare to give Somalia the rightful place
that we all expect it to have among other countries,
Kenya is preparing to send its Ambassador to that
country, who is based in Nairobi, to join the Turkish
Ambassador who is currently residing in Mogadishu.
We urge other countries with Nairobi-based
representatives to Somalia to do the same.

The pressure that we have placed on Al-Shabaab
has shown that piracy, described previously by the
Secretary-General as a land-borne disease, not a sea-
borne disease, has been on the decline. Statistics for
the past two months show that the number of ships
being hijacked has decreased quite considerably. I hope
that this will show the international community that
putting pressure on, and eventually defeating,
Al-Shabaab will be one of the many ways of
eliminating piracy, which has made the shipping routes
of the Indian Ocean ever so dangerous and expensive.

Finally, I call on the Council to support efforts to
build the capacity of Somali institutions to provide
security and administrative services to the country's
people. Those efforts are critical to achieving the
ultimate objective of sustainable peace in Somalia and
therefore cannot be left to ad hoc measures that remain
largely uncoordinated. We urge the Council to remain
focused on, and seized of, the situation in Somalia, as
has been the case. We in the region, in particular the
AU and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, will play our part by doing what we can
to support our brothers and sisters in Somalia.
