Mr. Sen (India): Let me begin by expressing my
delegation's pleasure, Sir, at seeing your delegation
assume the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I also express India's appreciation to you for
scheduling today's debate on this important topic.

Let me also welcome the presence of Mr. Rangin
Spanta, Foreign Minister of Afghanistan, and Mr. Shah
Mehmood Qureshi, Foreign Minister of Pakistan, who
just left the Chamber, and thank them for their
statements and their expressions of concern and
sympathy over the terrorist attack on our embassy in
Kabul, their clear condemnation of which has been
echoed by members of this Council today.

Last but not least, I also thank Special
Representative Kai Eide and Under-Secretary-General
John Holmes for their briefings today.

I am distressed to have to begin my statement by
acknowledging with gratitude the condolences of this
Council over the barbaric attack upon our embassy in
Kabul two days ago. Not only were scores of innocent
Afghan lives lost; we also lost four Indian colleagues
working with a fraternal people in their hour of need.
Those who perpetrated that act and those who train and
protect terrorists and enable them to commit horrific
acts of violence are no better than the basest criminals.

It is for that reason that security within
Afghanistan and coordinated efforts to stop terrorists
from operating with impunity beyond Afghanistan's
borders must be the paramount priority of our
collective efforts in Afghanistan. To those who commit
such acts and to those responsible for the greater
villainy of sheltering and enabling terrorists, our
response remains firm and unyielding. As our Prime
Minister has said, "We have lost Indians who were
helping their Afghan brothers rebuild their lives and
country. That endeavour must continue with renewed
commitment". While mourning their loss, we believe
that we can best honour our fallen colleagues by
redoubling our commitment to working with
Afghanistan to secure stability and development in that
country and, consequently, in the region.

Our discussion today takes place in the context of
the recently-convened Paris Conference in Support of
Afghanistan. Having participated in the Conference at
the political level, India welcomes its outcome and the
proposed presidential statement of this Council in
support of that outcome. We share the sense in this
Chamber of the need for the international community
to provide not just the resources - important as they
are - but also the much-needed political space to
enable the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) to exercise its mandate to
assist the national Government in coordinating
international assistance for Afghanistan.
In that context, I should also underline that, as a
regional partner and a country with strong historic and
cultural links with Afghanistan, India sees merit in the
approach adopted by Special Representative Eide, as
reflected in the report before us. The mandate provided
to UNAMA by this Council through resolution 1806
(2008) provides ample scope for the United Nations to
play a central role in the international community.
Streamlining our collective efforts through UNAMA in
support of the newly adopted Afghanistan National
Development Strategy and through the national budget
will underscore the fact that international assistance is
in line with priorities set by Afghanistan.

What is crucial, however, is that such
coordination be effected in a manner that is coherent
and focused. We need to avoid the temptation of trying
to resolve all of Afghanistan's problems at once, just as
we need to avoid the pitfalls of setting unrealistic
benchmarks and objectives that are desirable for us, but
less so for the very people we seek to help. While the
international community collectively repeats
commitments underscoring the importance of such a
demand-driven approach, greater efforts are required
on the ground to meet such commitments. Without an
Afghan-led process of discussing and finalizing the
prioritization of tasks, our collective efforts run the
very real risk of losing legitimacy.

Events on the ground make it clear that any
listing of challenges before the Afghan people must
begin with security. We cannot afford to slacken our
resolve or our efforts in combating the forces of
terrorism, extremism and crime wherever and in
whatever forms those groups may take. Most
importantly, that must be a collective effort; we cannot
succeed if we send mixed signals through bargains for
temporary and local peace while the rest of us contend
with the consequences of such deals.

The rising trend of attacks, abductions and
suicide bombings is also a sign that terrorist groups are
emboldened by the displays of wavering confidence
that such bargains imply, and therefore hope to weaken
our collective resolve. We cannot have partial
compromises with such forces and yet nurture hopes of
prevailing in Afghanistan. We remain convinced that
there needs to be a much closer alignment between the
consistent application of force wherever terrorist
groups are present and the political objectives of our
efforts in Afghanistan, in which UNAMA must play an
important role.

Results cannot be achieved on the ground without
adequate attention to both security and development
components. However, if we are to achieve sustainable
success over the long term on both fronts, the common
denominator is capacity-building. Thus far, our
collective effort on that vital aspect has been episodic
and inadequate. We need to do better expeditiously.
The report identifies some of the key areas in which
such capacity-building efforts are vital, and we concur
in particular with the notion that strengthening the
National Police and public administration has to be
taken up as a priority. Limited results in that regard
will be reflected by an equally paltry list for us to show

for our efforts in any of the benchmarks for progress
that we may have set ourselves, be they in the field of
counter-narcotics or the efficient utilization of
budgetary resources. It is for that reason that India has
made capacity-building a priority element in all our
efforts in Afghanistan, even in the infrastructure
projects we are executing there, all of which include
strong capacity-building components in them.

To achieve those and other core objectives in
Afghanistan, we have collectively agreed to empower
the United Nations, through its Assistance Mission, to
facilitate greater coherence amongst us and between us
and our hosts. However, we cannot achieve results
unless we enable UNAMA to do its job by providing it
the material and human resources to execute its
mandate in Afghanistan. Not only does the United
Nations need these resources on an exceptional basis
for Afghanistan, it needs them exceptionally soon. The
time for us to empower UNAMA is now.

India will remain fully committed to
implementing the interrelated security, political and
development challenges facing Afghanistan. We remain
unflinching in our commitment to reconstruction,
development and capacity-building in Afghanistan. As
one of Afghanistan's largest development partners,
India remains willing to support UNAMA in improving
donor cohesion in support of Afghan-defined priorities.

In conclusion, let me also reiterate our abiding
belief in and commitment to our shared objective:
assisting Afghanistan to complete its reemergence as a
modern democratic country, confident in its unique
culture and pluralistic identity, at peace with itself and
secure in its neighbourhood, firmly on the path to
sustainable economic development and liberated from
the burdens of the recent history of strife and privation.
It is for this reason that we fully endorse the effort to
empower the United Nations to bring us together in a
more coherent partnership to enable Afghanistan to
secure the better future that lies within its reach.

