Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): On behalf of our
delegation, we wish to congratulate you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of May 2002. We regret that it continues to be
necessary for the Council to convene on an almost
daily basis in response to the tragic events in the
Middle East.

We deplore Israel's decision not to cooperate with
the Secretary-General's efforts to investigate the events
in Jenin. We also deeply regret that, as a consequence,
the fact-finding team had to be disbanded. We believe
that it is essential that the Secretary-General be
mandated to prepare a report based on all available
information on the events in Jenin. The international
community cannot allow Israel to enjoy a veto over the
attempts to investigate the facts regarding the possible
massacres and war crimes committed in Jenin and
elsewhere in the occupied territories. As the Secretary-
General noted in his letter to the President of the
Security Council, the long shadow cast by the events in
Jenin will remain in the absence of a fact-finding
mission.

The Security Council can no longer ignore the
culture of impunity that Israel seems to enjoy. The
intransigence of the Israeli State is beginning to erode
the credibility and legitimate standing of the United
Nations as a whole. Security Council resolutions 1402
(2002) and 1403 (2002) called for the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from Palestinian territory without delay.
Israel has yet to withdraw its forces. Security Council
resolution 1405 (2002) welcomed the Secretary-
General's initiative to send a fact-finding mission to
investigate the events in Jenin. Israel refused to
cooperate with the Secretary-General, forcing the
Secretary-General to disband his team. Yet everyone is
now witnessing the true extent of the vandalism and
wanton destruction carried out by Israeli soldiers in the
headquarters of the Palestinian Authority and, indeed,
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory.

The Security Council must now take a stand or it
will make itself guilty of the selective application of its
authority and of inconsistency in ensuring compliance
with its decisions. Moreover, if the Council fails to
impose consequences for non-compliance with its
decisions, its ability to fulfil its Charter mandate will
be completely undermined and its credibility will be
harmed.

This past Monday, 29 April 2002, the ministers of
the countries representing the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM) met in Durban, South Africa, and expressed
outrage at the wilful killing, vast destruction and other
atrocities committed by the Israeli occupying forces,
including reports of war crimes and massacres
committed in the Jenin refugee camp and in other
Palestinian cities. The Ministers representing the NAM
members of the Security Council also participated in
the meeting.

The ministers called for the immediate and full
withdrawal of Israeli occupying forces from Palestinian
cities, in implementation of resolutions 1402 (2002)
and 1403 (2002). They expressed full solidarity with
and support for the elected President of the Palestinian
Authority, Yasser Arafat. They looked forward to the
fact-finding team of the Secretary-General, which they
believed would confirm the possible war crimes
committed against the people of Palestine. The
ministers expected the Security Council to continue in
its role of maintaining peace and security.

No one doubts that the situation in the Middle
East is complicated. Nonetheless, the Member States
expect the Security Council, the sole body entrusted
with the task of maintaining peace and security, to
insist that its decisions be implemented and respected.
It is encouraging to note the developments of the past
couple of days, including the lifting of the siege in
Ramallah. Therefore, it is our hope that Israel will take
advantage of this opportunity to heed the broad
consensus of the international community for an
immediate withdrawal from all Palestinian territories.
It will continue to remain difficult to resume the peace
process as long as Israeli tanks surround the villages of
Palestine.

