Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): The report of the
Secretary-General (5/2008/781), which is before the
Council, aims at providing a comprehensive picture of
the situation in Darfur over the past 60 days. I will
therefore limit my briefing today to developments
affecting the security and humanitarian situation in
Darfur, the status of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and progress
made in the political process. Under-Secretary-General
Malcorra will then highlight some key issues relating
to the deployment of UNAMID and some of the major
challenges that we continue to face in this area.

It has been almost one year since the transfer of
authority from the African Union Mission in the Sudan
to UNAMID. This milestone provides an opportunity
for reflection on the efforts made to date to resolve the
conflict in Darfur.

While some progress has been made in various
areas over the past year, it has been much too slow in
providing real improvements for ordinary citizens in
Darfur and inadequate in resolving the Darfur crisis. As
the conflict enters its sixth year, over 2.5 million
people continue to live in internally displaced persons
camps, completely dependent on humanitarian
assistance. The situation has not improved. Over the
past six months, nearly 100,000 more people have been
displaced.

As Council members heard recently from Under-
Secretary-General John Holmes, the humanitarian
community continues to struggle with issues of
security and humanitarian access, with the hope that
the situation will improve over the coming year. It is of
grave concern that, year after year, the security
situation remains volatile and unpredictable. The past
two months have been no exception. Attacks on
UNAMID and humanitarian workers, intertribal
08-66225
violence and clashes between the Government and the
armed movements have even intensified.

In the first year of its operation, UNAMID lost 21
personnel. Most recently, on 29 October, a UNAMID
soldier was killed and another injured during an attack
while guarding a water point near the Kassab camp, in
Northern Darfur. On 9 November, another UNAMID
soldier was injured during an ambush of a UNAMID
convoy travelling on the El-Jeneina road.

During the past year inter-ethnic fighting has also
claimed many lives. In October alone, seven separate
armed tribal clashes reportedly took place, killing at
least 41 men and several children and injuring many
more. Several women were raped during the clashes.
Many parcels of cultivated land were burned and
livestock was stolen. Just this past week, inter-ethnic
clashes in Southern Darfur claimed another 75 lives,
including those of members of the Sudanese police,
who tried to intervene.

Despite the unilateral declaration by the
Government of the Sudan of a ceasefire on
12 November, aerial bombardments and armed clashes
between the Government and the rebel movements
have continued. In particular, during the period from
12 to 25 November, UNAMID received unconfirmed
information about significant military incidents in
several locations across Darfur. Five of these incidents
were related to aerial bombardments.

UNAMID deployed patrols to verify these
reports. In Southern Darfur, UNAMID found visible
evidence of air strikes, including four bomb craters and
unexploded ordnance near the Village of Abu Dangal,
in Southern Darfur. UNAMID dispatched another
verification patrol to Abu Shouk, in Northern Darfur,
but it was twice stopped at Government checkpoints
and was not allowed to proceed to the site. On
13 December, a UNAMID patrol was eventually
allowed access to the area and observed six craters left
from aerial bombardments in the Village of Korbia, 90
kilometres northwest of Kutum.

The Government of the Sudan has justified the
bombings in Abu Shouk by the need to clear the road
of bandits so convoys from the Sudanese Armed Forces
could pass safely. However, the United Nations has
emphasized to the Government that the pretext for
those aerial bombardment cannot be accepted in any
way and that the Government should honour its own
commitment to the cessation of hostilities.
08-66225

The violence between the parties was not limited
to aerial bombardments. Rebels also have a lot to
answer for. In November, Government authorities were
targeted by armed groups. Clashes between
Government forces and the Abdul Wahid faction of the
Sudan Liberation Army also took place over several
days in November near Kutum in Northern Darfur.

(spoke in English)

Amid continuing violence and in this complex
operating environment, UNAMID has been trying to
implement its mandate even as it continues to deploy.
Over the past year, the frequency of the Mission's
patrols have drastically increased, in order to facilitate
humanitarian access and provide convoy protection,
but also as a confidence-building measure and to
investigate security incidents. The 24/7 presence of
UNAMID police in Kalma camp has been welcome by
camp residents and has strengthened the relationship
between UNAMID, the humanitarian community and
the internally displaced persons. Several requests have
been made for UNAMID to replicate this initiative in
other camps, but so far limited resources, especially the
absence of more formed police units, continue to hold
the Mission back.

Earlier this month, UNAMID played a central role
in preventing a major crisis following clashes between
nomads and internally displaced persons in Hassa Hissa
camp, in Western Darfur, near the town of Zalingei.
UNAMID intervened with camp leadership and local
sheikhs to stabilize the situation. It then deployed troops
to the area to prevent further escalation, and through
coordination with the Government liaison officer,
Government forces were deployed to restore order at the
camp. UNAMID forces - police and civilian
components - worked together with the community
and local government officials to negotiate a settlement
and to ensure a speedy resolution to the conflict.

As its numbers and its capabilities increase, the
Mission will be able to do much more of this good
work. We will need continued Government cooperation
and sustained international support to reach this
objective. In this context, we will continue to work
with Member States to fill key gaps in the Mission's
force composition. As Council members are fully
aware, for over a year we have been requesting pledges
for a multi-role logistics unit, a medium transport unit,
a heavy transport unit, an aerial reconnaissance unit,
light tactical helicopters and 18 medium-utility
3
helicopters. Pledges for these resources have been and
still are outstanding. I reiterate my appeal to Council
members to urge troop- and police-contributing
countries in a position to provide those capabilities to
do so without any further delay.

Deploying UNAMID to its authorized strength as
it endeavours to undertake its mandate activities has
been and remains our priority. Recent cooperation with
the Government of the Sudan on the facilitation of
UNAMID deployment has gone a long way in
complementing our efforts. Under-Secretary-General
Malcorra will provide additional details on this issue.

As we have emphasized many times before, even
when fully deployed and at full capacity, UNAMID
cannot, by itself, bring peace to Darfur. Only a political
settlement between the parties will be able to bring an
end to the conflict. It is therefore deeply regrettable
that another year has passed while the parties continue
to engage in military action rather than investing
themselves fully in political negotiations.

The multiparty Sudan People's Forum, launched
in October, takes a step in the right direction. Progress
was made in the discussion at the national level on the
issues of most concern to Darfurians: disarmament of
militias, compensation, Darfur as a region, political
representation and socio-economic development. The
Government has pledged that the recommendation of
this forum will serve as a basis for discussion, for
direct dialogue with the armed movements and towards
a final political settlement. For the Sudan People's
Forum to make a difference, it is critical that quick
action be taken to implement its recommendations.
Violations of the ceasefire declared unilaterally by
President Al-Bashir at the conclusion of the Sudan
People's Forum, of course, have not helped promote a
climate of trust between the parties.

Joint Chief Mediator Djibril Bassole has been
working closely with the parties over the past several
months, urging them to cease hostilities, take steps to
demonstrate their seriousness towards the settlements
and engage in meaningful dialogue about the future of
Darfur. He continues to work with the Government and
movements in an effort to adopt a framework
agreement that includes the cessation of hostilities and
defines the modalities of and specific topics for direct
negotiation.

With the help of the Government of Qatar and
other stakeholders, there has been some progress this
past month in beginning these discussions in Doha.
Many issues still remain outstanding, and Mr. Bassole
has been engaged intensively to bring the parties'
positions closer together. During his interaction with
the armed movements, Mr. Bassole has been urging the
groups to resolve the question of their participation and
representation at future peace talks. Now the rebels
should be called on to conclude these issues rapidly.
They have a sober obligation to do all they can to allow
meaningful talks to begin.

The 14 July application by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for an arrest
warrant against President Al-Bashir, may also have an
impact on peace and security in Darfur. So far, we have
received mixed signals from the Government on this
issue. On the one hand, we have been given
reassurances that there will be no impact on UNAMID
and the United Nations Mission in Sudan (UNMIS) if
the ICC agrees to the Prosecutor's request for an arrest
warrant for the President. However, some public
statements made by Government officials have
contradicted that position.

Our peacekeeping missions and our humanitarian
and development work in Sudan will continue to
conduct their operations in an impartial manner,
cooperating in good faith with all partners to further
the goal of peace and stability in the country. We trust
that the Government will continue to fulfil its
commitments towards peace in Darfur and cooperate
with United Nations efforts towards that end.

In the meantime, priorities from our perspective
are clear: the Violence must stop, the parties must
commit to dialogue and the United Nations-African
Union mediation efforts must receive all required
support. On the peacekeeping side, we must redouble
our efforts with troop-contributing countries to
accelerate deployment. Additionally, we must get the
most out of the UNAMID units that are already
deployed in the areas of protection of civilians and
facilitation of humanitarian assistance.

At the same time, the fundamental responsibility
for making real progress lies with the parties. It is the
Government of the Sudan and armed rebel movements
which must cease hostilities and agree to dialogue
under the auspices of Chief Mediator Bassole. It is the
Government which must take concrete action to
demonstrate its seriousness with respect to the
outcomes of the Sudan People's Forum and the
08-66225
associated ceasefire. In addition, it is critical for
regional stability and lasting peace in Darfur that the
Governments of Chad and the Sudan implement the
Dakar Agreement.

A year ago, my predecessor cautioned that the
longer this issue went unresolved, the greater the risks
that UNAMID would fail to implement the mandate
given to it by the Council. It is my hope that in one
year's time, I can appear in this Chamber with better
news.

