Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Mr. President, for having organized this debate on
the role of business in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-building.

It is worthwhile to note that the return on
investments in Africa is the highest of the last five
years, amounting to approximately 25 per cent. This
statistic would have us believe that flows of private
investment are being massively attracted to that part of
the world. But this is not the case, since investors
remain cautious due to the proliferation and persistence
of armed conflicts and one of its accompanying results,
the disregard for the rule of law. Conflicts discourage
investment. Initiatives and actions by certain investors
also keep conflicts alive. The last 10 years have clearly
shown the interrelatedness of conflicts' duration, the
illicit circulation of light arms, the illicit exploitation
of natural resources and human rights violations. In the
context of a globalized economy characterized by the
mobility of its economic factors, the private sector has
proven to be a global actor, actively participating in
governance both at the national and international
levels.

Countries in conflict are characterized by a
weakening, if not a collapse, of their institutions. The
private sector's contribution would benefit from a well-
defined regulatory framework. Such a contribution
cannot replace the responsibility of the international
community, in particular that of the United Nations
system.

The challenges to be met are essentially the
following. How do we reconcile the social
responsibility of private companies with the need to
envisage incentive measures? How do we find a fair
balance between the ideals of peace, development and
equity and the business sector's cardinal principles of
profit-making and productivity? We must also ask
ourselves about the private sector's ability at the
conflict-prevention stage to make a substantial
contribution to establishing and entrenching democracy
and good governance, the lack of which is often a
source of conflict.

In general, the presence of the private sector is
still weak in Africa and largely depends on the public
sector and the State for its survival. In an environment
in which the private sector and the State are weak, how
do we establish equitable and constructive partnerships
with foreign private companies? Moreover, how do we
strengthen international cooperation and political will
to enforce agreed coercive measures against
individuals and private companies that act
irresponsibly in conflict areas? How do we make such
partnerships with the private sector as inclusive and as
integrated as possible? More and more, the
international community gives special and increased
attention to countries emerging from conflict and
countries in conflict. How can we ensure that this is not
done to the detriment of countries striving to prevent
conflict and to preserve peace and stability? In that
connection, the situation of the least developed
countries, which are the weakest and most vulnerable
to the risk of bankruptcy, deserves more attention.
Finally, we must ask ourselves how to get the private
sector to join in the integrated, multidisciplinary
approach for post-conflict reconstruction.

In that connection, I recall that in Abuja, in
March 2003, there was a forum of business people of
West Africa. The objective was to provide a platform
for West African business people to consider their
involvement in the implementation of the New
Partnership for Africa's Development, to identify a
process by which the private sector could become an
important driving force for the economic development
of West Africa and to consider the private sector's
contribution to efforts for establishing sustainable
peace in West Africa. I recall that initiative in order to
emphasize that, while in the short term the involvement
of the private sector in post-conflict reconstruction is
desirable, it will not be cohesive unless it is part of the
broader approach to sustainable development and takes
into account the socio-economic causes of conflict.

In connection with the challenges I have just
outlined, we await with great interest the publication of
the report of the inter-agency group established by the
Secretary-General in order to examine the
recommendations it will make.

