Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would
like to convey my gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
having organized this thematic debate devoted to an
especially sensitive topic, that of the regulation and
reduction of armaments as a vector for peace and
development. Your presence here today, Sir, gives our
debate special significance. Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon recently denounced "the vast resources that
are consumed by the endless pursuit of military
superiority" and made an urgent appeal for
disarmament.

The United Nations Charter gives both the
Security Council and the General Assembly a role to
play in that regard. The main responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security lies with
the Security Council, while the particular mission of
the General Assembly is to consider the principles for
general cooperation in the maintenance of international
peace and security, including those regulating
disarmament and arms regulation.

We are compelled to note today that the
significant efforts that have been made to bolster peace
and security have been accompanied not by a decrease
but by a worldwide increase in the resources consumed
by armaments. Certainly, arms and security forces are
the traditional tools for affirming sovereignty and
indispensable instruments for establishing and
maintaining security at the national and international
levels. Certainly, the decision to invest in armed forces
is a sovereign decision to be made by each State in the
light of its place in the world and its threat perception.
Certainly, investments will always be necessary to
improve peacekeeping capacities. By actively
developing its security and defence policy, the
European Union and, through it, Belgium are seeking
to contribute effectively to the maintenance of peace.

However, as we have witnessed a doubling in
military expenditures over the past decade, it would be
dishonest to attempt to justify preserving excessive
military arsenals out of the sole concern of maintaining
peace and security. Peace and security are also built
using other means, and what the Charter and today's
debate seek to remind us of is that the more we invest
in those other means, the less we will need to invest in
weapons.

We know what those other means are and we are
using and developing them. They are bilateral and
regional cooperation, the prevention of conflicts,
mediation, peacebuilding and economic and social
development. All those instruments contribute to
increased collective security and thus can only lead to
reduced recourse to arms.

Through its involvement, inter alia, within the
Peacebuilding Commission, Belgium intends to
contribute actively to programmes whose ultimate
objective is to silence weapons for good. Disarmament
and demobilization are in fact a necessary condition for
the economic and social reconstruction of areas
affected by conflict.

My country believes that a great step forward in
disarmament would be taken if common international
norms were adopted for the import, export and transfer
of conventional weapons, including small arms and
light weapons. Indeed, we know that it is difficult to
prevent the destabilizing accumulation and chaotic
dissemination of such weapons in conflict zones, and
that they therefore claim a great many victims, mostly
civilians. We therefore welcome the adoption by the
First Committee of the General Assembly of a draft
resolution, entitled "Towards an arms trade treaty"
(A/C.1/63/L.59), defining a series of concrete steps to
achieve progress in that field. Belgium's experience in
the implementation of criteria adopted at the regional
level leads us to fully endorse that approach and to
participate actively in it.

An arms trade treaty would enhance human
security - a very important concept for Belgium - as
it would have a direct impact on the life of every
individual, in particular in the most vulnerable strata of
the population. Belgium has therefore resolutely
committed itself in favour of banning anti-personnel
landmines and cluster munitions. In the same spirit, my
country is actively participating in international efforts
to put an end to the phenomenon of child soldiers.
Belgium is guided in that respect by the same spirit in
which it promoted the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction. Chemical
weapons were used for the first time at Ypres, Belgium,
during the First World War.

Generally speaking, multilateral disarmament and
non-proliferation treaties clearly play a key role, be it
with respect to conventional weapons or weapons of
mass destruction. In that regard, the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on their Destruction deserve special
mention. Belgium stresses the importance of strict
compliance with those instruments, which should be
ratified and implemented by all States Members of the
United Nations.

Belgium welcomes your initiative, Mr. President,
which leads us back to the basic aspirations of the
Charter's authors. My country is convinced that it
cannot but bolster the resolve of our Council to labour
for peace and security with all the means at its
disposal, both through armaments and "with the least
diversion for armaments of the world's human and
economic resources", as clearly prescribed in Article
26 of the Charter. We are convinced that today's debate
will serve as a clarion call to enhance the effectiveness
of the multilateral framework of our disarmament,
arms control and non-proliferation policies.

