Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful to Mr. Martin Griffiths, Mr. Mark Lowcock and Ambassador Inga Rhonda King for their briefings, which have given us a very complete picture of the political and humanitarian situation in Yemen. We reiterate our appreciation for the efforts they have made in their respective fields to achieve peace and address the pressing needs of the affected populations in Yemen. First, we are very concerned about the increase in hostilities that began in mid-January, which has led to the displacement of almost 5,000 people in thecentre of the country. Today, more than ever, there is a need for a genuine truce that commits the parties to a national de-escalation. We reiterate that the parties to the conflict have an obligation to respect international humanitarian law and refrain from attacks on hospitals and other health-care centres. Such indiscriminate attacks particularly affect the civilian population, whose well-being depends on the services provided through that infrastructure. We recognize the importance of the talks between Saudi Arabia and the Houthis, on the understanding that they can bring about a ceasefire and a cessation of hostilities. Secondly, we are very concerned about the deterioration of the current humanitarian situation. We reiterate that all parties to the conflict have an obligation to allow safe and unrestricted humanitarian access. This humanitarian crisis is made even more complex by the climate situation. The desert locust plague threatens to invade Yemen, which could have very severe consequences in a context where food security is already fragile. It is known that this plague can cause losses of up to 100 percent in both crops and fodder, triggering an extremely alarming and dangerous situation. Preventive measures are therefore urgently needed to prevent this pest from spreading in Yemen. We support the efforts of relevant organizations to prevent the worsening of a situation to which the Yemenis are already subjected, and we call for support from the international community to that end. Now more than ever we must reach a broad and inclusive political agreement based on mutual respect and full compliance with the commitments undertaken. We therefore note the importance of making progress in the implementation of the agreements reached in Stockholm and Riyadh. In that regard, we are pleased to learn that the parties have agreed on a detailed plan to complete the first large-scale exchange of prisoners since the beginning of the conflict. There is no military solution to the conflict in Yemen. We echo the words of the Secretary-General, who said that our mediation capacity and tools for maintaining peace need to be strengthened and that we need to place long-term development at the centre of our efforts. We understand that the political process in Yemen must be inclusive of women and young people and reflect their needs. Indeed, because of the conflict, agricultural production has been increasingly taken on by women in Yemen, thus enhancing their participation in the country's economy. That is why it is important to make it possible for them to be a part of the political process. In conclusion, we welcome the start of mercy flights from Sana'a airport to neighbouring countries, where patients, the majority of whom are boys and girls, can to receive the treatment that they so desperately need. We welcome the release and transfer from detention centres to civilian actors of 64 boys who had been deprived of their freedom. Both of those measures are vital for trust-building among the population in the political process and to alleviate their suffering. We reiterate that only an inclusive, sustainable and credible peace process can once and for all open the way for all to development and prosperity for the Yemeni people.
