Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): It is very good to
see you in the chair again, Sir.

It is late and I will try to be brief, but I want to
say at the outset that the international community and
the United Nations have already achieved a very great
deal in Afghanistan. I should like to pay particular
tribute to the excellent work of Special Representative
Brahimi and his team in the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan.

I should like, in this intervention, to focus on five
key areas.

First, as to security, thanks to the outstanding
support of contributor nations and the cooperation of
the Afghan authorities and people, the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) is helping to restore
security and confidence in and around Kabul. The
international community must now build on this
success by providing troops and resources for ISAF,
under Turkish leadership from June, and through
donations to the ISAF trust fund.

Secondly, the key to long-term stability in
Afghanistan is security sector reform. There is
progress, but it is, frankly, too slow. There needs to be
a concerted international effort, since otherwise we risk
losing our investment. Last week in Geneva, the United
Kingdom said that it was ready to contribute $21
million for the Afghan armed forces, including support
for demobilization and the Afghan Ministry of
Defence, conditional on the implementation of a
strategic and coherent approach to security sector
reform and satisfactory accountability, with a View to
the Afghans' developing the capacity to support their
own security sector as soon as possible.

Thirdly, as to the political process, Afghanistan
now has an Interim Administration under the effective
chairmanship of Hamid Kharzai. Next month's loya
jirga should produce an even more broad-based
Government and I agree with Sir Kieran's statement
earlier in the debate that the loya jirga is too important
to be discarded for its imperfections. We have
contributed £500,000, or $750,000, towards the costs
of preparation and we will be watching carefully to
make sure that the proceedings of the loya jirga are free
and fair.

Fourthly, with respect to humanitarian and
reconstruction assistance, the United Kingdom has
already provided £60 million, or roughly $90 million,
and pledged a further £200 million to avert a
humanitarian catastrophe and to improve access to
basic services, such as health care and education. We
were the first donor nation to contribute to the
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund and I would
like to encourage others to follow suit as soon as their
legislative processes and other requirements can be
managed.

Fifthly, I wish to refer to drugs. As others have
commented, production rose under the Taliban. We
welcome the recent success of the Interim
Administration in eradicating one third of the current
poppy crop in the main growing areas. There is an
urgent need for targeted financial assistance to support
rural recovery. Future efforts should focus on law
enforcement, alternative livelihoods, institution-
building, demand reduction and regional cooperation.
The United Kingdom is coordinating international
support for this effort.

Finally, Afghanistan is now much better off than
before, but much remains to be done. A sustained effort
by the entire international community is essential to
maintain momentum. There is a very great deal at stake
for all of us in this.

