Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing today. I would also like
to welcome to the Council Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, and Mr. Ivan Mrkie,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia.

The United Kingdom is grateful for the Secretary-
General's comprehensive report (S/2012/818), and
indeed for his own close engagement with this issue,
reflected in his visit to Kosovo in July.

Kosovo continues to make progress, both internally
and on the international stage. Internally, in September
the International Steering Group declared the end of
Kosovo's supervised independence. This is a measure
of substantial internal progress, although, obviously,
efforts to consolidate a multi-ethnic and democratic
society must continue. Internationally, since our last
meeting in August (S/PV.6822), four more United
Nations Member States have recognized Kosovo. We
encourage those countries that have not yet recognized
Kosovo to do so.

The United Kingdom welcomed the conclusions
of the European Commission's feasibility study on the
Stabilization and Association Agreement with Kosovo.
The conclusions underline that Kosovo is no longer
a special case; it is moving down the same European
Union (EU) accession path as the other countries of the
western Balkans. It follows that it will be expected to
deliver the same requirements, in terms of the reforms
necessary to meet the EU accession criteria. We wish
the Kosovo Government well in that regard; the United
Kingdom remains a firm supporter of Kosovo's EU
accession path.

Good-neighbourly relations are a crucial aspect of
the EU accession process. We therefore welcome the
recent reinvigoration of the EU-facilitated dialogue,
reflected in high-level meetings that postdate the
issuing of the Secretary-General's report. I readily
join Special Representative Zarif and other Council
members in welcoming this vital step. We look forward
to seeing tangible progress towards resolving issues at
the political level in order to reinforce the encouraging
progress already made in taking forward technical
agreements such as those on regional cooperation and
cadastre records. We are particularly encouraged to note
the progress made on integrated border management.
Going forward, it will be important to engage the local
community in northern Kosovo to ensure success.

The situation in northern Kosovo continues to be
a potentially destabilizing factor. We urge Belgrade
to take the necessary steps to remove illegal parallel
security structures in northern Kosovo. While the
dialogue remains a key vehicle for addressing the
overarching political issues, it remains important for
the authorities in Pristina to engage their citizens in
the north. They must demonstrate in both word and
deed their resolve to protect the community in northern
Kosovo, and to work towards its social and economic
well-being.

We are concerned about the recent unrest in the
ethnically mixed area of Kroi i Vitakut/Brdjani. The
United Kingdom reiterates its support for the right
of return of all Kosovo's communities, providing it
is exercised in a transparent and consultative fashion
and with the correct documentation. We call for calm
and encourage all those involved to enter into dialogue
in order to find a secure and sustainable solution that
allows all citizens the right to return to their place of
origin.
The United Kingdom continues to be grateful for
the professional way in which both the Kosovo Force
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) are carrying out their mandates. We
particularly welcome EULEX's efforts to increase its
presence in Zubin Potok. We condemn the 7 September
incident against EULEX and Kosovo police personnel
that led to injuries to a Kosovo police officer. The
perpetrators must be brought to justice.

With regard to the protection of minorities and
cultural heritage, we welcome the efforts of the
Kosovo police to enhance community policing and
the engagement of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe in that process. It is important
that the planned recruitment drive for Kosovo police
give special attention to recruiting officers from the
Kosovo Serb and other minority communities. We also
note the outreach by municipal officers to returnees.
It is important for Kosovo to continue taking visible
measures to prevent inter-ethnic incidents and to
investigate fully when such incidents do occur. We
welcome the recognition in the report of the importance
of socioeconomic factors in establishing sustainable
returns, and the United Kingdom remains committed
to the returns process through political engagement and
bilateral projects.

The United Kingdom continues to support the
important work being done by the EULEX Special
Investigative Task Force to look into the allegations
relating to organ trafficking made in the Marty report.
We are confident in its capacity and determination
to take this important investigation forward. Let me
also take this opportunity to reiterate the simple but
important point that the United Kingdom respects the
verdicts of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.

I would also like to welcome the important work,
referred to in the Secretary-General's report, that has
been taken forward by the United Nations Kosovo
team and the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, together with the EU and civil
society, addressing the theme of the status of survivors
of conflict-related sexual violence. This is a hugely
important issue, particularly in post-conflict societies
such as Kosovo. The British Foreign Secretary, William
Hague, has recently launched an initiative on preventing
sexual violence that aims to strengthen international
efforts and coordination to prevent and respond to
sexual violence. We will give strong support to efforts
to address the challenge posed by this tragic legacy of
past conflict in Kosovo.
The United Kingdom remains committed to the
irreversible progress of both Kosovo and Serbia towards
EU membership. We hope that the positive conclusions
of the feasibility study will be welcomed by the EU
General Affairs Council in December, with a view
to negotiations on the Stabilization and Association
Agreement with Kosovo being opened in 2013, once the
conditions have been met. We hope that both Belgrade
and Pristina will continue to engage constructively in
the dialogue, and we look forward to further tangible
results.

