I thank Special Representative Deborah Lyons, Ms. Shkula Zadran and my colleague Ambassador Djani of Indonesia for their briefings. I would also like in particular to welcome and thank Ms. Shkula Zadran, Afghan Youth Representative to the United Nations, for her presentation. I will focus my remarks on the following three areas: the peace situation, the security situation and the humanitarian situation. With regard to the peace process, let me begin by welcoming the launch of the Afghan peace negotiations in September and the ongoing discussions. The agreement reached by the parties on rules of procedures for the negotiations is a welcome and important step in the right direction. South Africa urges all the parties to continue to build on that momentum and engage constructively towards a just, durable and inclusive peace. More important, South Africa urges that the peace process be Afghan-led and -owned and include all Afghans. The progress and gains made in the rights of women and girls needs to be preserved. As Ms. Zadran demonstrated to us today, the women and youth of Afghanistan have a meaningful role to play and a real and existential stake in the future of Afghanistan - both in terms of its peace process and in mapping its reconstruction and development trajectory. On the security situation, regretfully, the soaring rates of violence and related high civilian casualties jeopardize Afghanistan's prospects for peace and are of great concern to South Africa. The Secretary-General has stated that "the armed conflict in Afghanistan remains the deadliest conflict in the world for children". It is important, therefore, that all parties cease their hostilities. The men, women and children of Afghanistan deserve peace and a life of fulfilment. Sustainable peace requires active dialogue and negotiation, which, in turn, require a peaceful environment in order to thrive. For Afghan peace talks to be effective, all parties must cease their violence and hostilities in order to create an environment conducive to meaningful progress. In that regard, South Africa calls on all parties to the conflict to comply with their obligations under international human rights law and international humanitarian law. In addition, all those responsible for grave violations in Afghanistan - particularly against children, women and the most vulnerable - should be brought to justice and held accountable, including through timely, systematic, impartial and independent investigations and, as appropriate, prosecution and conviction. On the humanitarian situation, a day or two ago we were informed of the worsening humanitarian situation in Afghanistan by the Acting Assistant-Secretary- General for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator. It goes without saying that the coronavirus disease pandemic, climate change and the protracted conflict, which has lasted over a decade, have all contributed to this dire situation. Mindful of the magnitude and complexity of the necessary measures, South Africa commends the United Nations and its humanitarian partners for their dedicated efforts to attend to all who require assistance. In conclusion, and noting that this will be South Africa's last meeting on the situation in Afghanistan as an elected Council member, let me take this opportunity to extend my appreciation and gratitude to Special Representative Lyons and the personnel of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for their dedication and commitment to the execution of its mandate. The Mission's work to facilitate dialogue with various stakeholders, including civil society groups, and its efforts to support conflict resolution and peacebuilding remain critical in uniting all Afghans towards a peaceful and sustainable resolution of the Afghan conflict. I thank the Permanent Representative of Indonesia and his team for their tireless efforts to contribute to creating a conducive environment for peace in Afghanistan, and I convey our best wishes to the incoming Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). I also thank Ms. Zadran for her role in Afghanistan and reassure her that South Africa has faith in the youth and believes in their ability to contribute to peaceful negotiations and building a fair, equitable and inclusive society. We are convinced that a better future for Afghans is on the horizon.
