Mr. Korneliou (Cyprus): At the outset, I wish to
commend the Russian presidency for organizing this
timely debate, and to thank you, Mr. President, for
giving us the opportunity to participate.

Cyprus aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union. I wish to make the following remarks
in my national capacity.

As you, Mr. President, rightly mention in the
concept note (S/2018/524, annex), the Middle East is
among the regions in the world most afflicted with old
and new persisting crises. Unfortunately, too often we
have seen the law of the jungle prevail over the principles
of international law. The international community must
collectively uphold its responsibility to reverse this
course by adhering to the principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. These principles serve
as a benchmark for what we accomplish in our efforts
to uphold international law. They are the barometer of
what we generally perceive as just and viable.

Allow me to refer briefly to my own country,
Cyprus, which is a test case in that region. We have
stated time and again that, if the rules of international
law had not been violated, the Cyprus problem would
not have arisen, and if these rules were applied today,
the problem would be solved in the interest of all parties
concerned. There is no other option but to continue
our efforts to reach a negotiated solution under United
Nations auspices. In this context, we welcome the
Secretary-General's intention to send a senior official
to conduct in-depth consultations with a View to a
meaningful resumption of the political process. Let me
also echo the Secretary-General's call on the Security
Council to increase its support and encouragement.

We should not forget that the Security Council
has the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security under the Charter
of the United Nations. It should therefore be clear
that anachronistic mechanisms of guarantees and the
presence of foreign troops in a post-settlement Cyprus
are inconsistent with our efforts to reunite our country
and become a normal State, as the Secretary-General
eloquently put it.

Cyprus straddles Europe, the Middle East and
North Africa, and has close historical and cultural ties
with the countries of the region. Cyprus, along with
Greece, as mentioned by the Permanent Representative
of Greece, have established trilateral partnerships with
our neighbouring countries: Israel, Egypt, Jordan,
Lebanon and Palestine. This cooperation is founded
upon our adherence to international law and a rules-
based international order as the bedrocks for peace and
prosperity for all countries and peoples in the region.
We look forward to embracing our neighbours who
support these principles.

In the same context, we have concluded agreements
on the delimitation of our maritime zones with Egypt,
Israel and Lebanon. This has allowed us to develop a
programme of hydrocarbon exploration in our exclusive
economic zone. Once again, the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and of international law
show the way forward and not unilateral actions that
endanger international peace and security.

We have followed closely the developments in the
Middle East and North Africa region - a region that
has been shaken by unprecedented unrest, turmoil and
conflict. The tide of upheaval has now begun to recede,
but serious challenges remain, notably in Yemen and
Syria. The coming months will be defined by post-war
transitions, peace talks, ballot boxes and reconstruction.
In any case, a military solution is not an option and
adherence to international humanitarian law and respect
for the need to protect civilians are indispensable.

The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
has been defeated, but it remains a threat. We have
to strengthen our efforts aimed at stability and
reconciliation and not allow ISIL or other radical groups
to exploit political instability once again. A solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian question will have an undeniably
positive ripple effect on other regional crises and in the
battle to combat the threat of violent extremism and
terrorism. We maintain our principled position and
support for a just and comprehensive settlement based
on a two-State solution under international law and
pursuant to the relevant Security Council resolutions
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Regarding Syria, we fully support the efforts of
Staffan de Mistura, which are aimed at driving the
political process forward. We remain committed to a
unified, sovereign and independent Syria without any
foreign occupying forces. At the same time, it is of the
utmost importance to address the serious challenges
faced by Syrian refugees and the neighbouring
countries hosting them. We also deplore all efforts
to eliminate ethnic, Christian and other religious
minorities in the Middle East. Cyprus, with a long-
standing history of peaceful coexistence of various
religious groups, stands ready to contribute to the
promotion of inter-faith dialogue.

Lastly, we condemn the deliberate destruction of
cultural heritage in Syria and Iraq and across the region.
The cultural heritage originating from the cradle of our
civilization should be protected. Cyprus is therefore at
the forefront of efforts to that end.

