Mr. Juul (Norway): Let me first of all express
our appreciation to the United Nations special envoy,
Mr. de Soto, for his comprehensive briefing here today.

Israel's decision to disengage from Gaza and
parts of the northern West Bank is a brave step that
should trigger the immediate implementation of the
road map and the revitalization of the peace process.
Hopefully, it will bring us closer to the realization of
the vision of two democratic States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security.

For the disengagement to have that effect, its
significant potential for revitalizing the Palestinian
economy must be utilized. The disengagement will aid
the speedy implementation of the road map and breathe
new life into the peace process only if we manage to
harness its potential for revitalizing the Palestinian
economy.

As chair of the donor group - the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee - Norway welcomes the important
work done by James Wolfensohn to ensure the success
of disengagement. The Liaison Committee stands ready
to support Mr. Wolfensohn's efforts to mobilize

tangible financial contributions from the international
donor community in support of his rapid-reaction
programme.

We also welcome the political courage shown by
the leaders of the two sides so far with regard to
disengagement. However, it is essential that the parties
coordinate the disengagement process and cooperate
effectively with Mr. Wolfensohn. Furthermore, the
Palestinian Authority should speed up its reform
programme and Israel should do what it can to create
the conditions necessary for viable Palestinian
economic growth after the withdrawal from Gaza and
certain parts of the northern West Bank.

The international community, as well as the
parties, must also look beyond the disengagement to
"the morning after". We must not allow the
disengagement process to divert attention away from
the continued expansion of settlements on the West
Bank and in East Jerusalem and the continued
construction of the barrier east of the Green Line. That
policy undermines the possibility of positive dividends
from the Gaza disengagement. We are concerned by the
recent Israeli cabinet decision to immediately complete
the separation barrier in and around East Jerusalem.
Israel must stop and reverse the construction of the
barrier inside Palestinian territory, including in and
around East Jerusalem. Any changes to the pre-1967
borders other than those arrived at by agreement
between the parties are not acceptable.

We are deeply concerned by the recent escalation
of the violence in Israel and in the Palestinian
territories. We condemned unreservedly the recent
terrorist attacks on Israel. The Palestinian Authority
must take immediate and effective action against those
involved in attacks. Israel, for its part, has an
indisputable right to protect its citizens against terrorist
attacks. However, international law bans the practice of
extrajudicial killings.

Furthermore, the Palestinian Authority must step
up its efforts to ensure a secure environment for its
citizens. Norway will continue its support for the
development of Palestinian security capacity through
the Palestinian civil police, in coordination with the
European Union Coordination Office for Palestinian
Policing Support and the United States Security
Coordinator, General Ward.

