Mr. Menon (Singapore): Let me begin by stating
the obvious. There is some discomfort about the venue
and nature of today's debate. But let me also state what
is equally obvious to all except those who refuse to see
reality. Climate change is the main global
environmental challenge. There is general agreement
among scientists that the increase in atmospheric
greenhouse gas concentrations is causing global
warming. We are witnessing rising sea levels and
extreme weather. We are seeing the extinction of
species. Those effects are worldwide and potentially
devastating as they increase in severity.

Given the paucity of their resources, developing
countries will be the hardest hit. For some, their very
survival is at stake. For example, entire island nations
might cease to exist as a result of rising sea levels. But
it is not only the poor who will suffer. If climate
change causes socio-economic conditions within
developing countries to deteriorate, millions of people
will be compelled to seek refuge in developed
countries. Even poverty and socio-political dislocation
are globalized these days. I believe that there is a broad
consensus that we must act to arrest that for which we
ourselves are responsible. Many of the problems
caused by climate change can be tackled only if we
work together.

Let us view our procedural disagreements against
that backdrop. Intuitively, there may be a nexus
between environmental degradation from climate
change and increased conflict over limited resources
made even scarcer. Land, water, food and minerals
have often been variables in that complex equation
leading to conflict. It is notoriously hard to quantify
exactly the role of each variable in that respect. People
have been studying conflicts for centuries without
arriving at a perfect formula for predicting them. But
while we should recognize the complexity of the issue,
we should not lose sight of the simple idea that people
often fight over tangible things.

While it may be difficult to quantify the
relationship between climate change and international
peace and security, there should be no doubt that
climate change is an immediate global challenge that
has trans-boundary, multifaceted effects. There will be
serious implications as concerns politics, socio-
economics, geography, security and the fundamental
way in which we interact with nature and with each
other. Given that complexity, can we realistically limit
ourselves to finding one correct forum to discuss all
aspects of this problem? Or should we use all our
resources to try to understand the issue and all
opportunities and forums to explore the problem from
various perspectives? Each piece of the puzzle could
help us see the bigger picture. We would like to view
today's open debate in the Security Council in that
light. At the very least, these discussions will keep
international focus on the problems associated with
climate change.

We are not advocating that the Security Council
play the key role with respect to climate change. But
neither can we deny the Security Council some sort of
role, because it seems obvious to all but the wilfully
blind that climate change must, if not now, eventually
have some impact on international peace and security.
The Council is one player in the broader debate on the
issue. Of course, the Council is not the only or the
main player. With its broader membership and
mandate, the General Assembly is clearly another body
that must discuss this issue. The General Assembly
already has existing mechanisms to deal with this.
There are also other forums such as the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) and the Economic
and Social Council. The upcoming fifteenth session of
the Commission on Sustainable Development is
expected to play a key role in discussing the problem
of climate change. All those forums must continue to
address the issue and its environmental, social and
economic effects on the world, particularly in those
countries most at risk.

Following this open debate, let us not put aside
the issue. We should see this as just one small step in a
longer march. Given the magnitude and urgency of the
problem, the General Assembly should consider
convening a high-level event or a special session
dedicated to the issue of climate change. There is no
point in sitting around and complaining that the
Security Council is encroaching onto areas that should
be dealt with by the General Assembly. The Assembly
should rise to the challenge and do something about
this global issue. A high-level event or a special
session of the General Assembly could give an added
push to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change meeting in Bali at the end of the year.
Ultimately, dealing decisively with climate change
comes down to political will - the political will to
sign the relevant treaties and protocols, the political
will to make compromises, and the political will to
make sacrifices for the longer term.

We now know that what we have done in the past
century has caused much damage to our environment
and to the world. We also know that unless we take
immediate steps to rectify matters, the situation will
get progressively worse in the coming decades. Every
long journey begins with a first step. Hopefully,
today's open debate will inspire us to take the next step
of dealing with this global issue in a broader setting
involving the entire United Nations membership. James
Freeman Clarke once said that a politician thinks of the
next election, a statesman, of the next generation. Let
us all be statesmen. Let us put aside our differences
and tackle this issue. That will be our legacy.

