I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by Her Excellency the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed; Mr. Ibrahim Mayaki, Chief Executive Officer of the African Union Development Agency; Sir Hilary Beckles, Vice Chancellor of the University of the West Indies; His Excellency Mr. Munir Akram, Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations, in his capacity as President of the Economic and Social Council; as well as the statements delivered by Their Excellencies Mr. Ralph E. Gonsalves, Prime Minister, Minister for the Public Service, National Security, Legal Affairs and Grenadines Affairs of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines; Mr. Othman Jerandi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia; Ms. Meryame Kitir, Minister of Development Cooperation of Belgium; Mr. Andres Rundu, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia; Mr. Niels Annen, Minister of State in the Federal Foreign Office of Germany; Mr. Sergey Vershinin, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation; Mr. Alvin Botes, Deputy Minister of International Relations and Cooperation of South Africa; Lord Tariq Ahmad of Wimbledon, Minister of State for the Commonwealth, the United Nations and South Asia of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland; Mr. Le Hoai Trung, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam; and by the representatives of China, the Dominican Republic, France, Indonesia, the Niger and the United States of America, in connection with the video-teleconference on "Peacebuilding and sustaining peace: contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity", convened on Tuesday, 3 November 2020. In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for this video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted written statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Azerbaijan, Brazil, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Cuba, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, the European Union, Georgia, Guatemala, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Liechtenstein, Malta, Mexico, Morocco, Namibia, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, the Sudan, Switzerland, Ukraine and the United Arab Emirates. Pursuant to the letter by the President of the Security Council addressed to permanent representatives of the members of the Security Council dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the extraordinary circumstances (E) 161120 281220 ay NTH A TAA eee Tae caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the enclosed briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
