Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): Two
weeks ago, the Security Council, after tough
consultations, unanimously adopted resolution 1405
(2002), which welcomes and supports the initiative of
the Secretary-General to establish a fact-finding team
to shed light on the events that took place in the Jenin
refugee camp in occupied Palestinian territory.
Immediately after the adoption of that resolution, the
Secretary-General began to take the necessary steps to
set up the team, while clearly explaining its nature and
objectives.

In the days that followed, the Secretary-General
set up the team, comprised of eminent personalities
who had proved themselves at the highest international
level. Those people were accompanied by experienced
experts, military and security specialists and forensic
and general support staff.

The Secretary-General's initiative - which, at
the outset, was accepted by the Israeli Government -
was increasingly questioned by that Government on
various pretexts, with the intention of delaying or even
jeopardizing the dispatch of the team. Those pretexts
included, inter alia, the composition of the team, the
scope of its mandate, the way in which the mandate
would be carried out and other procedural matters.

As the Council knows, throughout the negotiating
process, the United Nations, far from being
discouraged, outdid itself in responding to the
questions raised by the Israeli authorities. Indeed, the
mandate of the team was clearly established: it was to
gather credible information about the events in Jenin
and to provide an account to the Secretary-General
who, in turn, would inform the Security Council.

After procrastination and delay, the Israeli
cabinet's decision finally reached the Secretary-
General and the Council in the form of a refusal to
cooperate with the dispatch of the mission. My
delegation regrets that decision, which, as many other
speakers have already pointed out, could affect the
credibility of the Council.

Faced with that obstinate refusal, the
Secretary-General reluctantly decided to disband the
fact-finding team, because it was clear that, without the
agreement and the cooperation of all the parties
concerned, it would not be possible for the mission to
go to Jenin, still less to proceed to undertake an
impartial and credible investigation based on the facts
on the ground.

My delegation does not want the Israeli
Government's refusal to cooperate to lead to
increasingly rigid attitudes or to a polarization of
positions and the further stalling of the peace process
in the Middle East. Everything must be done to
persuade the Israeli Government to cooperate in
resolving the crisis, within the framework of respect
for its international obligations.

That is why we believe that the Security Council
as a whole should consider what new measures might
be adopted so that the events that took place in Jenin
can be fully clarified. My delegation is very willing to
work closely with other delegations to that end.

In conclusion, we welcome the meeting of the
"quartet" that took place yesterday in Washington,
DC, which committed itself to working with the Arab
Governments and the rest of the international
community to restore peace in the Middle East on the
basis of security, political, economic and humanitarian
considerations.

We encourage the "quartet" to implement its
decision to organize an international conference early
this summer, which, we are convinced, would make it
possible to adopt concrete measures aimed at the
achievement of that objective.

