Mr. Harrison (United Kingdom): I first join
others in welcoming you, Mr. President, as you preside
over this meeting.

The delegation of Spain will be speaking later on
behalf of the European Union. My delegation naturally
endorses what it will say. I would just like to make one
or two points of detail.

First, my delegation would like to join others in
congratulating Ambassador Kolby for the way he led
the recent mission to Ethiopia and Eritrea and also to
congratulate Ambassador Legwaila and the United

Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) on
their tireless work.

It is obvious that the decision shortly to be
announced by the Boundary Commission will have
considerable importance for the future of the peace
process and the stability of the region. As the Boundary
Commission's decision grows nearer, we believe that it
is important for the international community to engage
more deeply in the peace process, particularly the
guarantors of the peace process and regional
organizations, including the Organization of African
Unity.

But a second point about the Boundary
Commission's ruling is that it will not be the end of the
peace process. Indeed, the current arrangements on the
ground will have to remain in place and the outstanding
obstacles to the peace process, including the areas of
Eritrean non-compliance, will need to be resolved. The
demarcation process itself may not be completed until
2004. But once the Boundary Commission's position is
known, it will be important to inject early momentum
into that demarcation process. The demining that will
be needed to allow demarcation to take place will be a
major undertaking, and it may prove to be beyond the
capacity of the two parties. So the Council may need to
consider whether to extend UNMEE's role to cover this
area of activity at the renewal of the mandate in a few
days' time.

Finally, I should like to say that we welcome the
meeting of the religious leaders of the two countries.
We believe that events like that can only help the
normalization of bilateral relations at all levels, which
is so important for the peace process.

