Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to speak on the occasion of the adoption
by the Security Council of resolution 2364 (2017),
which renews the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) for an additional year.

At the outset, I welcome the constructive
negotiations that have led to this result. And, in that
regard, I would like to convey to the members of
the Council the sincere gratitude of His Excellency
Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, President of the Republic
of Mali, the Government and the people of Mali for
this important decision, which the Council just made
unanimously. I also wish to thank Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres and all the women and men of
MINUSMA for their daily commitment and sacrifice
alongside the people of Mali in their quest for peace,
stability and development.
The resolution the Council just adopted is important
in more ways than one. Indeed, in deciding to extend
the mandate of MINUSMA for another year, that is,
until 30 June 2018, the Security Council reaffirms the
support of the international community for the peace
process in Mali, with full respect for the sovereignty,
national unity, territorial integrity and the unity and
secular nature of the State of Mali.

In taking a decision to renew the proactive and
robust stance of MINUSMA's mandate, the Security
Council is responding to a pressing request from the
Government of Mali, supported by the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States,
to consider the particularly hostile and dangerous
environment in which peacekeepers are deployed.
This robust mandate gives MINUSMA the means to,
first, protect and defend itself against hostile forces
and to carry out its primary task of protecting civilian
populations in Mali.

Giving a mandate that is appropriate to the
situation is one thing; equipping MINUSMA with the
necessary material, financial and human resources is
another. The Government of Mali strongly welcomes
the strengthening of the operational capacities of
MINUSMA, allowing it to carry out its mandate
fully and effectively. In that regard, the conclusions
of the MINUSMA force generation conference held
on 22 and 23 May 2017 under the chairmanship of the
Secretary-General provide hope that this challenge
will soon be overcome. I would like to commend the
troop-contributing countries that made pledges on that
occasion. I hope that those pledges will soon be realized.

Equally important is the strengthening of
cooperation between MINUSMA and the Malian
Defence and Security Forces. In particular, I would
like to highlight the need and urgency of supporting the
Malian Defence and Security Forces in the daily fight
against terrorism on the ground, without waiting for the
completion of their rebuilding process. Terrorist forces
will not wait until the end of that process. I welcome
the fact that this central issue is taken into account in
resolution 2364 (2017).

Similarly, the Government of Mali welcomes the
fact that the new MINUSMA mandate reflects the truly
important issue of restoring the authority of the State
of Mali throughout the territory, in particular the return
of the administration and the defence and security
forces in all regions of the north, including in Kidal.
The Government welcomes the decisive support for the
effective implementation of the cantonment process, of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and of
security sector reform in Mali.

For our part, I can assure the members of the
Security Council that, under the authority of President
Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, the Government will continue
with its diligent implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, emanating from the
Algiers process. To that end, Bamako recently hosted a
day for assessing theimplementation of the Agreement,
under the presence of the Prime Minister and Head of
Government, on Friday, 23 June. A11 Malian actors in
the peace process took part, including the signatory
movements, the High-Representative of the President
of the Republic and civil society for the implementation
of the Agreement.

One of the major conclusions of that meeting
was that the three parties - the Government, the
Platform and the Coordination des mouvements de
l'Azawad - led by the High-Representative of the
President, accepted the adoption ofa realistic consensual
calendar for the restoration of the administration and
the Malian defence and security forces to Kidal as soon
as possible. At the same time, the Government will
continue its implementation of the Agreement in terms
of providing basic social services and peace dividends
to the affected populations, and in particular will seek
to uphold human rights. Sustained attention will be
given to the situation in the centre of the country.

Members will have noted that the Mali crisis has
regional and international dimensions also. That is the
very purpose of the establishment of the joint force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S), the deployment
of which was approved by the Security Council
through resolution 2359 (2017), with a mandate to fight
terrorism, organized crime and human trafficking. I
would like to call for greater, more steadfast support
from our bilateral and multilateral partners with a
view to mobilizing the necessary resources for the
effective functioning of thae joint force. On that issue
an emergency summit of the Heads of State of the G-5
Sahel, with the participation of the President of the
French Republic, is scheduled for 2 July in Bamako.

In conclusion, I want to thank the French delegation,
under the leadership of my dear friend Ambassador
Delattre, for initiating and leading the negotiations
on resolution 2364 (2017). I would also like to thank
all members of the Security Council for their sincere
support in its adoption. Likewise, I thank each one for
providing such valuable support. I reiterate the infinite
gratitude of the people and the Government of Mali to
the Secretary-General, to his Special Representative
for Mali and to all MINUSMA personnel, as well as
to the troop-contributing countries, the French forces
of Operation Barkhane, the European Union Military
Training Mission and to the members of the Agreement
Monitoring Committee, lead by Algeria, for the
steadfast and multidimensional support to the peace
and stabilization process in our country. Finally, I want
to reiterate the tribute paid by the people of Mali to
the memory of all victims, both civilian and military,
Malian and foreign, who have fallen in the fields of
glory in Mali.

The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.
