Unfortunately, I address the Security Council today at a time when the whole world is facing the huge challenge posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I would like to voice my hope that our joint efforts, mutual solidarity and cooperation will see us overcome this difficult situation in the very near future. I would like to take this opportunity to extend my deepest condolences to the families of the victims of the coronavirus disease throughout the world and to show the strong solidarity of Serbia with all countries affected by the pandemic. I wish to point out the importance of this meeting being held, as it conveys a strong message to the people in Kosovo and Metohija that they have not been forgotten, at this difficult hour, and that we care for them more than ever before, well aware of the fact that their living conditions were difficult even before the pandemic outbreak. We have undertaken decisive measures to help Serbs in Kosovo and Metohya fight the epidemic - by supplying medical and protective equipment and sending medical doctors and staff. But we have also expressed readiness from the very beginning to fully cooperate with Albanians and work together with representatives of the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government (PISG) in Pristina to combat the epidemic. Persons who had been infected in Kosovo and Metohija and who have been receiving medical treatment in central Serbia include both Serbs and Albanians, and last week we donated 1,000 coronavirus test kits to the Institute of Public Health in Pristina. I would like to reiterate that Serbia will continue to extend all the necessary assistance and show solidarity to all in these difficult times, as well as that the fight against coronavirus and the protection of human lives are the top priority today. In this context, I will briefly reflect only on the previous period, covered in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/255). Serbia has time and time again, and most notably in the past year, demonstrated its strong commitment to finding a compromise solution for the issue of Kosovo and Metohia that would secure lasting peace and stability, while also showing its readiness to reach a solution by which neither side would be an absolute winner, but would gain enough for the solution to be a long-term and sustainable one. Serbia has responded with restraint to all the unilateral and discriminatory actions of Pristina PISGs, while refraining from countermeasures and acting as a responsible partner, one contributing to stabilization of the situation and aiming to secure conditions for an unimpeded course of dialogue. We had hoped that the October election in Kosovo and Metohia and the appointment of new authorities in February this year would have been a good opportunity for Pristina PISGs to turn over a new leaf in their approach to the dialogue, to finally show readiness for talks and revoke the controversial decision on the imposition of tariffs, which resulted in the dialogue being stalemated for a long time now. However, we ended up being faced with positions even more extreme and an absolute lack of goodwill for the dialogue, which was all made blatantly obvious in the programme presented and decisions made by the Albin Kurti Government. Their position as to the tariffs imposed by Pristina on goods originating from central Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina - thus inflicting immeasurable political and economic damage on Serbia and the region as a whole - has best illustrated their approach to the dialogue as well. 25/31 26/31 Despite all of that, Serbia has continued to show its commitment to the resolution of all issues relevant to the lives of our citizens, while striving to promote connectivity and freedom of movement as well as the flow of goods, capital, services and people. In view of that, and as a token of goodwill, we recently signed letters of intent to establish air and railway traffic between Belgrade and Pristina, as well as a statement of intent to finalize the construction of a motorway connecting the two cities. I take this opportunity to express gratitude to Ambassador Richard Grenell, Special Envoy of the President of the United States, for his initiative and all the efforts he made towards reaching the agreement. Support and assistance in the context of dialogue is always welcome. We hope that the engagement on the part of the European Union (EU) will also gain new momentum with the appointment of Mr. Miroslav Lajeak as the EU Special Representative for the Belgrade-Pristina Dialogue and that conditions for the continuation of the dialogue will be in place immediately upon the end of the pandemic. All it takes for that to happen is for one step to be made by Pristina. We have heard countless calls made by all the stakeholders involved for the revocation of the senseless tariffs, including at Security Council meetings, but Pristina has persistently refused to do so. We were recently informed that Kurti made a decision to lift the tariffs, but to also impose "reciprocity measures" at the same time. Such a disingenuous move by Pristina was meant to "pull the wool over the eyes" of everyone who called for the revocation of the tariffs, while practically making no difference as compared to the previous measures. For that reason, I would like to remind once again that resolution 1244 (1999) remains the only valid United Nations document, which must be respected, and that the formation of the community of Serbian municipalities is Pristina's obligation in accordance with the Brussels Agreement. I take this opportunity to once again call for a return to dialogue and refraining from unilateral moves. The ongoing situation has taught us better than any before that we need to rely on each other and be aware of the importance of cooperation and connectivity. Regrettably, the current political atmosphere in Kosovo and Metohija has resulted in even the assistance and solidarity of Serbia in the fight against COVID-19 being a subject of politicization and misinterpretation by way of brutal attacks and unseemly accusations, to which the entire international community responded with condemnation. It is therefore incumbent upon us to set aside our differences once we overcome the coronavirus pandemic, and arrive at decisions and solutions that will ensure normal and peaceful life to all communities in Kosovo and Metohija. I need to reiterate once again that we see it as unacceptable to draw any correlation between the imposition of anti-civilizational tariffs and the decisions to revoke recognitions of the unilateral declaration of independence by so-called Kosovo, particularly bearing in mind that Pristina, by its own admission, has continued lobbying across the globe in favour of the recognition of so-called "Kosovo", in which, as they have claimed, they enjoyed selfless support by some members of the Council. If members are requesting that we stop campaigning for the revocation of recognitions, would it not make perfect sense for them to stop lobbying in favour of Kosovo unilateral declaration of independence first, while asking the so-called Kosovo authorities to do the same? In February of this year, when the fake news appeared that Jamaica purportedly recognized Kosovo unilateral declaration of independence, Pristina representatives, including Hashim Thagi and Behgjet Pacolli, expressed their gratitude to United States Congressman Eliot Engel for his assistance. In a letter to Secretary of State Michael Pompeo, Congressman Engel and Senator Robert Menendez requested to be informed "why the [United States] Administration has neither imposed those sanctions nor actively pressed Serbia to end its global de-recognition efforts". Please, let me know how such steps could be considered as conducive to a good climate for the continuation of the dialogue. Only if everyone stops lobbying, the same can be asked of Serbia. In the previous period, we were particularly alarmed by two highly important issues concerning the vows to make military service compulsory in Kosovo and Metohija and to pass the so-called law on war crimes, genocide and alleged Serbian aggression. I remind the Council that a special Security Council meeting was held in December 2018 (see S/PV.8427) to address the announced establishment of the so-called Kosovo armed forces and that on that occasion, and several times after that, we warned about the serious consequences of such steps that would immediately threaten the safety of Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija and drastically deteriorate the security situation in the region. The statement about military service indicates another forthcoming unilateral and absolutely unacceptable act by Pristina, in violation of resolution 1244 (1999) and the Kosovo Force mandate it established, as the only legal and legitimate military structure in the province. With regard to the announcement to bring a case against Serbia before the International Court of Justice on the count of alleged genocide, that has been clearly motivated by Pristina's attempts to somehow obscure the issue of trials for crimes committed by the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), particularly now that it has become apparent that it is highly likely that, despite years of delays, formal indictments will soon be raised before the Specialist Chambers. If it is indeed our wish to build a future together, we are also obliged to act in a responsible way and say that those who suffered the most in the conflicts in Kosovo and Metohija were innocent civilians, regardless of their ethnicity. We cannot allow one side to assume the role of sole victim while denying the crimes committed against the Serb population. The farming families killed in Staro Gracko and the child victims in Gorazdevac, victims of the massacre at Lake Radonji¢ and the Kleeka killings, as well as each and every one of the 200,000 Serbs persecuted by the so-called KLA from Kosovo and Metohija, of whom only 1.9 per cent have achieved sustainable return, and who are not able to get back to their homes in Kosovo and Metohija for safety reasons even after more than 20 years, all deserve answers. Therefore, it is our hope that the activity of the Specialist Chambers for crimes committed in Kosovo and Metohija will contribute to justice being served for all. At a time when the whole world is facing one of the greatest challenges of the century and when we are required to show maturity and seriousness, the Pristina authorities have demonstrated that they do not consider the safety and the lives of citizens to be a top priority and that nothing matters to them more than who will assume political power. They have shown an utmost lack of understanding of what a responsible approach means, while failing to address the difficult challenges we are all facing at the moment. The political messages conveyed by representatives of the then new Government, which was dismissed in less than two months in a vote of no-confidence, can be taken seriously or not, or seen either as only serving local political purposes or as being addressed to the international public. However, it is a fact that every word uttered at any time and any decision we make can have unforeseen consequences for all citizens. The weight of responsibility is all the greater if one is dealing with a sensitive situation, as is the case in Kosovo and Metohija. The main victims of political conduct that shows no signs of readiness for a compromise solution that 27/31 28/31 would satisfy the interests of both the Serbian and Albanian sides are not the politicians, but Serbs in Kosovo and Metohiya, who have been physically assaulted, threatened and exposed to hate speech on a daily basis, and also Albanians who are now rushing to Serbia to receive medical treatment. Therefore, the responsibility lies with political leaders not to generate contexts that prevent the development of a society towards a democratic and modern one. Sadly, I cannot help but conclude that Pristina politicians have, through their behaviour in these difficult times, once again affirmed a fact that has been clear to all, but that some Council members would not admit to, namely, that the project to create an independent State of Kosovo was a big mistake made by a part of the international community, as well as that States cannot be created by unilateral decisions. Let me reiterate once again that the Republic of Serbia firmly believes that problems should be resolved through dialogue and hopes that conditions for this will be in place as soon as possible. Serbia's endeavour is to ensure that we build a joint future by pursuing a policy of peace and cooperation.
