Mr. Al-Moumani (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me at the outset, Mr. President, to thank you for
having convened this important meeting. Time is short,
so allow me to briefly take up some points that we wish
to share.

Jordan, led by His Majesty King Abdullah II
ibn Al Hussein, will remain at the forefront of all
international and regional efforts to confront terrorist
groups in the context of a comprehensive approach that
takes into account military, security and ideological
confrontation. Let me remind the Council of what
his Majesty said: "Because this war is our war, we,
Muslims and Arabs, must unite our efforts and lead
an Arab-Muslim coalition, as we defend our religion
and our noble civilization as we protect and ensure the
security of our peoples and countries".

We must continue to work together to confront
more effectively the issue of the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters towards the full implementation of resolution
2178 (2014). It is also important to promote and
improve the ability of local parties to combat Da'esh.
In this regard, Jordan has supported the efforts by the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to set up an Islamic military
alliance to combat terrorism. We participate therein,
support it strongly and were among its initiators.

A part of the solution to the problem of terrorism
lies in understanding the root causes of extremism and
terrorism. Failed States, chaos in some conflict regions,
sectarian divisions, marginalization, exclusion and
the fragmentation of States are all fertile ground for
terrorism and extremism. Failure to resolve the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict is a fundamental factor in this
respect. Failure to reach a peaceful and just settlement
gives terrorists a pretext to recruit and gain support.

We must also stress that there is a need to find a
political solution to the Syrian crisis. Let me point to
the fact that combating the funding of terrorism cannot
be achieved through individual national efforts or
independent efforts by individual institutions. There
are many sources for the funding of terrorism. We must
therefore look into mechanisms that ensure concerted
efforts at the national level as well as cooperation at the
regional and international levels. Lack of coordination
nationally, regionally and internationally is one reason
for the success of those groups in obtaining resources.

I must also refer most regretfuly to an expanding
phenomenon that is the fear of Islam and of Muslims
around the world. It is a destructive phenomenon, one
which leads to erroneous ideologies and thoughts,
feeding the extremists and their objectives that seek to
divide us. Let me stress that those suffering the most
from terrorism and its crimes are Arabs and Muslims,
more than any other ethnic or religious groups.

We must concentrate on the youth. Jordan was in the
forefront of those pointing to the need to protect youth.
Let me stress here the importance of implementing the
provisions of Security Council resolution 2250 (2015)
on youth, peace and security, based on the initiative
of Crown Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah II during
Jordan's presidency of the Security Council in April
2015 and the Amman Youth Declaration on Youth,
Peace and Security, of August 2015. Furthermore, we
must deal with the struggle within States to prevent
Da'esh from recruiting new members internationally,
luring them through social media, in addition to using
the electronic media to smuggle millions of dollars'
worth of archaeological treasures.

Jordan reasserts its support for the Secretary-
General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.
We look to its contents very positively, as long as it
goes along with national plans.

Finally, the heinous terrorist crimes perpetrated
by terrorist groups surely must point to the fact that
those terrorists are trying to undermine our joint
common values. The war against terrorism is indeed a
third world war, and we must participate effectively in
combating it.

