I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General James Swan, Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission Francisco Caetano Jose Madeira, and Director Agnes Marcaillou for their briefings. China pays close attention to the situation in Somalia. China commends efforts made by the country in the past three months in preparing for elections, implementing the transition plan, improving the relationship between the Federal Government and federal member states and promoting economic and social development. We have good reason to believe that the people and the Government of Somalia will continue to make new progress in the national governance and peace processes. Somalia is entering a critical stage, with the elections at the top of its priorities. President Farmajo signed the electoral bill into law and the National Electoral Security Task Force adopted its terms of reference and reviewed the draft concept of security for voter registration. The progress in these areas fully demonstrates Somalia's strong willingness to promote peaceful elections. China supports all parties in Somalia that proceed from the fundamental interests of the country as a whole, enhance cooperation and dialogue and jointly advance the electoral and political processes. In providing constructive assistance, the international community should adhere to the principle of a Somali-led and Somali-owned process. China consistently advocates the idea that African countries should address African issues in African ways. The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has been playing a significant role in maintaining peace and stability in the country. China supports AMISOM in continuing to perform its duty in accordance with its mandate and helping the Somalia national security forces to strengthen their capacities and gradually assume security responsibility. The African Union Peace and Security Council has made requests and suggestions in terms of Somalia- related issues. We hope that the United Nations Security Council will give sufficient attention and positive response to the African Union's voice. China strongly condemns all forms of terrorism. The United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia and AMISOM have made notable contributions to Somali efforts aimed at combating terrorist activities. Terrorism attacks targeting the United Nations and AMISOM facilities are a matter of grave concern. We call on all relevant parties to take pragmatic measures that would effectively guarantee the safety and security of United Nations and African Union facilities and staff in Somalia. The coronavirus disease pandemic, combined with locust infestation and floods, has worsened the humanitarian situation in the country. China appreciates measures already taken by the Somali Government to prevent and control the pandemic. Limited by its economic and social development conditions, Somalia is more vulnerable than ever and less capable of responding to disasters. The international community should continue to provide constructive assistance in order to help Somalia overcome difficulties and achieve sustainable and independent development at an early date. In the face of the pandemic, we are truly a community with a shared future. The Chinese Government and enterprises have donated multiple batches of medical supplies to Somalia and shared our experience and best practices with Somali medical personnel through video-teleconferences. China will continue to make its own unilateral contributions.
