Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): In
deciding to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville to 31 December 2003,
for a final time, the Security Council asked the
Secretary-General to furnish it with a report on the
progress achieved with regard to the strategy pertaining
to the completion of the Office's mission and its
eventual withdrawal. The report just given to us by
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs Danilo
Turk contains extremely useful and detailed
information to help us to understand the activities
undertaken by the Office since 21 November 2002. The
delegation of Cameroon would like to thank the
Secretary-General and his Representative, Ambassador
Noel Sinclair, and his entire team for the quality of the
information they have given us.

The report is generally clear and detailed and
gives us the necessary information pertaining to the
implementation of the Bougainville Peace Agreement
and the plan for the withdrawal of the United Nations
Political Office. The key to that process is the
collection of weapons, the reintegration of former
combatants and the taking of concrete practical
measures to restore peace.

The drafting of a new Constitution for
Bougainville is a fundamental milestone in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement. Indeed, the
essential prerequisite for the establishment of a
Constituent Assembly for Bougainville upon the
completion of the Constitution depends upon the real
destruction of weapons during stage II of the peace
process. In that connection, allow me to say how
grateful we are for the efforts made to date to disarm
former combatants. However, to be truly effective, the
process should also include the full participation of all
parties.

Unfortunately, beyond the commendable efforts
that have been made, we must regret the lack of
participation in the disarmament process by the
Me'ekamui Defence Force (MDF) of Francis Ona. As
the Government of Papua New Guinea and its partners
in the peace process have done, my delegation appeals
to Mr. Francis Ona to give peace a chance by
participating in the current process. That would
constitute an indispensable contribution to completing
the ongoing peace process to the benefit of all. In the
same vein, we invite the United Nations Political
Office and other parties concerned to do everything in
their power to avoid anything that could be damaging
to the peace process, such as the recent death of an
MDF combatant.

Just as we believe that the collection of weapons
is an indispensable element in the completion of the
peace process in Bougainville, the reintegration of
former combatants and the taking of practical concrete
measures to restore peace are also priorities in the
process. We wish to welcome all the contributions that
have been made to that end, in particular that made by
the United Nations Development Programme's cocoa
production programme, which has created a number of
jobs for the inhabitants of Bougainville, in particular
for former combatants.

We also cannot fail to mention the efforts made in
that regard by the Peace Monitoring Group and by the
donor community as a whole. In that regard, Australia,

New Zealand and the United Kingdom have behaved in
an exemplary manner. We are very grateful to them.

The Monitoring Group decided to end its mission
on 30 June. We hope that the parties to the Agreement
will take the necessary measures to ensure that the
work they have accomplished continues in the future in
order that the United Nations Political Office will be
able to effectively discharge its mandate and withdraw
on 31 December as planned.

We are convinced that to strengthen peace the
very commendable commitment of donors must not
end once the Political Office is withdrawn. On the
contrary, it should continue, and perhaps even be
enhanced. That is the price of lasting peace.

