Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for convening this meeting on an issue of great
importance, namely, the situation in the Lake Chad
Basin. I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman and Under-Secretary-General Stephen
O'Brien for their detailed and illuminating briefings.

Just over two weeks ago, the Security Council heard
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, deliver a briefing
here in the Chamber on the latest report (S/2016/566) of
Secretary-General on his Office (see S/PV.7735), during
which he highlighted the precarious humanitarian
and security environment in the Lake Chad Basin.
Uruguay's brief statement on this issue does not reflect
any intention to understate the impact of this crisis, for
given the multidimensional nature of these problems,
we could clearly explore these issues at much greater
length.

Uruguay takes a comprehensive approach to the
crises in this region, considering that the situation
has devolved to its present state due to the sum of a
great number of converging elements that are further
aggravating existing structural deficiencies. The
deplorable security environment, made worse primarily
due to the terrorist threat posed by Boko Haram, the lack
of food and the unmet basic needs of the populations,
have led to 2.6 million people to leave their homes
forcibly - with 71,718 registered displaced persons in
a little over a year and an estimated 43,193 others who
have not been registered 4 which further destabilizes
an already fragile region.

We are talking about 2.6 million people who had
to abandon everything due to the crisis in the region,
2.4 million people affected by Boko Haram violence
and 3.8 million people suffering from extreme food
insecurity. For the international community as a whole,
those numbers may not seem so significant on a global
scale. However, given that the population of Uruguay
hovers around 3.5 million, just making that comparison
has a meaningful and disconcerting impact on us.
The question we must ask ourselves is, What can the
international community do to at least ease the crises
facing the 21 million people who live in these crisis-
affected regions?

First, we must recognize the work ofthe specialized
agencies of the United Nations - the World Food
Programme, UNICEF, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the World Health
Organization, among others - as well as of the Central
Emergency Response Fund, which, insofar as their
capacities allow them, have tried to meet the most
urgent needs of those people. The 90-day emergency
response plan is yet another tool that will undoubtedly
make a significant difference in the situation in the
Lake Chad Basin.

Secondly, we must address the root causes of the
crisis: hunger, lack of education, lack of access to safe
drinking water, insecurity and lack ofmedical facilities,
among many others. We need sustainable solutions for
these populations so that they can build their resilience
and adapt to adversity.

With regard to Boko Haram, in addition to its
warped or deviant interpretations of religion, it clearly
seeks to intstil and exploit fear in its victims. It has also
been shown to have strategic interests in the border
areas of Nigeria, the Niger and Cameroon, including
control over the flow of weapons, human trafficking
and trafficking in ivory. We stress the fact that when
its members are not engaged in terrorism they operate
as common criminals. We need to pursue our strategy
against them with all means at our disposal.

Uruguay commends all of the emergency plans and
initiatives that have proven to be important instruments
of assistance to the populations at risk, but we must also
continue to work with the Governments of Cameroon,
Chad, the Niger and Nigeria to build capacities that
will enable them to address the root causes that fuel
these crises.

