The President (spoke in Spanish): I should now
like to make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Colombia.

My delegation would like to thank the Assistant
Secretary-General, Mr. He'di Annabi, for his extensive
briefing on the current situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We were very encouraged by
the positive signs to which he referred with regard to
the observance of the ceasefire, the disengagement of
forces and the gradual withdrawal of foreign troops
from Congolese territory. Above all, however, we
welcome the positive results of the first preparatory
meeting of the inter-Congolese dialogue, held from 20
to 24 August, on which the facilitator, former President
Ketumile Masire, will report to the Council next week.
In our contacts with his office during August, we have
noted his readiness to meet with the Council on 5
September.

The agreement to hold a dialogue, starting on 15
October in Addis Ababa, with the full participation of
the Congolese parties signatories to the Lusaka
Agreement and representatives of the various forces in
the country, is a positive development.

With regard to the briefing provided by
Mr. Annabi, I would also like to emphasize the
disturbing aspects of the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Combat is still occurring in the
eastern part of the country in operations promoted by
rebel groups that have not signed the Lusaka
Agreement. Difficulties persist in the demilitarization
of Kisangani despite the efforts of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) to maintain a dialogue with the
representatives of the Rassemblement congolais pour la
democratie (RCD).

However, the humanitarian situation is reason for
our greater concern, and on this we agree with the
various delegations who have spoken. We especially
wish to underline the sense of the visit of Ms. Carol
Bellamy of the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) to the eastern region of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo this month. We regret that she
was not able to join us at this meeting due to her
participation in the Conference against Racism being
held in South Africa starting this week. Her visit
contributed to highlighting the needs of minors in this
conflict, particularly the access of humanitarian
organizations to restricted areas where there are people
living at serious risk, and the recruitment of child
soldiers on both sides of the border. For this reason, we
wish to congratulate UNICEF for this initiative.

Finally, I would like to underline the importance
of the visit by the Secretary-General to the area
beginning next week, accompanied by his new Special
Representative and the head of MONUC, Mr. Amos
Namanga Ngongi. We hope that results of this visit
help to maintain the positive direction events in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are taking.

In conclusion, I want to add the voice of my
delegation to the desire of the Congolese people,
expressed by Congolese Foreign Minister, Leonard
Okitundu, in Gaborone last week, when he stated that
the war in the Congo had ended. This is the aspiration
of my delegation and of all the members of the
Security Council.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council. I now call on the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

