Ms. Bellamy: Let me first say on behalf of my
colleagues in the humanitarian community, who are
working very hard on behalf of humanitarian concerns in
Iraq, that I certainly appreciate the positive cements made
today by members of the Security Council.

I wish to comment briefly on two issues that were
raised. The representative of France expressed interest in
the modalities of the cash component. As I have said to the
Council in the past, it is our view that the provision in
resolution 1284 (1999) for a cash component and for local
procurement needs to be pursued quite vigorously. I think
that there is consensus - certainly among those of us who
are working on humanitarian issues - that making a cash
component available to the centre and the south is critical
for the efficiency of our programmes and for sustainability.
It will allow for payment for the labour and the local
supplies needed for the physical rehabilitation of
infrastructure, for example schools and health facilities. It
will also support the transport and installation of supplies
purchased under resolution 986 (1995), such as water and
sewage treatment equipment, as well as staff training,
which is something we are not able to do at this point
because the focus is largely on infrastructure.

I would say, however, that at this point we fully
support the recent tasking by the Office of the Iraq
Programme of the United Nations Office for Project
Services (UNOPS) to conduct a cash component review,
and we at the United Nations Children's Fund are
certainly committed to working closely with them in the
hope that a modality or a framework for implementation
can be devised. We have suggested in the past that the
targeted nutrition programme might serve as an
opportunity to pilot the modalities. We appreciate the fact
that some of the members of the Council have offered
concrete suggestions on the modalities, and so following
the evaluation and review by UNOPS, I think we would
all be in a better position to come back with some
specifics in terms of modalities.

With respect to sanctions, again, as we have said in
the past, as a fund and programme of the United Nations
we recognize that sanctions are an instrument of the
international community. But, again, if I might reiterate
the comments that I made to the Security Council in
February 1999, in the interest of children we believe that
sanctions should not be imposed without obligatory,
immediate and enforceable humanitarian exemptions,
along with mechanisms for monitoring their impact on
children and other vulnerable groups. We do believe that
sanctions have certainly been a factor, but we do not
believe that sanctions are the only factor, and we think
that is what is very important to recognize. The effects of
two wars and the failure of the Government of Iraq to
invest in social services, particularly in health and
education, have also contributed, certainly, to the rise in
child mortality. We think it would be much too simple a
conclusion to just assume that the conditions have
deteriorated for one reason alone.

I would conclude by turning again to the cash
component and saying that this is something which we
must seek very much - the participation of the
Government of Iraq on the cash component as well,
because we can come up with many modalities, but
ultimately we have to be able to implement it.

