Mr. Daou (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on France's assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and to
commend your initiative in convening this meeting on
the grave situation in my country, Mali. I would also
like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
concise and comprehensive briefing and for all his
laudable efforts in search of a lasting solution to the
crisis in Mali, in keeping with the spirit of resolution
2056 (2012).

The situation in Mali has seen a significant
development in the return of interim President
Dioncounda Traore after more than two months in
France undergoing medical treatment after the attack
on him on 21 May. In a speech to the Malian people on
29 July, the Head of State reiterated his forgiveness of
his attackers in a spirit of good will, magnanimity and
selflessness when he said:

"I have said and I repeat today that my life is nothing
compared to Mali, and I reiterate my forgiveness
of my attackers. I forgive all Mali. I forgive in the
name of Mali, because Mali will need all its energy
and all its children if it is to get back on its feet."

Still, despite the generosity of spirit and humanism
that characterize the statesman who is President of the
transition, the law must also be enforced. Committed
to fighting impunity and true to its responsibilities, the
Government opened an investigation and has charged
the alleged assailants with disturbance of the public
order, attempted murder, accessory to attempted murder
and failure to assist a person in peril. Their trial began
yesterday, 7 August, and a verdict is expected in the
coming weeks.

Today more than ever, Mali is determined to
meet the many brutal challenges to its sovereignty,
national unity and territorial integrity. In that light,
the interim President of the Republic has proposed a
new governmental structure for emergence from the
crisis through the creation of transitional institutions,
addressing the various concerns of various national
actors. These include a high State council, comprised
of the President and two Vice-residents; a Government
of national unity with representatives of all engaged
elements of society; an advisory national transitional
council, bringing together representatives of political
parties and civil society; and a national negotiation
council charged with conducting peace talks with the
armed groups in the north of Mali, in cooperation with
the mediator sent by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS).

Moreover, the plan indicates that the security of
the President and other institutions of the country will
be provided by the Malian army and security services.
It also includes making a request to ECOWAS, the
African Union and the United Nations pursuant to the
conclusions of the ECOWAS assessment mission. A
week ago, the interim President launched consultations
with all actors in the country aimed at strengthened
efforts in the transition to a national unity Government.

Although significant progress has been made in the
past week towards re-establishing constitutional order
and stabilizing the country's institutions, it remains
true that the situation in the northern regions of Mali
is one of great concern. Terrorist and radical Islamist
groups, with the complicity of Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb, are perpetrating all sorts of abuses against
innocent civilians, trampling on fundamental human
rights and international humanitarian law. The terrorist
groups Ansar Dine and the Movement for Unity and
Jihad in West Africa are engaging in all sorts of criminal
activities, including destroying socio-economic
institutions and mausoleums classified as national
heritage sites by UNESCO, as was just mentioned by
the Permanent Observer of the African Union.

Allow me to also comment on the humanitarian
situation in the region, which has continued to
deteriorate and requires the international community
and all those of goodwill to act. At present, the
necessary funding to meet the most urgent needs of the
refugees and internally displaced persons are frankly
inadequate. The 167,000 internally displaced persons
and the 250,000 refugees in neighbouring countries,
in particular in the Niger, Burkina Faso, Mauritania,
Algeria, Guinea and Togo, are living in extremely
arduous conditions.

TheGovernmentofMali,incooperationwiththeHigh
Islamic Council of Mali, the Collectif de ressortissants
du Nord, the Malian Red Cross, l'Association Cri du
coeur and United Nations humanitarian agencies have
undertaken the organization of humanitarian convoys
in the north, in particular in Timbuktu, Gao, Kidal,
Douentza, Hombori and Gossi. Food, medicine and
insecticide-treated mosquito nets have been provided to
those regions under the control of fundamentalists and
terrorist groups. Teams of doctors have been quickly
dispatched to deal with medical emergencies.

Improving the living conditions of those affected
by the crisis in the north and food insecurity are among
the priorities of the Malian Government, which has
launched a major resource mobilization campaign
addressed to the international community.

Most recently, the Malian Minister for Humanitarian
Action, Solidarity and the Elderly led a large delegation
to visit Malian refugee camps in Burkina Faso in order
to provide moral and financial support. The delegation,
which is currently in the Niger, where it was received
by the Prime Minister, intends to soon travel to
Mauritania, which has welcomed a large number of
Malian refugees.

I should like here to thank neighbouring countries,
United Nations humanitarian agencies and all bilateral
and multilateral partners for their support. I should also
like to take this opportunity to appeal urgently to the
international community for support in order to avoid a
humanitarian disaster in the region.

The Secretary-General earlier referred to the
various efforts being made by ECOWAS, neighbouring
countries and the Security Council to seek lasting
solutions to the serious crisis besetting Mali. I wish to
take this opportunity firmly to reiterate the unfailing
commitment of the Government of Mali to spare no
effort in working together with the African Union,
ECOWAS, the Security Council and all other partners The President (.vpnke in French ' There are no to achieve the Government's objectives, namely, to further speakers inscribed on my list. I now invite
free the northern region of Mali and organize free and Council members to informal consultations to continue
democratic elections throughout the country's entire our discussion on the subject.

territory. The meeting rose at 10.55 am.
