Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): We are
very aware of the time constraints on the Council, and it
is with some regret that I feel the need to ask for the
floor to respond to some of the statements of the
representative of Iraq. But I will be brief.

The blame for Iraq's difficulties in recent years rests
solely with the Iraqi leadership. Iraq is not and has not
been a victim of aggression by other States. It is Iraq that
has attempted literally to erase one of its neighbours. It is
Iraq that has launched military aggression against other
neighbours. And it is Iraq that has directed violent threats
against nearly all of its neighbours that have not actually
been physically targeted.

Within the past three weeks alone, Iraq has aimed
violent threats at Turkey, at Saudi Arabia and at Kuwait.
The danger of instability lingers in the Gulf region for
one central reason: Iraq's manifest aggressive intent
towards its neighbours and Iraq's failure to comply with
mandatory resolutions of this Council.

Furthermore, it is an indisputable fact that the
coalition's recent use of force in Iraq came about only
after Iraq's repeated refusal to cooperate with the
disarmament requirements stipulated by this Council. In
short, Iraq has refused to give up its weapons of mass
destruction.

 

It is also well known and well documented that, within
the scope of that limited use of force, coalition forces
exercised every possible precaution in order to avoid
civilian casualties and collateral damage.
With regard to the no-fly zones, it is also well known
that they were created for the express purpose of protecting
Iraqi civilians from the depredations of the Iraqi regime and
its characteristic policy of employing massive military force
against the persons, the homes, the businesses and the
mosques of Iraqi civilians.

The Shiites in the south and the Kurds in the north of
Iraq have been the primary victims of regime violence in
recent years. Indeed, the Iraqi regime's threat to its own
civilian population is continuing. Just this weekend there
were many reports of Shiite citizens being targeted by the
regime, in Baghdad and in the south, following the
assassination of a prominent Shiite religious leader.

The no-fly zones also perform an essential early-
warning function regarding Iraq's continuing threats to its
neighbours. Thus the complaints and statements we have
heard from the Iraqi representative today have no standing.
The Iraqi regime is itself the perpetrator of calculated
ongoing violence against Iraqi civilians. Until that violence
stops, the international community, including the United
States, must continue to exert every possible effort to
protect the citizens of Iraq from their brutal regime and to
assist in providing for their basic humanitarian needs
through the oil-for-food programme.

