Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this debate, and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his comprehensive and helpful
briefing. I also thank the Permanent Representative of
Haiti for his statement.
We commend the Special Envoy, President
Clinton, the Special Representative to the Secretary-
General and the staff of MINUSTAH for their efforts in
supporting the Government and the people of Haiti in
the delivery of basic services, disaster recovery and
harmonizing critically needed international support in
the aftermath of the devastating earthquake.

We salute the Government and the people of Haiti
for their remarkable resilience. We are encouraged to
note that the immediate humanitarian needs of the
displaced population in Port-au-Prince and in the
regions have been largely addressed. We commend the
international community for the generous support
given and pledged to assist Haiti. However, we
recognize that significant challenges still remain. For
example, the country still faces the challenge of
resettling an estimated 1.3 million displaced people
and rebuilding infrastructure. It is therefore important
that the pledges made be honoured in order to help the
Government of Haiti bridge the gaps. In this regard, we
welcome the establishment of the Interim Haiti
Recovery Commission, which will play a central role
in coordinating medium- and long-term reconstruction
efforts. At this critical phase of recovery and
reconstruction, we would like to emphasize the
importance of effective coordination among the United
Nations agencies and international actors. The role of
the Government remains central, and it is important
that all concerned work closely with it.

The presidential and legislative elections
scheduled for 28 November will be a significant
milestone for Haiti's stability. It is important to ensure
that they are peaceful and credible. In this regard, we
welcome the support extended by international partners
and the collaboration between MINUSTAH and the
United Nations Development Programme in providing
technical support and assistance to the Provisional
Electoral Commission.

One of the most pressing needs at this time
remains the provision of shelter and housing, and the
sustainable resettlement of displaced persons to
permanent accommodation. This is a multifaceted
challenge that will require adequate planning and a
comprehensive strategy.

We note that, although the security situation in
the country has remained generally calm, significant
threats still prevail, including from former gang leaders
who escaped from prison. We are also concerned with
the underlying problem of drug transshipment through
Haiti, which, if unchecked, will negatively affect
stability in the country. The strengthening of security
and of rule-of-law institutions must be supported in
order to tackle these threats. We commend
MINUSTAH for its support of Government efforts to
address drug trafficking through increased land and
maritime patrols, air surveillance and border
management.

Finally, we salute the men and women of
MINUSTAH, who, despite the difficulties and the
tragedy that befell them, have continued to play an
indispensable role in maintaining a secure and stable
environment.

