Mr. Petersen (Denmark): I am honoured to speak
today on behalf of the Nordic countries: Finland, Iceland,
Norway, Sweden and my own country, Denmark.

The threats posed by terrorism, radicalization
and instability constitute a challenge to all countries.
Addressing them requires strong cooperation between
all the parties involved. African countries are on the
front lines in meeting those challenges, along with
their partners, including the Nordic countries. The
African countries shoulder their part of the burden
when the African Union (AU) assumes responsibility
for peace operations, along with regional economic
communities; when African countries join hands to
create multinational forces, like the Multinational Joint
Task Force to fight Boko Haram in the Lake Chad
region and the Group of Five for the Sahel joint force to
combat terrorism and transnational crime in the Sahel;
and when African countries make vital contributions to
United Nations peacekeeping operations to keep them
engaged, despite very complex situations.

In the Nordic countries, we welcome those efforts
to meet the challenge of terrorism, radicalization and
instability. We believe the strengthened cooperation
on peace and security between the AU and the United
Nations is key to enhancing our efforts and address
the challenges. The next step is to ensure predictable
and sustainable support to AU operations. The report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/454) issued on
26 May sets out useful options for support and joint
decision-making. The Nordic countries strongly
encourage the Security Council to give its consent to
use, on a case-by-case basis, United Nations assessed
contributions to finance AU peace support missions
mandated by the Security Council. That will also entail
close United Nations involvement, as highlighted in the
report of the Secretary-General.

We welcome the signing in April of the United
Nations-AU Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security. The Nordic countries are
particularly encouraged by the emphasis on prevention
and root causes, strong themes in our countries' long-
standing partnerships and cooperation with African
partners. The Nordic countries have supported,
among other things, African mediation and early-
warning capabilities.

When the rule of law prevails and the voice of the
people is heard, conflict can be avoided. The peaceful
transition in The Gambia demonstrated that. Together
with Economic Community of West African States, a
number of African countries stepped in with decisive
support for a peaceful solution for the people of The
Gambia. That support is an important signal of African
unity and regional ownership of a process leading to a
more prosperous and democratic continent.

Accountability and inclusive peace processes lead
to better and more sustainable results. In the peace
processes where women and young people are included
and exert real influence, peace agreements are more
likely to be reached and the peace is more likely to
last. Where women are involved in peacekeeping, the
operations gain more trust from communities and
respond more effectively to the needs of the local
population. The Nordic countries support the AU and
many African countries in their endeavours to train
more women, and to ensure that their police forces are
responsive to the needs of women.

Enhancing African capabilities in the area of peace
and security is a key contribution to regional and global
security, and it is a key contribution to achieving the
2030 Agenda for Sustaiable Development. The Nordic
countries are supporters of the efforts of the AU in
that regard. We welcome a strengthening the peace
and security architecture of the AU and we hope it will
bring greater coherence and high-level focus to such
important issues.

