Mr. Motoc (Romania): I too wish to welcome His
Excellency, Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta, and
through him to congratulate the authorities of Timor-
Leste for their steady efforts and encouraging
achievements. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his special report on the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET), and Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno for his
briefing.

Romania aligns itself with the statement to be
made shortly by the Irish Presidency on behalf of the
European Union. Therefore I shall confine myself to
only a few specific comments.

I will start by pointing out Romania's confidence
in Timor-Leste's future. With the present UNMISET
playing a valuable role, remarkable progress has been
made in strengthening political institutions,
consolidating governmental authority, promoting
regional and international cooperation and upholding
democratic principles and personal freedom. The
Government in Dili has demonstrated strong
commitment towards developing the country as a stable
and democratic nation.

Nevertheless, areas remain in which national
efforts could and should be assisted by the United
Nations beyond the present UNMISET mandate. These
include consolidating the rule of law, developing civil
society, promoting political dialogue and strengthening
the democratic institutions. Quick and resolute actions
by the Government are still required to develop the
administration's legislative and regulatory framework,
conduct investigations of past serious crimes and
enhance observance of human rights and of the rule of
law.

Good-neighbourly relations with Indonesia
should be further pursued and strengthened. We call on
both sides to finalize the border delimitation as soon as
possible and to facilitate the return of former refugees.
Furthermore, we encourage increased bilateral
cooperation on security and justice. That will pave the
way to consolidation of confidence and stability and,
implicitly, an improved climate for economic
development.

Romania favours on-going support by the
international community in Timor-Leste. The Security
Council, bilateral donors and the wider international
community have invested enormous energy and
expectations in that country. The gains achieved to date
must be consolidated and expanded to secure their
irreversibility. In this regard, we welcome the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
latest report (S/2004/1l7). In that document he has
pointed out that a modest additional effort will
definitely make a crucial difference.

We support the extension of the United Nations
presence in Timor-Leste beyond 20 May. The three
months ahead of us will allow for the identification of
the best way ahead. We believe that the reduced post-
UNMISET presence, with a clear mandate, will give
the people and Government of Timor-Leste greater
confidence to continue the necessary efforts and
reforms. We are convinced that the good prospects for
development of Timorese self-sufficiency will pave the
way for the United Nations soon to leave behind a
notable account of success as our legacy there.

Finally, I wish to underline that Romania's
genuine attachment to democratic transformation in
Timor-Leste stems from its own experience with the
challenges of transition. For us, this is one more reason
to see it as a moral duty to support Timor-Leste's
speedy and sustainable transformation into a stable,
democratic and prosperous country.

