Mr. Awaad (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): At
the outset, the delegation of Egypt wishes to pay tribute to
the International Commission of Inquiry for its efforts to
investigate violations regarding the infiltration of weapons
across the Great Lakes region, in the centre of Africa. We
welcome the findings reached by the Commission, which
has had to operate under extremely difficult conditions.

Similarly, we commend those Governments that
cooperated in a positive fashion with the International
Commission of Inquiry. In the meantime, we wish to
appeal to all other parties to lend even greater support and
cooperation to the Commission in the coming period so
that the Commission can expeditiously fulfil its mandate.
The delegation of Egypt also appeals to all States to
ensure the effective implementation of the arms embargo
against the shipment of arms to non-Government forces
in Rwanda, as provided for in Security Council resolution
1011 (1995). My Government hopes that no State in the
Great Lakes region will allow any armed group to use its
territory as a staging ground for attacks against any
neighbouring State, in flagrant violation of international
treaties and the Charter of the United Nations.

The Security Council requests the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, in operative paragraph 7 of the
draft resolution before the Council, to consult with States
neighbouring Rwanda on appropriate measures for the
purpose of better implementation of the arms embargo
and deterrence of the shipment of arms to Rwandan
government forces. We fully support that request and look
forward to knowing the outcome of such consultations.
We are confident that in these consultations, and in the
context of any accord to be discussed to deploy United
Nations observers at airports and border checkpoints,
there will be full compliance with the principle of the
national sovereignty of all States in which such observers
are to be deployed. Therefore, securing the consent of the
Government concerned should be a sine qua non
condition for dispatching United Nations observers to the
State in question.

We are gravely concerned by the news that some
Rwandan army elements received training in order to
launch raids inside Rwanda to destabilize that country.
We are also concerned that the areas hosting Rwandan
refugees could be used as smokescreens for those military
training activities.

The delegation of Egypt once again maintains that
there will be no real stability unless the question of
refugees in the Great Lakes region is addressed
comprehensively and their return to their countries is
facilitated as early as possible.

 

My Government supports the Tunis Declaration of
Heads of States of the Great Lakes Region of 18 March
1996. We consider it a continuation of efforts made in
Cairo in November 1995. We hope that all its provisions
will be implemented in an effort to restore stability to this
vitally important area in the heart of Africa.

The delegation of Egypt will vote in favour of the
draft resolution before the Council, which, from our point
of view, represents an appropriate and balanced reaction by
the Council to the report of the International Commission
of Inquiry.
