Mr. Danon (Israel): Forty years ago in 1979, the
world witnessed two historic events. One set the stage
for a future of peace and order in our region and the
other emboldened the forces of complete and utter
chaos. On 26 March of that year, Israeli Prime Minister
Menachem Begin, Egyptian President Anwar Sadat and
United States President Jimmy Carter shook hands on
the White House lawn to launch a lasting peace between
two formerly sworn enemies.

As one end of our region began to see the light of
day, the other was descending deeper into darkness.
On 11 February, just five weeks before the Treaty of
Peace between the Arab Republic of Egypt and the
State of Israel was signed, the founders of the current
Iranian regime gained control of the Government,
hijacking the future of Iran and exploiting the Iranian
people's genuine aspirations for freedom. Just two
weeks apart from each other, two ground-breaking and
radically opposed developments occurred in the Middle
East 4 the first peace agreement between Israel and
an Arab State and the rise of the Violent and oppressive
regime that laid the foundation for the fundamental
threats facing the Middle East today.

In 2019, there is still peace between Israel and
Egypt. There is also peace between Israel and Jordan.
Those agreements, which have lasted decades, have
served as critical forces of order in a region plagued by
terrorism, extremism and hateful ideology.

But the revolution has not subsided either. If
anything, the forces of chaos have only grown,
extending far past Iranian borders. The Iranian regime

is jeopardizing the region and beyond, spreading its
ideology into Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Yemen and even the
African continent. It is financing terrorism while also
hijacking the freedom of navigation in one of the most
crucial shipping lanes in the world. It is bolstering its
proxies to commit malicious crimes around the world
and continues to pursue nuclear weapons capabilities
with the explicit goal of destroying Israel.

The United Nations cannot stay silent when those
forces of chaos are destroying the principles for which
it stands. Today, we have a duty to preserve the forces of
order by confronting the forces of chaos - terrorism,
extremism, hateful ideology and the regime of the
Islamic Republic of Iran.

On 11 July 1997, Nelson Mandela delivered a
speech on reaching a new world order. He observed: "in
the new global order, no country, region or continent
can any longer operate in isolation from the rest of
the world" ("Renewal and renaissance: towards a new world order", lecture delivered at the Oxford Centre for
Islamic Studies, United Kingdom). Mandela's words
encourage cooperation and partnership for a new and
prosperous world order, but they also send a warning to
those countries and forces that seek to act in isolation
from the rest of the world and against its best interests.

It has become clear that the interconnected world
order is upheld and protected when countries come
together to confront rogue actors and their malicious
partners. Those regimes seek to dominate the regions
of the world with an extreme ideology. They punish
or even kill those that they believe stand in their way.
The regimes use Violence and terrorism to achieve their
goals. Such rogue regimes are those like the one in the
Islamic Republic of Iran.

In 1979, the year that witnessed historic peace, also
endured the rise of the Islamic Republic of Iran. The
Iranian revolution shocked the world. When Ayatollah
Khamenei took power, he wasted no time in turning
his extremist militant ideology into policy. When
Khamenei established the Quds Force in 1980, with the
clear objective of exporting the revolution abroad, he
stated in his announcement, "We have to topple these
unjust and treacherous Governments".

Take it from the Iranian political and military
establishment itself. Regime leaders today celebrate
their international intervention openly and boast about
their regional influence and power in Iraq, Syria,
Lebanon, Yemen and Gaza. They refer to themselves
and their main partners, proxies and puppets as the
"axis of resistance". The axis includes Iran; its proxy,
Hizbullah in Lebanon; and its partner, Bashar Al-Assad
and his criminals in Syria. Its goal is to export the
Iranian revolution, violently targeting the West and all
who oppose its efforts to spread the revolution across
the region.

The Iranian force of chaos has caused infestation in
Lebanon - 13 years have passed since the catalyst that
launched the Second Lebanon War in July 2006, when
Hizbullah launched a well-orchestrated attack with the
goal of infiltrating Israeli sovereign territory, killing
eight Israeli soldiers and abducting two more.
One month later, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1701 (2006), which established, between
the Blue Line and the Litani river, "an area free of
any armed personnel, assets and weapons other than
those of the Government of Lebanon and of UNIFIL"
(para. 8). It also called for the full implementation of
resolution 1559 (2004), requiring "disarmament of all
Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias" (para. 3).

But Hizbullah, with inspiration, funding and
weapons supplied by Iran, has further entrenched
itself in the area of operations of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). Although 13 years
have passed, the Security Council has yet to receive
an accurate picture of the gravity of the situation in
southern Lebanon. It is unfortunate that some have
chosen to turn a blind eye to the reality on the ground.

UNIFIL must be fully equipped to discharge its
mandate and contribute to stability in the region. It must
report to the Council all restrictions in movement to the
fullest extent, detailing where the restrictions occurred
and who was responsible and why, because with every
passing day of Hizbullah's further entrenchment, it
becomes harder and harder to tell where Beirut ends
and Tehran begins.

Resolution 1701 (2006) calls for "no sales or supply
of arms and related materiel to Lebanon except as
authorized by its Government" (para. 8). It appears,
however, that the call for an embargo has been
completely ignored.

The Iranian regime is transferring weapons in

various ways and Council members can see it there.

The Quds Force exploits civilian airports in Damascus
and Beirut - civilian airports - and civilian land
infrastructure on the Syria-Lebanon border to smuggle
weapons, dual-use items and other capabilities. But
today I am presenting new evidence. In 2018 and 2019,
Israel found that Iran and the Quds Force have begun to
advance the exploitation of civilian maritime channels
and specifically the port of Beirut. For the same
purpose, a civilian port - the port of Beirut - is now
the port of Hizbullah.

Led by the Quds Force, dual-use items are smuggled
into Lebanon to advance Hizbullah's rocket and missile
capabilities and conversion programme. Under the
guise of Syrian entities, such as the Syrian Scientific
Studies and Research Centre, Iran and Hizbullah have
been able to purchase dual-use equipment from civilian
companies, while concealing the true nature of those
purchases, which were hostile to Israel and its citizens.
Through that method, Iran is able to transfer the
dual-use equipment from the Port of Beirut with the
permission of the authorities and without revealing its
true identity and intentions. Every State Member of the
Organization must ask itself the following questions.
Is it absolutely sure that its companies are not the ones
selling dual-use equipment to Hizbullah? Is it sure that
its citizens know the end use of those dual-use items?

The Iranian regime's targets for exporting
the revolution stretch far beyond the banks of the
Mediterranean. In the past month, Iran has pursued
a dangerous advancement in its hostile nuclear
programme, following President Rouhani's declaration
to enrich uranium to "any amount we want". The
regime has so far enriched uranium to 4.5 per cent,
going over the limit of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA). It is clear that Iran will continue
to pursue a nuclear weapon, threatening the entire
Western Hemisphere.

I therefore ask the countries that still support the
JCPOA what they are to do about the Iranian nuclear
threat. Are they going to ignore it? What is the Security
Council going to do about the Iranian nuclear threat?
We simply do not have the luxury of giving the Iranian
regime the benefit of the doubt. Now is not the time for
optimism, but the time for realism. It is the time to find
partners who share our goal of confronting that force
of chaos.

After years of war, it is significant that Israel and
our Arab neighbours have found something on which
to agree. Maybe the Council should listen to us if we
agree about something after so many years. Our mutual
objectives have brought us together. In the face of
the threat posed by the Iranian regime, we are each
committed to restoring order in the region. It is critical
that, in the struggle against Iranian expansionist
ambitions, all parties look at the big picture. In the face
of existential threats, Israel, the Arab world and the
international community can only gain from working
together. By confronting the forces of chaos, terrorism,
extremism and hostile nuclear ambitions, we can clear
the path for regional peace.

When we gathered here three months ago, I offered
a framework of four pillars for the past and the future
(S/PV.8517). One ofthose pillars is regional cooperation.
Just as in 1979, when Israel and Egypt stood together
for peace, despite the turmoil shaking the other end of
our region, today we must come together once more to
confront the threat to peace. The forces threatening that
peace all lead back to the regime ofthe Islamic Republic
of Iran. We have learned from history that when the
international community fails to rise to the occasion
before it is too late, the price to pay is unbearable. When
it comes to the Iranian regime, now is not the time for
appeasement; now is the time for action.

