Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank you, Sir, for the opportunity today
to take stock of the recent debates and discussions on
new challenges to international peace and security. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
introduction and Antonio Guterres, Margaret Chan and
Yury Fedotov for their informative briefings.

The Security Council is charged with the
maintenance of international peace and security. In
recent years, it has become a common and a just refrain
in this Council to emphasize the importance of
effective conflict prevention. Prevention should be
considered a key element of the Council's work. We
believe it is natural, therefore, for the Council to tackle
cross-cutting challenges such as those put forward for
today's discussion. All three issues - matters related
to international peace and security - are drivers of the
kinds of political, economic or social changes that can
generate modern conflict. All three issues have the
capacity to convert existing tensions or pressures into
instability or violence. As Mr. Guterres pointed out,
Somalia is a compelling proof of that.

Our understanding of conflict has evolved over
time. We have developed a more sophisticated
appreciation of the relationship between security,
development and inequality, for example. As the
frequency of international conflict has diminished, so
this Council has found itself occupied more often by
intra-State conflict. We have taken on peacebuilding.
We have placed the protection of civilians under
imminent threat at the centre of many peacekeeping
operations.

As we become more confident in our conflict
prevention role, we have begun to develop a more
subtle appreciation of factors that may indicate the
potential for conflict or that may exacerbate existing
conflict. It follows, then, that this Council should be
alert and responsive to the broader factors that
contribute to conflict sensitivity in a region. That does
not mean that the United Kingdom believes that the
Security Council should itself take action to address all
those factors. We are not seeking to disrupt the balance
between the various agencies, funds and programmes
that together make up the infrastructure of the United
Nations.

We know that today's discussion makes some
people uneasy. Although today's debate wisely refers to
"challenges", all too often our debate revolves around
the word "threat" and its connotations. The word
"threat" evokes Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter, which in itself provides the means for the
Security Council to take action through economic
sanctions, travel bans and even military intervention.
But the use of the word "threat" in the context of
today's debate is not in anyone's interests. We could
just as well consider issues such as pandemics,
transnational organized crime, migration and the
adverse effect of climate change as factors that could
lead to disputes or that could likely exacerbate
friction - the language of Chapter VI and the pacific
settlement of disputes.

The point is the same. The Security Council
should be apprised of the extent to which those issues
represent conflict risks. We should be aware as we scan
the horizon that cross-cutting themes may offer
insights into the potential for conflict. Many argue that
the dramatic events of the Arab Spring this year were
not predicted, but a series of United Nations
Development Programme human development reports
did indeed identify many of the underlying
socio-economic factors that led to the uprising. The
Council would perhaps have been better prepared to
respond to the Arab spring if it had focused on those
factors at an earlier stage.

Taking one of the three factors dealt with in
today's debate, the United Kingdom believes that
insecurity and conflict can be exacerbated by climate
change factors such as drought, famine and
desertification. It is not hard to see how international
agreements on the shared use of natural resources may
be disrupted by the adverse effects of climate change.
So we believe that it makes sense for those responsible
for helping Member States to strike agreements on
resource-sharing to have regular access to advice from
climate specialists to ensure that they take account of
such risks.

The United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia (UNRCCA) has
accessed outside expertise on climate change for
precisely that reason. But let us be clear. We are not
arguing that the UNRCCA should have a mandate to
tackle climate change. We are not suggesting that the
UNRCCA should lobby for changes to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
We are not even suggesting that the UNRCCA should
have the mandate to hire a climate specialist. We are
merely suggesting that it should have access to that
expertise, when necessary, to develop its own work.

We think that it is sensible for the Security
Council, charged as it is with the responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to
have the opportunity to consider cross-cutting
pressures on international stability and thematic issues
that might contribute to regional fragility or increased
sensitivity to conflict or escalation in violence. That is
an important tool for effective conflict prevention.

Over the course of the past several years, we have
continually emphasized the need for the Council to be
able to conduct more effective conflict prevention. We
need, then, to be free from time to time to scan the
horizon for potential disputes, frictions or threats on
the basis of evidence from experts in thematic issues,
such as those briefing the Council today, and not just in
response to an eruption in violence.

