The President: At the outset of this formal meeting
of the Security Council, allow me to express heartfelt
appreciation and sincere congratulations to Ambassador
Nugroho Wisnumurti of Indonesia for the impeccable way
in which he presided over the work of the Council during
the month of August. In so doing, I wish to single out in
particular Ambassador Wisnumurti's outstanding sense of
leadership, his extraordinary qualities in coordinating the
work of the Council and his special talent as a remarkable
communicator in informing the public and the media of the
Council's position.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Report of the Secretary-General submitted
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1010 (1995)
(S/1995/755)

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in which she requests to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President,
Ms. Kalajdzisalihovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) took
a place at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1010 (1995), document S/l995/755.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General of 30 August 1995
(S/l995/755) submitted pursuant to its resolution
1010 (1995) of 10 August 1995.

"The Security Council strongly condemns the
failure of the Bosnian Serb party to comply with the
demands contained in resolution 1010 (1995). The
Bosnian Serb party's refusal to cooperate with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) cannot but reinforce the deep
concern expressed in that resolution and in previous
resolutions and statements.

"The Security Council stresses its determination
that the fate of persons displaced from Srebrenica
and Zepa be established. It reaffirms its demands to
the Bosnian Serb party to give immediate access for
representatives of the UNHCR, the ICRC and other
international agencies to such persons who are
within the areas of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina under the control of Bosnian Serb
forces, and to permit representatives of the ICRC to
Visit and register any persons detained against their
will.

"The Security Council also reaffirms its
demands to the Bosnian Serb party to respect fully
the rights of all such persons, to ensure their safety
and to release them.

"The Security Council reiterates that all those
who commit Violations of international humanitarian
law will be held individually responsible in respect
of such acts.

"The Security Council takes note of the
investigations which are being carried out by the
International Tribunal established pursuant to its
resolution 827 (1993). The Council reiterates in this
context that all States shall cooperate fully with the
Tribunal and its organs, including by providing
access to sites the Tribunal deems important for its
investigations.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General to continue his efforts and to report to the
 

Council no later than 6 October 1995 regarding
compliance with resolution 1010 (l995) and any
further relevant information that may become
available.

"The Security Council will remain actively seized
of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the

Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1995/43.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 4 pm.

