Mrs. Albright (United States of America): I want to
begin, as others have, by thanking you, Sir, especially and
your Government for taking this very important initiative.
The United States looks forward to working with the

 

Netherlands and all those represented here today to combat
the traffic in small arms.

Over the past year, I have raised these issues in
meetings and speeches and through a report on the arms
trade issued by the Department of State this summer. I am
optimistic that support for strong action is growing
worldwide and I will carry that message with me from our
meeting today, beginning next month when I will be raising
these issues as part of a trip to Africa.

Although prices are low, the social cost of arms sales
is high. Countries that are among the world's poorest spend
hundreds of millions of dollars buying small arms and other
weapons. Funds are diverted, crops are mortgaged and
relief supplies are stolen to finance these purchases. In each
case, it is the people who are the losers.

The international community must develop an
integrated, comprehensive response in countries of origin
and countries of conflict, among buyers, sellers and brokers,
and with Governments as well as international and
non-governmental organizations.

In today' 5 presidential statement, we commit ourselves
to strengthening our coordination, promoting disarmament
in peacekeeping operations and improving the enforcement
of small arms embargoes. The United States strongly
supports these steps. Let me mention several other
initiatives that we are taking or that we hope to undertake
in concert with others.

The United States will refrain from selling arms to
regions of conflict not already covered by arms embargoes.
We encourage other nations to establish and observe such
moratoriums. We have passed laws making it illegal for
traffickers subject to American law to broker illicit deals
anywhere. We ask others to crack down on brokering as
well. We are working with the European Union to develop
principles of restraint and a joint action plan. We are
supporting the efforts of the Kampala-based United Nations
African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders and the Organization of American
States, and planning to assist the West African small arms
Moratorium.

We welcome the important precedent which the United
Nations has set by undertaking the destruction of more than
18,000 weapons, and millions of rounds of ammunition, left
over from the Liberian civil war. The United States is
participating in this effort and we are committed to working
towards destroying such stocks of weapons worldwide.

Finally, we should all commit to finishing
negotiations on a firearms protocol to the United Nations
convention against transnational organized crime by the
end of 2000.

Let me also propose that it is time to attack the
economy of war that supports illicit arms flows. In many
instances, these transactions are fuelled by sales of
gemstones, precious metals and narcotics. Too often, the
profits fund violence and mayhem, as in Sierra Leone,
where illicit diamond profits allowed the RUF to
transform itself from a band of 400 to a marauding army
of thousands.

Ambassador Fowler of Canada, as the Chair of the
Security Council's sanctions committee on Angola, is
working aggressively on the underground economy which
fuels that country's civil war. His efforts provide
important lessons for other zones of conflict.

The United States accounts for 65 per cent of the
world's gemstone market, and we recognize that we must
do our part to end illicit transactions. We hope to work
here at the United Nations with other nations, and
industry, to strengthen certification regimes worldwide.
We want particularly to work with the diamond-producing
countries to make sure that their interests in strong, stable
markets are protected.

No solution to this problem, or to the broad
challenge posed by illicit arms sales worldwide, will be
complete or materialize overnight. But Governments have
a responsibility to keep arms transactions transparent and
make those involved accountable. If we do, we can
tighten control of borders, make it harder to move arms
around and drive illegitimate traffickers out of business.

Again, Mr. President, let me thank you for your
personal leadership and that of your Government in this
effort.

