Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Let me convey my
appreciation for the work done by Ambassador Sacha
Llorentty Soliz as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and commend him
for his comprehensive briefing today. I also take the
opportunity to pay tribute to the work done by his
predecessor, Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi of Spain,
who successfully concluded the second comprehensive
review of the status of implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). That resolution remains a crucial instrument
in the effort to combat the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery, as well as
their potential acquisition by non-State actors.

Italy welcomes resolution 2325 (2016) and in
particular its call for greater capacity-building
assistance and for more intense cooperation among all
stakeholders, including civil society and academia.

On 10 February, we adopted our programme of
work. It is time now to achieve meaningful results
through the proactive implementation of resolution
2325 (2016). The increasing risk that non-State actors,
particularly terrorists, acquire chemical, biological,
radiological or fissile materials represents a new critical
dimension. Terrorist groups and non-State actors have
indeed demonstrated the intent and capacity to develop
and access these harmful tools. As the report of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism clearly
demonstates, this has already been the case in Syria,
where the use of chemical weapons was attributed to
Da'esh in one case, while the use ofa toxic chemical as
a weapon was attributed to the Syrian armed forces in
three cases.

Rapid advances in science, technology and
international commerce create not only huge benefits
for humankind, but also the potential for misue. We
are concerned that the abuse of emerging scientific
innovations could facilitate illicit proliferation
activities, in particular through the illegal transfer of
sensitive technology and illicit financial transactions.

Reinforcing international cooperation to tackle
this phenomenon is crucial. We stress the importance
of the 1540 Committee and the discharge of its mandate
for capacity-building assistance and encouragement to
all States to work towards the full implementation of
relevant resolutions. It is essential that the political
will to comply with international obligations be
combined for every State with the actual ability to
do it. Technical assistance is essential to this end. As
Chair of the Global Partnership Against the Spread
of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction, we
invited the 1540 Committee to present its activities, in
particular with regard to Africa, in order to highlight
current needs and increase opportunities for donors to
cooperate with potential recipients, as well as with the
Committee itself.

Considering the tools currently available in
countering the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, we think that particular attention should
be paid to the field ofbiological weapons. Similarly, the
enhanced protection of critical infrastructure relevant
to the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
from the increasing risk of cyberattacks is much needed
today. The full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) is a long-term task that requires continuous
effort at the national, regional and international levels;
the sustained and intensified support of the Security
Council; and direct interaction with States and
relevant organizations. Close cooperation among all
stakeholders , especially at the regional level, is needed
to coordinate activities so as to avoid duplication and to
focus on the most important areas.

We are deeply concerned about proliferation
activity by the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, as clearly highlighted in the last report of the
Panel of Experts. This adds to the inherent threats
to international peace and security, as well as direct
dangers to the non-proliferation regime, posed by the
North Korean nuclear programme and these types
of programmes.

Reporting on compliance is crucial. From this
point of view, resolution 2321 (2016) notes the
complementarity of that obligation with those of
resolution 1540 (2004). In adopting resoltuion 2325
(2016), the Council calls on all States to strengthen
national non-proliferation regimes in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004) and to submit timely reports on
their efforts. Accurate and timely reporting is crucial
for long-term results. Capacity-building aimed at
improving reporting is essential.

