Ms. Wensley (Australia): It is with considerable
pleasure that I address the Security Council on the
occasion of the adoption of the draft resolution
authorizing the establishment of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).
This draft resolution is a crucial and historic step towards
realizing the desire of the East Timorese people for
independence, as reflected in the outcome of the ballot of
30 August organized by the United Nations.

As the transitional authority for East Timor,
UNTAET is charged with the heavy responsibility of
overseeing East Timor's transition to a new, independent
State. In implementing this mandate, the transitional
administration faces challenges that are quite simply
enormous. They go well beyond the immediate and
critical tasks of reconstructing East Timor's physical
infrastructure and of addressing the urgent humanitarian
needs of hundreds of thousands of displaced people across
East Timor. UNTAET, in close consultation with the East
Timorese, must also build the foundations for a
democratic and stable State. It must build a constitution,
a legal system and judiciary, a police force and a civil
service.

The Secretary-General's comprehensive report
outlines the magnitude of this task. We have no doubt
that, drawing on its experience of nation-building
elsewhere in the world, the United Nations will achieve
these goals and create the economic and social
foundations for a well-managed, stable and democratic
State. Australia is fully committed to assist in this task.

 

UNTAET's mandate will culminate in a democratic
election in which the people of East Timor will choose their
first Government and then take their place formally in the
community of nations. Australia looks forward to that day.

Australia shared the international community's distress
at the post-ballot violence in East Timor. At the request of
the Secretary-General, Australia accepted the leadership of
the multinational force tasked with restoring peace and
security, protecting and supporting UNAMET and
facilitating the Vital work of humanitarian agencies. Fifteen
countries have now joined Australia in contributing forces
in East Timor. We wish to acknowledge gratefully the
ready cooperation Australia has received from regional
countries and from other members of the international
community in mounting the International Force, East Timor
(INTERFET) operation, and enabling its early success. As
the Council is aware from the INTERFET Commander's
periodic reports, security has been restored to most of East
Timor, humanitarian agencies are now able to conduct their
work and the East Timorese people have begun to return to
the homes from which they were driven.

Consistent with the terms of today's draft resolution,
Australia looks forward to the time when the multinational
force in East Timor hands over its duties to the military
component of UNTAET. Australia is fully committed to
continuing its active role following the handover to the
UNTAET force. But we also see the maintenance of peace
and security in East Timor as an ongoing responsibility of
the international community. Australia urges the Member
States of the United Nations to take early decisions to
contribute to the UNTAET peacekeeping force or to lend
their support in ways best suited to their individual
circumstances.

Australia commends the Indonesian People's
Consultative Assembly, which on 20 October agreed by
consensus to revoke its 1978 decision incorporating East
Timor into Indonesia. That decision attests to the emerging
democratic spirit in Indonesia, reflected also in the 7 June
general elections. Australia understands that this was a
difficult decision, but the historic result upheld Indonesia's
responsibilities under the 5 May tripartite Agreement. The
decision in one sense marked the end of a painful national
and international issue, and Australia sincerely hopes that
it marks the beginning of a new and positive relationship
between the peoples of Indonesia and East Timor, and also
of reconciliation among the people of East Timor.

It would be remiss of me not to note that the decision
on East Timor was very closely followed by the election of
Abdurrahman Wahid and Megawati Soekarnoputri as
President and Vice-President of the Republic of
Indonesia. We welcome their election, which is part of
the ongoing movement of political reform in Indonesia,
and constitutes an important contribution not only to their
country but to regional stability.

Australia, as a near neighbour of East Timor and a
responsible member of its region and the wider
international community, is committed to assisting
UNTAET and the East T imorese people to prepare for
independence and rebuild and develop their country. We
consider this to be a long-term regional and international
responsibility. We urge the international community to
give early, generous support to the UNTAET Trust Fund.
We pledge our cooperation to the United Nations
specialized agencies, international financial donors,
bilateral donors and the non-governmental organization
community in the period before the birth of an
independent nation, and indeed well beyond.

We congratulate all participants here today on the
cooperative approach that has characterized the
development and the conclusion of the draft resolution.
We also congratulate the Secretary-General and his
Personal Representative, Jamsheed Marker, and those who
have so valiantly, strenuously and with dedication
represented the United Nations on the ground in East
Timor during this period. This draft resolution marks a
historic day for the people of East Timor and for the
United Nations efforts to build international peace and
stability.

