Mrs. Chigiyal (Federated States of Micronesia):
Much has been written and said about the specific
challenges facing small island developing States (SIDS),
and for good reason. SIDS, such as the Federated States
of Micronesia, are inherently exposed to factors outside
our control and are the single most vulnerable group of
countries in the world.

I would like to thank the Prime Ministers of Samoa
and Jamaica and the Minister of Finance of Seychelles
for their briefings this morning.

The Security Council cannot close its eyes to
the challenges facing small island developing States,
especially the existential threat posed by climate
change. I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and
your country, New Zealand, for bringing this debate to
the Council. As SIDS, we have an inherent interest in
the subject.

Speaking as one of the many representatives of
island communities appearing before the Council
today, we, as islanders, can all welcome the Council's
debate on the issue of the peace and security challenges
facing our communities. It is appropriate and expected
that the Council should address the security issue of
our time, namely, climate change. But the Council must
go beyond merely debating the issue. It must ensure the
security of all peoples and especially those of small
island developing States. Its work must be relevant to
even the smallest of the members of the United Nations.
It must give greater emphasis and attention to the
myriad issues that pose peace and security challenges
to SIDS, and it should put the issue of climate change
and security on its formal agenda. Our vulnerability to
security threats, man-made or natural, can be reduced
only through collective international efforts, including
those of the Security Council. The Council has a moral
imperative to act, and really tough decisions must be
taken if it is to address the security challenges facing
SIDS.

But while the members of the Council and many
in the international community may disagree about the
various types of security challenges, in our countries
it is actually possible to see with awful clarity what
those challenges actually mean. Among many other
challenges, small island communities are grappling
with the simultaneous threats of sea-level rise,
extreme weather events and a decline in the viability
of fisheries. For our small island developing States,
the interconnectedness of security threats needs no
explanation. To put it in context, when two of the states
in our Federation were struck by Super-typhoon Maysak
in March, the storm damaged 90 per cent of their food
crops, contaminated their water supplies and left behind
widespread destruction of the homes and everything
else in its path. Typhoon Maysak's consequences have
set back our sustainable development efforts for many
years.

Micronesia is a large oceanic State. One of the
greatest threats to our sustainable development and
economic security is that of the unabated criminal acts
represented by illegal, unregulated, and unreported
fishing. And in a country with such a large exclusive
economic zone, the task of patrolling it is daunting.
Our area could become a prime location for criminal
activities and a transit point for human trafficking and
drug smuggling. Not to be overlooked is the issue of
sovereignty that would affect my island nation. Our
exclusive economic zone, a major source of economic
livelihood, would substantially diminish in size, as
present measurement baselines, located mostly on the
atoll islands, may forever be submerged underwater.

For the islands of Micronesia, the effect, whether
through natural disaster or undeterred global warming,
and whether abruptly or gradually, will be the same,
and that is nothing less than our disappearance from
the face of the planet. As the Pacific water and ocean
temperature rise, the long-term fate of our islands is
dire, as we will be completely engulfed by the sea
and remain only as submerged reefs. No amount of
development can save us from disappearing if climate
change is not adequately addressed. I therefore urge the
international community and members of the Council
to commit to and adopt an ambitious, legally binding
agreement at the Paris Conference.

We have tried to do our part to ensure that we
maintain a peaceful and secure society and region. But
we know all too well that in an interconnected world, no
man is an island. Gone are the days when security was
about warfare. New security threats have emerged that
can destabilize a society and a region, and we believe
that the Security Council should help us pre-empt them.
To maintain a peaceful and secure region has no price,
and we cannot do it alone.

