Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): My
delegation fully associates itself with the statement to
be made shortly on this subject by Denmark on behalf
of the European Union.

I should like to express a very warm welcome
back to the Council to Ambassador Sharma and to
commend him on the excellent start that he has made as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

We are very much pleased to see the Secretary-
General's report (S/2002/ 1223) and are grateful for that
and for the clear and informative briefing that we have
had today. The United Kingdom is very much
encouraged by the progress that has been achieved in
Timor-Leste since independence, and we should like
the Special Representative to convey the thanks of the
Council to the whole UNMISET team for what they
have achieved, both before and after independence.

In addition, we express our sympathies for the
families of the victims of the Bali bombing.

The report and the briefing together set out an
approach that the United Kingdom fully supports for
Timor-Leste. We also welcome the continued
commitment by the Government to achieving the
objectives set out by the Security Council in resolution
1410 (2002), but it is clear that there are many tough
challenges still ahead. We are particularly aware that
urgent action is needed to alleviate poverty, to improve
employment and to strengthen the still-fragile
institutions.

I should like to go through a number of detailed
points. We welcome the news that 86 of the 100
stability posts have now been filled, but we are still
concerned that only a quarter of the 228 development
posts have thus far been filled. We urge UNMISET to
deal with those as quickly as possible - particularly
the posts for which it has already secured funding -
and if the Special Representative could give us some
sense of a time frame for that, it would be useful. We
hope that international experts working in Timor-Leste
will focus on training their Timorese counterparts
rather than on trying to do the job themselves. That is
an important aspect of capacity-building.

On the economic side, we understand from the
International Monetary Fund - which is currently
visiting Timor-Leste - that it estimates a shortfall of
between $60 million and $80 million in the budget up
to mid-2005 and that it is also expecting the economic
situation to worsen in the second two years of this
triennium, in 2004 and 2005, which will clearly affect
the social safety nets. So we would be grateful to learn
a bit more about the assessment of the United Nations
as to the current economic and budgetary situation and
what needs to be done to address it.

I note that the rule of law is the first of what the
Special Representative considers the principal
challenges that the new State faces. There are
reminders of our experience in the Balkans echoing
here. Respect for human rights and for the rule of law
is crucial for Timor-Leste's future. We therefore
welcome the establishment of the Provedor office, but
we are concerned at the suggestion that the Judicial
Magistrates Statutes do not provide sufficiently for the
independence of judges and lawyers. I would be
grateful to know whether anything is being planned to
remedy that.

We look forward to the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) assessment mission
and to the provision of a suggested road map of
assistance for the justice sector by the Portuguese
justice sector expert on the World Bank monitoring
mission. A review of all pre-trial detentions is clearly
needed, and we are especially concerned about the 10
juveniles currently in detention. We welcome the recent
indictments issued by the Serious Crimes Unit,
especially for members of the Tentara Nasional
Indonesia (TNI) suspected of murdering Dutch
journalist Sander Thoenes. The poor performance in
attracting forensic pathologists needs to be addressed.
The mandate implementation plan of 10 priority cases
needs to be completed quickly to increase the chances
of successful reconciliation. I would like to ask
whether the Special Representative has any suggestions
for what can be done about serious crimes which fall
outside the remit of the mandate implementation plan,
because we believe these could undermine work on the
plan.

We look forward to the multi-donor mission to
Timor-Leste next week to look at the needs of the
national police. We are pleased that the transfer of
responsibility to the national police is proceeding well;
it is important that the police should be fully capable of
maintaining law and order when the time comes for
UNMISET's departure. Finally, we would be interested
in knowing whether the United Nations has any plans
to revise its phase-five security status for West Timor.

I end by repeating our thanks to UNMISET for its
work and giving, through Mr. Sharma, our best wishes
to them and to the Government of Timor-Leste for the
coming period.

