Mr. Lovald (Norway): The deterioration of the
situation in Haiti gives reason for concern. Haiti now
needs both to restore security and to implement
investment and aid in order to lay the foundation for
the country's reconstruction and the strengthening of
the rule of law. A concerted effort by the United
Nations, regional organizations and the international
community is essential to achieving that.

Norway would like to take this opportunity to
express its strong support for the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Valdes,
and the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) in preparing for fair and transparent
elections to take place in November. We would also
like to underline the importance of the electoral
assistance of the Organization of American States for
Haiti.

Lasting and sustainable peace depends on the
existence of legitimate national authorities. The
upcoming elections offer the possibility of a new start
so that Haiti can begin addressing its multitude of
challenges. Priorities right now are the restoration of
security and successful elections.

There is a strong need to promote and facilitate
national reconciliation in an open and inclusive
process. Haiti needs to develop a political climate and
a culture of dialogue, tolerance and respect. There is no
alternative to dialogue and compromise in meeting the
challenges facing the country. Good governance based
on democracy, respect for human rights, sound
economic management and accountability must come
from within.

In recent years, Norway has been supporting and
encouraging political dialogue aimed at national
reconciliation. We remain committed to facilitating
venues for political dialogue and consensus-building in
an open and inclusive process. We believe that, in a
long-term perspective, peace and prosperity can be
secured only through political dialogue.
Despite the efforts of the United Nations,
regional organizations and others, the situation remains
difficult and there are no signs that give reason to
expect significant improvement in the near future. It is
Norway's view that, in a short-term perspective, there
is a lack of timely, adequate and secure financing
enabling MINUSTAH to fulfil its mandate, including
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
activities, and that this must be addressed.

It is our view that, as we approach the September
summit, the situation in Haiti underlines the need for a
new approach to peacebuilding. We thus encourage all
Member States to bear that in mind when considering
the proposal of establishing a United Nations-led,
consolidated peacebuilding mechanism.

