Mr. Kafando (spoke in French): I welcome the
opportunity to brief the Council on the occasion of the
consideration of the report of the Secretary-General
on Burundi (8/2018/89). Before I begin, allow me, Mr
President, to congratulate you on your accession to
presidency of the Council for this month and to greet
all members of the Council.

We had hoped to have among us President
Benjamin Mkapa, facilitator of the inter-Burundian
dialogue, whose contribution would undoubtedly have
not only deepened the understanding of the political
stakes in Burundi, but also identified prospects for
the continuation of the process. Unfortunately, he
was not able to make the trip due to his participation
in the summit of the Heads of State of the East
African Community.

As announced, my briefing concerns the
Secretary-General's report on the situation at Burundi,
of 25 January 2018. The first observation of the report
focuses on the political situation in Burundi, which
remains tense and characterized by measures that
restrict freedom. Indeed, I note that only the majority
party and some other political formations allied to it are
able to carry out political activities without hindrance.
The economic situation is far from improving
owing to the ongoing political situation. Such an
environment cannot be conducive to the organization
of credible elections.

The security situation is improving significantly
across the country, although human rights violations
and other abuses continue to be reported, especially
since the launch on 12 December 2017 of the campaign
to raise awareness of the constitutional referendum.

As far as the humanitarian situation is concerned,
the report emphasizes that it remains a matter of
concern. The irrevocable decision of the Burundian
Government to go ahead with the constitutional
amendment will be decided by the referendum that, in
principle, is planned for May. To that end, it should be
noted that the concern raised by the Secretary-General
in his report cannot be interpreted as interference in
Burundi's internal affairs by denying the country its
sovereign right to amend its own Constitution. On the
contrary, it must be understood as his desire to seek
consensus around an issue of such importance to the
future or even the fate of Burundi.

History make it clear that the stability and
development of Burundi over the past 15 years are
essentially the result of the broad consensus that
prevailed in the negotiation and adoption of the Arusha
Agreement. Moreover, this recommendation on the part
of the Secretary-General merely explains article 299 of
the 2005 Burundian Constitution, which is still in force
and which states that "[n]o revision procedure may be
used ifit undermines national unity [or] the cohesion of
the Burundian people".

The United Nations, the African Union, the East
African Community and the European Union are the
guarantors of the Arusha Agreement, the quintessence
of which is not limited to ethnic and gender balance,
which is retained in the new Constitution. Power-
sharing, good political governance, pluralist democracy
based on the principle of broad consensus, and the
protection of minority rights remain at the heart of the
Arusha Agreement which, as we know, was the basis of
the Burundian Constitution of 2005, which is currently
under revision.

All this could have been possible if political will
had prevailed in the inter-Burundian dialogue, under
the auspices of the East African region. That having
been said, I take this opportunity to congratulate the
mediator and facilitator of the Burundian dialogue
on his efforts to find a just solution to the crisis. Now
that, following its most recent summit, the region has
decided to pursue the dialogue, it is up to the African
Union, alongside the other partners, including the
United Nations, to remain strongly committed to the
outcome of mediation. For the United Nations, whose
support for the process is intended above all to help
bring the Burundians together in the hope of reaching a
dynamic compromise, dialogue remains indispensable.

I have just summarized very briefly the report
of the Secretary-General on Burundi, submitted for
the Council's consideration. Everything indicates
that the country remains a subject of concern to the
international community. I note that in its communique
on the report, dated 14 February, the Government of
Burundi declares itself ready to spare no effort to
cooperate with the United Nations in the context of
respect of its sovereignty. In that regard, as Special
Envoy I can attest to the fact that this good cooperation
already exists between the Burundian authorities and
the United Nations mission in Burundi. I thank them
for their welcome and their full availability, although
I would add that, contrary to certain statements, the
Special Envoy's contribution to the Secretary-General's
report has hardly exceeded his obligations, let alone
guided by any partiality. The sole objective guiding his
actions was to sound the alarm bell so that the emerging
future of the Burundian people can be enjoyed by all
Burundians and thereby to avoid the endless reversals
of which that country has suffered so much.

