The President: As this is the first public meeting
of the Security Council for the month of November,
I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute,
on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Jerry
Matjila, Permanent Representative of South Africa, for
his service as President of the Council for the month of
October. I am sure I speak for all members ofthe Council
in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Matjila
and his team for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among members ofthe Security
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council held private
consultations on 31 October 2019 on the latest
political developments in Guinea-Bissau.

"Expressing full support to the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
and African Union communiques issued on
29 and 30 October 2019, respectively, on the said
developments, the Security Council expresses
deep concern over the social and political situation
and calls on President Jose' Mario Vaz and the
Government led by Prime Minister Aristides
Gomes, in charge of conducting the electoral
process, to resolve their differences in the spirit of
respect and cooperation.

"The Security Council calls on all actors in
Guinea-Bissau to fully respect the ECOWAS Heads
of State decision of 29 June 2019.

"The Security Council condemns the recent
violence that resulted in the death of one civilian
and several injured. It welcomes the decision by the
Government to launch an independent investigation
into the matter and looks forward to its outcome.

"The Security Council urges the political actors
of Guinea-Bissau to show the utmost restraint, to
refrain from all forms of violence or incitement to
hatred and to resort to dialogue as the only means
of resolving their differences and preserving peace
and stability in the country.

"The Security Council encourages the political
actors in Guinea-Bissau to take all appropriate
measures to ensure the smooth functioning and
stability of State institutions, in accordance
with the Constitution and the principles of good
governance, and to refrain from taking any actions
that could provoke a relapse into a political and
institutional crisis.

"The Security Council seizes the opportunity
to draw the attention of political actors in Guinea-
Bissau to the urgent need to hold the presidential
elections on 24 November 2019, as agreed, in
order to conclude the electoral cycle to allow for a
peaceful transition of power to an elected President.

"While recognizing the efforts deployed by all
stakeholders so far towards the peaceful conduct
of the presidential election, the Security Council
encourages political actors in Guinea-Bissau to
work together to preserve the gains of the political
and electoral process in order to strengthen the
prevailing peace and stability.

"The Security Council welcomes that the
defence and security forces of Guinea-Bissau
are maintaining strict neutrality and avoiding
interference in the political arena and urges them
to continue doing so throughout and beyond the
electoral and political process.

"The Security Council also reminds all actors
that the Council's possible reconsideration of the
existing sanctions regime will depend on their
orderly conduct as well as that of other political
actors. It also reminds all stakeholders that it will
consider taking appropriate measures against
those who undermine stability in Guinea-Bissau,
in accordance with Security Council resolutions on
Guinea-Bissau.

"The Security Council reiterates its strong
support and commitment to the process of
consolidating peace and stability, as well as the
development of Guinea-Bissau, in collaboration
with regional actors and international partners,
including the Group of Five, comprising the This statement will be issued as a document of the
Africa" Uni": ECOWAS: the Community of Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2019/13.
Portuguese-speaking Countries, the European

Union and the United Nations." The meeting rose at 10.05 am.

