Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I wish to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
for his report. I welcome His Excellency Mr. Jeremic',
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
to this debate and thank him for his statement. I also
thank Mr. Hyseni for his statement.

From the outset, Uganda would like to commend
UNMIK for its continued efforts in promoting security
and stability in Kosovo and the region. We are
encouraged that the overall security situation in
Kosovo during the reporting period remained relatively
calm. We commend UNMIK for its proactive
engagement with all communities, as well as the
authorities in Pristina and Belgrade and international
actors in furthering peace and stability in Kosovo. We
are convinced that the work of UNMIK in supporting
minority communities, encouraging reconciliation and
facilitating dialogue and regional cooperation is
critical.
We welcome the readiness of the authorities in
northern Kosovo to cooperate with UNMIK in order to
resolve the practical problems on the ground. It is
important that progress be made on the discussions of
practical issues despite the political differences. To this
end, we commend UNMIK for engaging both sides and
setting up task forces in order to promote the
depoliticization of the problems and adherence to
established rules and procedures.

We encourage all leaders on both sides to commit
themselves to dialogue and to avoid any provocation.
Every effort needs to be made to promote peaceful
coexistence. The persistence of security-related
incidents perpetuates insecurity among the minority
communities. It is important that the perpetrators of
Violence be brought to justice so as to foster a sense of
security among the minority communities. In this
regard, we call on all parties to exercise restraint,
mutual respect and tolerance in order to live in
harmony.

We therefore welcome the message of peace
delivered by the President of Serbia during his Visit to
the Decani monastery to celebrate Orthodox Christmas,
urging all people regardless of their identity to
reconcile their differences for the sake of a common
future. These are the kind of messages that are needed
from leaders to promote peace and dialogue.

My delegation welcomes the cooperation between
UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX) on exchanges of information and
coordinating on issues of mutual concern. This
cooperation is Vital, and we encourage its
strengthening within the framework of resolution 1244
(1999).

The Kosovo Force (KFOR) plays an important
complementary role in maintaining an overall safe
environment. In this regard, we salute the efforts of
UNMIK, in coordination with EULEX and KFOR, to
encourage both sides to find a sustainable and peaceful
solution.

We commend UNMIK for facilitating the
activities of UNESCO and for facilitating agreement
on power supply issues. These activities are important
because they build confidence and create better
understanding among communities. We therefore
encourage UNMIK to continue, in coordination and
cooperation with local and relevant international
actors, its efforts to address critical social service
needs.
Regional cooperation plays an important role in
enhancing development. We therefore encourage the
authorities in Pristina and Belgrade to work together in
pursuance of that goal. We are convinced that UNMIK
continues to play an important role in facilitating
Kosovo's engagement in international and regional
forums. We call on the international community to
continue to support UNMIK's important work,
consistent with resolution 1244 (1999).

Finally, we commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, and
the staff of UNMIK, for their good work.

