Mr. Al-Qahtani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this urgent
Council meeting to debate the continuing Israeli
military aggression against Lebanon and its people. I
also wish to thank Mr. Guehenno and Mr. Gambari for
their briefings on the latest disturbing developments in
the region.

Over the past few days, and even as I speak, we
have been witnessing a barbaric military campaign by
Israel's military forces against Lebanon and its people.
That has led to the death of dozens of civilians,
including women and children, and to serious damage
to the infrastructure of that country - without
justification.

While we recognize the right of all States,
including Lebanon, to defend themselves, the waging
of a wide-spread military campaign directly targeting
civilians and hitting their infrastructure, such as in the
current campaign by the Israeli forces, can in no way
be consonant with that objective. To the contrary, it
seems that the holding of the two Israeli soldiers is
being used as a pretext to bring destruction and
instability to the region.

The alleged right of Israel to self-defense ends
when the Security Council takes the necessary
measures to maintain international peace and security.
Will the Security Council be allowed to stop Israel's
aggression against this wounded country? It is
premeditated aggression; it is flagrant violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and of all international
norms. We must put an end to it forthwith.

Lebanon today is a rare successful experiment in
democracy; it has borne fruit. If we wish to protect that
experiment, if we wish to allow Lebanon to fully
exercise its authority over all its territory, we must stop
any act that may destabilize the country and harm
democracy. The fact that the Israeli Government holds
the Lebanese Government responsible for the
abduction and holding of the two Israeli soldiers, even
though it had no knowledge of that action, is a grave
development and is in no way proper justification for
waging the military campaign against Lebanon.

We call on the two parties to show restraint and
not to escalate, and certainly not to target civilians. We
hope that these incidents will not cause further
deterioration of the situation. The region cannot take
any more tension beyond what it currently suffers. At
any rate, the Security Council must immediately take
appropriate measures to put an end to this barbaric
aggression in order to protect Lebanon and its people.
We cannot allow Lebanon to be brought to its knees.

