Mr. Skoog: I am pleased to be here today on behalf
ofthe members ofthe Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
to present the annual report of the Commission on its
ninth session, as contained in document S/2016/115.

We meet during the Peacebuilding Week, at one
of several timely opportunities to discuss next steps
in terms of implementing the resolutions on sustaining
peace, adopted almost two months ago. I look forward
to the informal interactive dialogue with members
of the Security Council following this briefing
and to the PBC annual session tomorrow. The two
groundbreaking resolutions emanating from the review
of the peacebuilding architecture provide an excellent
basis and strong impetus for an enhanced role of the
Peacebuilding Commission, as well as a strengthened
relationship with the Council.

I will now turn to the task at hand of presenting
the activities and achievements of the PBC during 2015.
The ninth session of the PBC coincided with the first
phase of the review of the peacebuilding architecture,
which inspired the work of the Commission. Over the
past year, we have taken what I believe are important
steps to improve the effectiveness and flexibility of the
Peacebuilding Commission, striving always to further
enhance the relevance of our work, broaden the scope
and reach of our efforts, and improve the accountability
of the Commission. This includes adopting more
transparent and strategic working methods and
a more flexible agenda, increasing inclusivity,
improving partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations, and highlighting peacebuilding needs in
the Ebola recovery.

I should like to highlight three particular areas
of progress from the annual report, and also pass on
some reflections on how this work can be built on and
leveraged in light of the review.

First, regarding the flexibility and effectiveness of
the work of the Commission, during its ninth session
the PBC was able to leverage the inherent flexibility
of the Commission to convene regional and country-
specific discussions concerning situations beyond
the PBC's established agenda. The Organizational
Committee had opportunities to discuss peacebuilding
needs and lessons learned in several contexts, such as
the peace process in Papua New Guinea, the elections
in Burkina Faso and financing for peacebuilding in
Somalia. Going forward, this work can and should
be further expanded. In my view, there is great scope
for the Commission to keep evolving in this regard.
The resolutions adopted in April give the PBC a clear
mandate to continue diversifying its working methods
in support of sustaining peace.

Secondly, on regional issues, the Commission has
over the past year moved to highlight thematic and
regional issues of relevance to its work. For example,
to draw attention to the peacebuilding needs within
the Ebola recovery, building on the successful work of
my predecessor, a the PBC Chair undertook a trip to
West Africa. I am very happy that a similar visit to the
region was carried out by the current Chair in the past
two weeks.

Furthermore, a regional discussion on trends and
threats to peacebuilding in West Africa was convened
at the beginning of this year, at which Under-Secretary-
General Jeffrey Feltman, Head of the Department
of Political Affairs, was invited to identify conflict-
prevention priorities and inform the Commission's
work in the region. Again, it is encouraging that the
Peacebuilding Commission is already building on what
was started during previous sessions, with additional
regional discussions convened at this session.
The Commission should further use the momentum
from the reviews to deepen and institutionalize
cooperationwithregionalandsubregionalorganizations,
both in the Commission as a whole and in the country-
specific work. The fundamental peacebuilding and
conflict-prevention work carried out in particular by
the regional economic communities is something the
PBC can better link with in its advocacy work and
accompaniment. In a similar vein, the PBC is well
placed to listen to and incorporate local perspectives
and bringi such understandings and approaches to
peacebuilding to the fore.

Thirdly, regarding inclusivity, few bodies at the
United Nations have a mandate to interact with and
draw upon the expertise of such a wide range of actors as
does the Peacebuilding Commission. During the ninth
session, the Commission worked to advance interaction
with a more diverse group of actors. The drafting of
a gender strategy for the Peacebuilding Commission
was initiated, which will help the Commission to
systematize the way it works on gender issues and to
put the empowerment of women at the core of the work.

A special session was organized to discuss how
to advance the youth, peace and security agenda and
champion youth participation for sustainable peace.
This is an agenda that I hope the PBC can keep on
championing, building on the momentum of resolution
2250 (2015).

The convening role of the PBC should be utilized
even further, as it is one of the most important tools
we have to foster greater coherence in international
action and to help break some of the silos and address
fragmentation. This in turn is a prerequisite for our
ability to support genuine national leadership and
ownership in peacebuilding processes.

Beyond these three topics that I have had a
chance to touch upon, there are of course many more
achievements that deserve the attention of this organ,
not least within the country-specific configurations of
the Commission. This year is another important year
for the Commission, and I am very happy to see how
the Commission continues to evolve under the very able
stewardship of the Kenyan Ambassador.

Before concluding, I wish to pay tribute to my
fellow PBC Chairs, as well as the representatives of
the countries on our agenda and all the members of the
Peacebuilding Commission. It has been aproductive year
for the Commission, and the successful steps could not
have been taken without their very active engagement
and dedicated support. In similar vein, I would be
remiss ifI did not dedicate a special word of thanks to
Assistant Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-Taranco
and his entire team at the Peacebuilding Support Office
for their steadfast support throughout the ninth session
and their never-ending determination to advance the
peacebuilding agenda at the United Nations.

I would just add a personal remark. I should like
to thank the Security Council and its members for the
very good interaction that I was able to have with all
of them during the past year. This is the first time that
I have had the possibility to brief the Council on this
topic since the adoption of resolution 2282 (2016), on
sustaining peace. I should like to this opportunity to
congratulate the Council on adopting the resolution,
and of course express the wish that its implementation
be at the forefront of the Council's agenda, because I
think it could represent a sea change in how we all deal
with international peace and security.

