Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): The Security Council's consideration today of
the situation in Tajikistan and along its frontier with
Afghanistan gives us an ideal opportunity to welcome the
progress that has been made towards peace - peace that
in order to be lasting needs to be bolstered by specific
action on the part of the protagonists. This is my
delegation's view, as we understand it, and it is what the
Secretary-General is working towards in his efforts to
support the quest for peace and to create conditions
favourable to its consolidation.

In his successive reports of 4 September and 5
November, the Secretary-General has given us an
appraisal of the status of the negotiations and of the
headway made in the right direction, that is to say, the
path towards peace through negotiation. We believe that

 

it is desirable for the Tajik Government and the United
Tajik Opposition (UTO) to strive to ensure that this
peace - which is still fragile - is bolstered through the
establishment of the necessary structures. We refer in
particular to consolidation of the ceasefire, the exchange of
prisoners, and the creation of a climate conducive to the
return of refugees in decent conditions.

My delegation wishes to pay tribute to the unflagging
work being done by the Government of the Russian
Federation and the Government of Iran, whose steadying
and animating role should encourage us to emulate them so
that the peace we all desire can emerge in Tajikistan. To
this end, all members of the international community must
rigorously commit themselves, since we have already
declared our support for the territorial integrity of Tajikistan
to be respected and the inviolability of its borders to
become a reality.

Tajikistan has unfortunately become the object of
many covetous eyes, and we hope that all the neighbouring
countries of Tajikistan can work in concert with the rest of
the international community to ensure that peace is the only
item on the agenda in all the efforts that are made in that
country and around it.

My delegation will try to ensure that what the
Secretary-General has recommended becomes a reality, and
it is with that in mind that we join the other members of
the Council in adopting this draft resolution, which
highlights the arguments put forward by the Secretary-
General in favour of expanding the personnel of the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) and
also authorizes the Secretary-General to extend UNMOT's
mandate until 15 May 1998.

I take this opportunity to say that, in the view of my
delegation, if peace in Tajikistan is to be lasting and
permanent, all the parties must follow a policy of inclusion,
working through dialogue, consultation and negotiation in
order to ensure that all the men and women of that great
country can work together and build a country that once
again becomes the haven of peace they all seek.

In conclusion, I would also like to express the hope
that every effort will be made by the Government of
Tajikistan as well as by the UTO and the other parties that
have not yet decided to join the UTO to provide security
for UNMOT personnel, whose important role was
recognized in the letter of 27 June 1997 from the President
of the Republic of Tajikistan and Mr. Nuri to the Secretary-
General.

