Mr. Ruperez: First, Mr. President, please allow
me to thank you and the other members of the Security
Council for the opportunity to address the Council.

As this is the first time I have taken the floor
since I have assumed my duties, I would like to take
this opportunity to tell the Council of the steps I have
taken to put the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate in motion. As members know, on 18 May
of this year, I had the honour of being appointed
Executive Director by the Secretary-General, with the
support of the Council, and I officially assumed my
duties on 29 June.

In fulfilment of resolution 1535 (2004), on
29 July the Secretary-General presented to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) my proposed
organizational plan for the Executive Directorate. That
plan, after due consideration, was endorsed by the
Committee and was communicated to the President of
the Council on 6 August. The Council approved the
plan on 12 August, as Ambassador Denisov has just
pointed out. As of that moment, my primary
preoccupation was the preparation of the budget and
other administrative arrangements to enable the
contracting of experts and other personnel who would
be integrated into the Executive Directorate. I wish to
express my gratitude for the support given to me in that
process by the Office of the Secretary-General, the
Department of Political Affairs and the human
resources and budget offices of the Department of
Management, among others. All of them have greatly
facilitated my work. I would certainly add the CTC
itself and its Chairman, Ambassador Denisov, to my
list of thanks, as they have been extremely useful in
helping me in my work as Executive Director.

Similarly, I have initiated contacts with
international organizations of primary relevance to our
future work, such as the International Monetary Fund,
the Organization of American States, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the African
Union, the European Union, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and the International Atomic
Energy Agency. At the same time, I have been invited
to participate in various forums, which has given me
the opportunity to discuss the efforts of the United
Nations against terrorism and which has placed the
Organization at the centre, where the initiatives put
forward by the international community in this regard
should converge.

I do not wish to end my statement without giving
the Council a brief idea of what the Executive
Directorate's first steps will be once it is fully
operational. As manifested by the recent adoption of
resolutions 1535 (2004), 1540 (2004) and 1566 (2004)
by the Council, the fight against terrorism has the
preferential attention of the international community.
Those resolutions have come to reinforce the measures
put forward in resolution 1373 (2001), which can be
considered as the cornerstone of United Nations action
against terrorism. The Council has been tailoring its
actions to the new challenges before it, while
reiterating the connection between organized crime or
the trafficking of weapons - including weapons of
mass destruction - and terrorism, and the need to
broaden cooperation not only among Member States,
but also with international, regional and subregional
organizations.

For those reasons, the Executive Directorate will
redouble its efforts to encourage Member States to
comply fully with the obligations before them, so that
they will be armed with the legal and administrative
tools to confront the threat of terrorism, in full
conformity to international law. In that regard,
dialogue with Member States will be intensified to
identify their needs and try to obtain for them the
assistance they require. Periodic evaluations and
country visits would be a valuable element in orienting
our work and obtaining the desired results.

In this task, the action taken by international
organizations will play a relevant role, as they can not
only help detect the needs of States but also coordinate
assistance. It is only in that way that we can begin to
close the gap and make more difficult, day by day, the
deadly and destructive work of the terrorists. The
world expects the United Nations to exercise
leadership in the global campaign against this scourge,
and I will exert all possible efforts to ensure that the
Executive Directorate, which I am honoured to head, is
up to the circumstances and responds fully to the
wishes of the international community in this regard.

I wish to conclude by once again expressing my
gratitude for the support that I have received from all
the members of the CTC, with whom, I trust, I will
continue to work in a very close and fruitful manner in
this period of transition, and also when the Executive
Directorate is fully operational. We have before us a
very important task with expectations that we cannot
disappoint.

Resolution 1566 (2004), adopted a few days ago
by the Council, signalled how urgent it is that the
CTED become fully operational. With the valuable
cooperation of all Member States, I expect that to
become a reality no later than in the first days of the
new year.

