Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes your presence, Mr. Minister, and
His Excellency Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, which raises
the profile of this briefing on the peace process in his
country. We also commend Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, for his informative briefing.

The Security Council's recent visit to Colombia
has enabled Member States to better understand the
challenges and opportunities associated with the peace
process and to reaffirm their support for the authorities,
as well as other relevant stakeholders. My delegation
takes this opportunity to express its deep gratitude to
the Colombian authorities for the warm welcome and
courtesies extended to the Council during its visit.

In signing the Final Agreement for the Termination
of Conflict and the Construction of a Stable and
Lasting Peace on 24 November 2016, the Colombian
parties expressed their shared aspiration to peace and
stability, and their commitment to ending 50 years
of conflict, working to restore the territorial unity
of Colombia, strengthening security and promoting
investments for the development of rural areas. More
than two years after its signing, my country notes the
slow but clearly promising progress that has been made
in the implementation of the Agreement. Cote d'Ivoire
therefore expresses its support for President Ivan Duque
Marquez's call for unity and urges all stakeholders to
work harder to implement their commitments.

In that regard, my country welcomes the involvement
of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun
(FARC) in the political process, the activities of the
Congress and transitional justice issues. Cote d'Ivoire
also welcomes the Government's measures to promote
economic recovery and socioeconomic reintegration,
including the approval of the national development plan,
the launch of 500 projects and the public investment
plan geared towards the compensation of victims and
the reintegration of ex-combatants, and the creation of
viable alternative livelihoods for workers cultivating
illicit crops.

Cote d'Ivoire also welcomes the efforts of
the Colombian Government that enabled the
operationalization of the mechanisms responsible for
the implementation of the peace agreement, namely,
the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and
Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement and the Commission on Truth, Coexistence
and Non-Repetition. My delegation is of the opinion
that, in addition to the authorities' proposals to improve
the multipurpose land cadastre, the June promulgation
ofthe statutory law ofthe Special Jurisdiction for Peace
was a significant step in guiding the peace process. It
is therefore important that meaningful resources be
allocated to ensure its effectiveness and independence.
In view of the forthcoming regional and municipal
elections, it is imperative that the Colombian parties
overcome their differences in order to maintain the gains
achieved so far and pursue the shared task of restoring
peace and stability in the country. Such efforts should
also focus on improving collective security, including
the protection of human rights defenders and former
combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo. Moreover, the fight
against the informal economy must remain a priority
for the Government, which must also strengthen its
presence and step up the provision of social services in
rural areas in order to redress imbalances in that area.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its call on
bilateral and multilateral partners to support the peace
process by supporting the initiatives ofthe Government
and other stakeholders to foster restoring lasting
peace and development in Colombia. My country also
expresses its support for the Head of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia and encourages him
to pursue his efforts in the fulfilment of his mandate.

