Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): It is
a great pleasure for me to welcome you, Mr. President,
and tell you how honoured we are to have you
presiding over our work and enhancing by your
presence the Security Council's examination of this
important question of children and armed conflict,
which is closely linked to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

We would like to welcome the ministers that have
joined us in this meeting. We thank the Secretary-
General for his report and his Special Representative,
Mr. Olara Otunnu, for the firm and unequivocal
support for finding urgent and sustainable solutions to
the tragedy of child soldiers and for putting an end to
that shameful, degrading and revolting practice.
Finally, I would like to thank the representatives of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and UNICEF for their important
statements.

The report that has been submitted to us marks a
new stage in our common quest to see norms for
protecting children in armed conflict situations
effectively applied.

The action plan for setting up a monitoring an
reporting mechanism proposed by the Secretary-
General presages a new era in monitoring the
behaviour of parties in situations of armed conflict. It
also allows the collective system for protecting
children to utilize more binding means to stop the
vicious spiral of using child soldiers. Even though
there are differences with regard to the practical
implementation of the action to be undertaken and with
regard to the role of each of the entities intervening in
the process, we feel that this plan has good chances of
meeting with broad endorsement.

The debate today could become a timely
opportunity to shed further light on the adoption of an
ambitious but realistic draft resolution that Benin has
submitted, and we would like to express our gratitude
for that. We feel that this draft is an appropriate
response to the alarm raised in 1996 by Graca Machel
and should enable the international community to move
beyond statements of intent towards action. The report
of the Secretary-General shows that the phenomenon of
child soldiers continues to afflict various regions of the
world, Africa in particular, leading to generalized and
unacceptable violations of law and morality. It is
therefore imperative - and this implies a particular
responsibility on the part of the Security Council -
that all parties to conflicts honour their obligations and
put an end to the enlistment of children.

We note, however, with some satisfaction that
programmes of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of children have been set up in situations
of conflict and post-conflict. We encourage the
integration of best practices in those programmes, as
reported by the Secretary-General in part IV of his
report. We also find relevant the measures proposed by
the Secretary-General with a View to fighting illicit
cross-border activities that harm children. We welcome
the increasingly important role played by peacekeeping
and peacebuilding missions in improving the protection
of children. While we condemn the sexual exploitation
of children that has been reported recently, my
delegation welcomes the swift and appropriate reaction
of the Secretary-General and of the troop-contributing
countries to deal with those intolerable acts.

Better coordination between the United Nations
and regional and subregional bodies would also seem
to be the way to make the collective system of
protection for children affected by armed conflict more
effective. Africa, which has a charter on the rights of
the child, has taken the problem in hand and remains
open of course to any serious and coherent initiative
that would be part of common efforts aimed at bringing
an end to the phenomenon of child soldiers.

The problem of child soldiers is a complex one
and in that respect it is important that the international
community also address the deep-seated causes of
those conflicts, which stem in the majority of cases
from the absence of development, socio-economic
inequalities, inter-ethnic rivalries, the denial of human
rights, the illegal exploitation of natural resources, and
from cross-border problems. Algeria will continue to
provide its support to any measures aimed at bringing
an end to the odious practice of using children in
armed conflicts and we believe that the implementation
of all action plans should conform to the universal
rules of transparency, non-selectivity and objectivity.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
support the draft presidential statement prepared by the
delegation of Benin.

