Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): My delegation is
equally unanimous, Madam: in congratulating you on this
success at the end of your presidency this month, and in
thanking you for your most warm and effective conduct
of our deliberations during this extremely busy and
somewhat eventful month.

My delegation would also like to express its respects
and welcome to the representative of Haiti, who sits at
the Council table today, and to congratulate him on the
successful achievements which he outlined to us.

The story of the United Nations Mission in Haiti
(UNMIH) has been a notable success for the United
Nations. The Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, those Member States which have given
particular assistance to the process, and the Government
and people of Haiti are to be congratulated on the
progress which has been achieved. Elections have been
held, and power has been peacefully transferred from one
democratically elected President to another. In all this, the
contribution of the United Nations has been vital and
imaginative, embracing the promotion both of stability
and of development in one of the world's poorest
countries.

But, as this resolution makes clear, there is still
much for UNMIH to do. Its mission is now at a delicate
stage. Security and stability have yet finally to be assured.
There is more work to be done, particularly in relation to
the National Police force.

It is for these reasons that my Government strongly
supports this resolution. Indeed, we would have supported
even more strongly a resolution more in line with the
recommendations of the Secretary-General and with the
wishes of the primary troop contributors and of the
Government of Haiti. We have found it difficult to
understand some of the problems which have been raised
over the strength of the force and the duration of its
mandate.

We pay a particularly warm tribute to the
Government of Canada for the lead that it has taken in
making UNMIH's continuation possible. It is a source of
great satisfaction to my delegation that UNMIH will now
be able to continue its mission into the stabilization phase.

