Mr. Lamamra (spoke in French): At the outset, on
behalfofthe Commisison ofthe African Union, I should
like to thank the President of the Security Council for
the month of July, United States Secretary of State
John Kerry, and the members of the Council for the
invitation to take part in this important meeting on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Great Lakes region. Ms. Dlamini-Zuma, Chair of
the African Union, regrets being unable to participate
in this important meeting, which takes place within
discussions aimed at implementing the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, signed in Addis
Ababa on 24 February.

The first commitment undertaken by the
international community concerns the role the Council
is expected to play with respect to the importance of
support for the long-term stability of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region.
Furthermore, the oversight mechanism calls on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, its neighbouring
countries, regional partners and the international
community to synchronize their efforts to promote
their respective commitments.

The Secretary-General's excellent report
(S/2013/387), which is before the Council today, aptly
portrays the dynamic in the region as well as the
challenges it entails.

The African Union views this high-level meeting
as a strong expression of the importance that the
Government of the United States and other Council
Member States attach to peace and security on the
African continent and to achieving a swift, lasting
solution to the crisis, particularly in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That
commitment is evident through the unanimous support
of the members of the Council for the efforts of the
Secretary-General to implement the Framework. I
would note that the appointment of a Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region
envisaged in the Framework has been made. In that
connection, I commend the quality of the working
relationship that Ms. Mary Robinson has established
with Ambassador Boubacar Gaoussou Diarra, Special
Representative of the African Union Commission for
the Great Lakes Region. I also note and welcome the
adoption of resolution 2098 (2013), which adapts the
United Nation Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo(MONUSCO)
to the new situation and creates the Force Intervention
Brigade as requested by the countries of the region
and the African Union. The African Union is grateful
to South Africa, Malawi and Tanzania for their
contribution to training the Brigade, which is now in
the process of being deployed and operationalized.

I must point out, however, that instead of the
long-awaited agreement expected to result from the
negotiations that President Museveni of Uganda
continues to lead with authority and perseverance,
the region has been shadowed by significant military
clashes between the armed forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and elements of Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23). Those confrontations have cast a harsh
light on the path that lies ahead before the achievement
ofa new era in the region.

The statements made today by Secretary of State
Kerry, the Secretary-General, Ms. Robinson and
the President of the World Bank, as well as those to
be delivered by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda and
Rwanda-all three present here today-are an important
contribution to enlightening the Council with regard to
the political, security and humanitarian situation on the
ground, as well as on the status of the implementation
of both the Framework and resolution 2098 (2013), as
well as on the political process currently under way.
That portrayal of the realities on the ground, the issues
at stake and the perspectives for the future makes
more clear than ever the urgency and need for greater,
sustained support from the international community in
the Great Lakes region.

In that context, Ms. Robinson and Ambassador
Diarra are working together to create the conditions
for the efficient and systematic implementation of
the Framework. I know that the Congolese authorities
and the authorities of the States party to the regional
oversight mechanism have expressed their firm
determination to fulfil the commitments they have
made, to which they are attached. I also know that the
support of the entire international community for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the countries
of the region will be unwavering, as we can tell from
the initiatives undertaken by the United Nations as
well as by international financial institutions and other
development partners. The recent consultative meeting
on development approaches in the countries of the
Great Lakes region organized in Addis Ababa by the
United Nations and the World Bank is an integral part
of that commitment.

The African Union believes that the dynamic set in
motion by the Framework and by resolution 2098 (2013)
paves the way for the kind of new horizons for peace,
security and development that the region so desperately
needs, within a favourable regional and international
context. The diligence with which the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has established
the national oversight mechanism and the national
consultations that have been launched augur well. At
the regional level, the ongoing mobilization of the
authorities of the countries of the Great Lakes region
and the concurrent mobilization of the Southern African
Development Community also bears witness to their
shared determination to put an end to instability in order
to devote their resources and energy to development and
integration. The upcoming summit of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), to be
held on 31 July in Nairobi, which will be devoted to
issues of peace and to monitoring the implementation
of the Framework, should be able to account for all the
attempts and to undertake the necessary joint action
towards the region's full realization of its potential.

This meeting of the Council, coming in the wake
of the inaugural meeting of the 11+4 mechanism,
co-chaired by the Secretary-General and the Chair
of the African Union on 26 May in Addis Ababa, is
a timely harbinger of a qualitatively different stage
in the international community's collective effort on
behalf of the people and countries of the region. The
African Union welcomes that initiative and reaffirms
its commitment to play its full part in that welcome
effort to enhance peace, security, democracy and
development in the entire Great Lakes region.

