Mr. Bakayoko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
I should like, first of all, to thank you, Mr. President,
and members of the Council, for having invited me to
participate in this Security Council meeting. It is a
great honour and a privilege, which I greatly
appreciate. I would also like to convey the greetings of
the people, the head of State and the Prime Minister of
Cote d'Ivoire, and to express their appreciation for the
interest that the Council has always shown in Cote
d'Ivoire. I am particularly pleased to express my
gratitude for the support that the Council has been
providing for Charles Konan Banny since the
formation of his Government on 28 December 2005.

Today's meeting is one of a number of timely
initiatives that the Council has taken in support of Cote
d'Ivoire and of the Ivorian people since the crisis
erupted on 19 September 2002. We would like to thank
the Council for that. I would also like to convey the
thanks and sincere appreciation of Cote d'Ivoire to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for all that he is
doing to promote the return of peace in Cote d'Ivoire.

Since the adoption of Security Council resolution
1633 (2005), which resulted in the formation of the
Government led by Mr. Konan Banny, C6te d'Ivoire
has entered a new era, which has allowed the peace and
reconciliation process to develop significantly. In spite
of a number of obstacles, which were quickly
overcome by the Government - in particular the
unfortunate events that took place in mid-January -
the general situation with regard to the process is
satisfactory.

Those events, which were resolutely condemned
by the Government of Cote d'Ivoire and by the
Secretary-General himself, brought home to us, like an
electric shock, the fragile nature of the peace and
reconciliation process in Cote d'Ivoire and the
importance for all of us to firmly support, with strong
measures and actions, the Government's efforts to
move beyond the crisis and to implement the road map
developed by the International Working Group.

In this context, the Government of Cote d'Ivoire
welcomes the fact that calm has been restored,
following the vigorous actions taken by the Council on
the day after the events of January against those whom
it deemed responsible for stymieing the national peace
and reconciliation process.

In particular, from 9 to 11 February, at
Yamoussoukro, a Government seminar was held to
define the modalities for the implementation of the
road map. A round table was also organized on
25 February at Yamoussoukro, with the four major
Ivorian political leaders, Mr. Laurent Gbagbo,
Mr. Henri Konan Bedie, Mr. Alassane Ouattara and
Mr. Guillaume Soro.

The meeting of the four leaders - the first on
Ivorian soil since the outbreak of the crisis - provided
them with an opportunity to take up with the Prime
Minister fundamental questions that were of concern to
them, as well as to take a number of decisions.

Regarding resolution 1633 (2005) and the Cote
d'Ivoire Constitution, they reaffirmed that the
Constitution and the resolution were not incompatible,
and called on the head of State and the Prime Minister
to consult at the earliest opportunity with a View to
finding appropriate solutions to potential conflicts that
could develop between the two texts relating to the
execution of their respective tasks. They admitted that
it would be possible, if need be, to convene a round
table of a similar type.

With respect to the dismantling of the militias and
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants, they agreed that it was necessary to
update the timetable and to immediately restart the
dialogue between the heads of the Forces de defence et
de securite and of the Forces nouvelles, and decided
that those two leaders would discuss all military
questions with a View to moving beyond the crisis.

With regard to identification and elections, the
participants welcomed the fact that it is technically
possible to simultaneously conduct operations for voter
identification and enumeration, and called on the
Government to make use of foreign assistance for a
large-scale and equitable identification operation and
to ensure that all the people will be able to exercise
their constitutional right to vote.

With respect to Radiodiffusion Television
Ivoirienne, the four leaders noted the provisions made
by the Government to ensure that the entire country
would be covered by its broadcasts in order to spread
the message of peace and reconciliation. They called
upon the various political leaders to ensure that the
newspapers that share their views would be part of the
peace process and that they would avoid doing
anything to jeopardize it.

With respect to the Independent Electoral
Commission (IEC), the leaders took note of the
election of the Bureau and of the arbitration of the
High Representative of the United Nations for
elections in Cote d'Ivoire. They decided, however, to
establish a fourth Vice-presidential post for the Front
populaire ivoirienne - the party in power - to
establish balanced representation of the existing
political forces.

They also called on the Prime Minister to
convene, over the following few days, the Bureau of
the Independent Electoral Commission, the signatories
of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement and all interested
parties so as to determine, together with the United
Nations High Representative for elections in Cote
d'Ivoire, the powers of the members of the Bureau and
the operating rules of the IEC so that the elections
could be organized in a fair, transparent and credible
manner.

On the code of conduct, the four leaders agreed
that they needed to get together frequently for
exchanges on the peace process and to ensure that
political life would be conducted in a calm
environment, with respect for the values of fraternity
and democracy.

As can be seen, the two meetings held in
Yamoussoukro, particularly that of the four political
leaders, enabled the Prime Minister, working
together- indeed, in tandem - with the head of
State, to put the peace and reconciliation process back
in the hands of the Ivorian people and to bring the
major leaders together to make a firm commitment to
move the country out of crisis and to make that process
irreversible.

Those two meetings also enabled the
determination of the implementation modalities of
Security Council resolution 1633 (2005) and of the
International Working Group road map, and to create
the climate and necessary political commitment for
their implementation.

Positive results were seen immediately. They
included the fact that, on 7 March, the Bureau of the
Independent Electoral Commission - the main engine
of the electoral machine - began its work after a
number of months of uncertainty.

The installation of the IEC was perceived by the
political parties as signalling the beginning of their
political activities in the run-up to the elections of
October 2006. As a result, important meetings have
been held this month among the major opposition
political policies, in particular the Rassemblement des
Republicains, the Parti democratique de la Cote
d'Ivoire-Rassemblement democratique africain and the
President's group. Important statements came out of
these meetings which for the most part translate the
determination of leaders to work in a new spirit that
has been seen since the Yamoussoukro meeting.

To these positive actions we could add the return
to Abidjan on 14 March 2006 of Mr. Soro, the
Secretary-General of the Forces nouvelles, after
seventeen months of absence from the city. Mr. Soro's
presence in Abidjan now - which itself was preceded
by the return from exile of opposition leaders Messrs.
Henri Konan Bedie and Alassane Ouattara - provides
sufficient evidence that the wall of mistrust that had
characterized political life in Cote d'Ivoire is finally
being broken.

With respect to identification and the electoral
process, the national working group studying the
matter presented its report to the Government on
Thursday, 2 March. The conclusions and
recommendations will be made available to the IEC.
On this question, I would like to affirm that the
Government has already put in place the electoral
process and identification. The two operations will be
done simultaneously, as was decided at the
Yamoussoukro Summit.
This new spirit that has emerged from the
Yamoussoukro Summit and that has now provided new
hope to all Ivorians has also made it possible from an
administrative point of View to partially begin the
process to redeploy the central administration in the
regions under the control of the Forces nouvelles in the
areas of national education and higher education. Thus
it has been possible to organize school examinations,
which we have not been able to do for more than three
years in the regions controlled by the Forces nouvelles.
Furthermore, the University of Bouake, the
headquarters of the Forces nouvelles, was officially
reopened yesterday, 28 March.

The progress in these different areas, in our
opinion, must become irreversible, and therefore we
have to consolidate this climate of trust. In this respect,
security matters must be settled as a matter of priority
and must be accorded the utmost attention. One of the
elements that must contribute to improving the security
situation remains the living and working conditions of
soldiers in the national army. Thus the Government
launched a programme to restore the barracks on
21 February. Through this important project, the
Government aims to create a more disciplined and
more professional army, provided with modern
infrastructure and equipment.

From the point of View of humanitarian
assistance, on behalf of the Ivorian Government I
would like to express our gratitude to the United
Nations system for the assistance provided to the
population heavily affected by the crisis that my
country has been experiencing since September 2002.
Humanitarian agencies, though they suffered from the
events of 15, 16 and 17 January 2006, did not suspend
their action on the ground. This concern, which is at
the very heart of humanitarian action, is to be
commended, and I would like to do so here.

The Ivorian Government, in order to mark its
support for this action and its support for all agencies,
made a statement in which it officially condemned
what happened and which did not spare the Ivorian
structures that cooperate with these agencies.
Furthermore, it dispatched the Minister for Defence to
the field in order to take stronger security measures.

Moreover, an interministerial commission,
including the humanitarian agencies, is being set up. It
will be a framework for the operational coordination of
humanitarian action on a national scale. In this regard,
the Prime Minister has just appointed a Special
Counsellor for Humanitarian Action. In addition, the
local authorities of the western part of Cote d'Ivoire
have undertaken public awareness measures so that
every citizen can understand the need for national
solidarity as well as the usefulness of the presence of
the international community alongside Cote d'Ivoire.

After several years of hesitation, of turbulence
and sometimes of Violence, the peace and
reconciliation process is now taking a positive turn that
we must all welcome and encourage.

I would like to thank once again all the heads of
State who have been involved personally and who are
working with us for the return of peace in Cote
d'Ivoire. I also thank Mr. Kofi Annan, Secretary-
General of the United Nations, and his colleagues,
including his Special Representative, Mr. Pierre Schori,
and his team, as well as the soldiers of Operation
Licorne and the French forces, for the efforts that they
are continuing to make to permanently restore peace,
reconciliation and stability in Cote d'Ivoire.

Though we should be pleased with the positive
developments in the political situation in Cote d'Ivoire
and should celebrate it, we must recognize that
enormous tasks fall upon the Government through the
road map and call for great vigilance as well as a
stepping up of efforts so that these tasks will be
completed.

In particular, we have to work in the following
areas: financing the electoral process at all stages;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration;
strengthening security throughout the territory to
guarantee safety for all voters; and resolving
humanitarian problems and supporting human rights. In
addition, we must make concerted efforts to strengthen
the capacities of judicial institutions with a view to
ensuring the rule of law throughout the country after
three years of war, and provide support for the State's
economy and finances in order to reduce the high
unemployment rate among young people and to carry
out the return of refugees and displaced persons.

There are still storms along the path that will lead
us to an ultimate solution, but we have to weather those
storms in order to be able to organize undisputed
general elections, which are the only way out of this
crisis. In this respect, the Government strongly wishes
that Mr. Antonio Monteiro's successor as High
Representative of the United Nations for elections in
Cote d'Ivoire can be appointed as soon as possible.

In particular, when it comes to strengthening
security throughout the entire national territory, I
would like to underscore that this point is the greatest
concern of all Ivorians and therefore of the
Government of Cote d'Ivoire. Indeed, not only do we
have to guarantee security in Abidjan, but also in the
interior of the country, especially in the west.

This region, as the Council knows, shares a
border with the Republic of Liberia, which shares
many ethnic and cultural similarities with the peoples
of West Africa. Providing good security in that part of
Cote d'Ivoire means providing greater security for
Liberia and strengthening the democratic process in
that country.

For all of these reasons, the Government of Cote
d'Ivoire strongly supports the Secretary-General's
proposal to strengthen the number of Blue Helmets in
Cote d'Ivoire. I would like to ask you to support this
proposal and to consider it positively.

I am grateful for all that you have been able to do
for Cote d'Ivoire since the outbreak of the crisis. I am
also aware of the fact that it is primarily up to us
Ivorians to do as much as we can to help our country
emerge from this crisis. We are determined to achieve
this, of course, with your support. Let us therefore
work together for the return of peace in Cote d'Ivoire
so that no one and nothing can make us retreat.

This is the place to invite all international
institutions and the different development partners to
respect their commitments within the framework of the
process of recovery and reconstruction of Cote
d'Ivoire, as recommended in the different agreements
on the Ivorian crisis, including the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement.

I thank the members of the Security Council for
the welcome and the attention that they have kindly
given to me. I thank them for their attention to the
message that I have just delivered on behalf of the
people and the Government of Cote d'Ivoire.

