The President: In accordance with the decisions taken
at the 3932nd meeting, I invite the representatives of
Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan, Canada, Indonesia, Norway,
Pakistan and the Republic of Korea to take the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Petrella
(Argentina), Mr. Sucharipa (Austria), Mr. Kouliev
(Azerbaijan), Mr. Fowler (Canada), Mr. Wibisono
(Indonesia), Mr. Kolby (Norway), Mr. Kamal
(Pakistan) and Mr. Lee See-young (Republic of Korea)
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now resume
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls the statement of its
President of 19 June 1997 (S/PRST/ 1997/34)
concerning protection for humanitarian assistance to
refugees and others in conflict situations.

"The Security Council welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on Protection for Humanitarian
Assistance to Refugees and Others in Conflict
Situations (S/l 998/883) and notes the
recommendations contained therein.

"The Security Council notes that several of the
recommendations contained in the report coincide with
recommendations made in the report 'The causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa' (S/ 1998/318).

"The Security Council reaffirms the importance
of pursuing a coordinated and comprehensive
approach, in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
principles and provisions of international law, in
improving protection for humanitarian assistance to
refugees and others in conflict situations.

"The Security Council condemns the attacks or
use of force in conflict situations against refugees
and other civilians, in violation of the relevant rules
of international law, including those of international
humanitarian law.

"The Security Council likewise condemns all
attacks or use of force against United Nations and
other personnel associated with United Nations
operations as well as personnel of humanitarian
organizations, in violation of international law,
including international humanitarian law. In this
context, the Council recalls the statement by its
President of 12 March 1997 (S/PRST/1997/13) as
well as other relevant statements and decisions. It
also recalls the Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel adopted by the
General Assembly on 9 December 1994.

"The Security Council affirms its intention to
review thoroughly and promptly the
recommendations of the Secretary-General with a
view to taking steps consistent with its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations and, in this context, notes the views
expressed in the debate on the matter at its 3932nd
meeting on 29 September 1998."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1998/30.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 5 pm.

