The President: At the outset of the meeting, I should
like, on behalf of the Council, to express sincere
condolences to the bereaved families of the personnel of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
United Nations agencies and other humanitarian aid
organizations, government representatives and crew
members who lost their lives in the crash of the plane of
the World Food Programme on Friday, 12 November 1999,
in Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We will
remember them as men and women who risked and lost
their lives while following humanitarian imperatives in the
cause of peace.

I now invite the members of the Council to stand and
observe a minute of silence.

The members of the Council observed a minute of
silence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Briefing by the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina

The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council's prior consultations, I request the
Chief of Protocol to escort His Excellency Mr. Ante
Jelavic, Chair of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
His Excellency Mr. Alija Izetbegovic, Member of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and His Excellency
Mr. Zivko Radisic, Member of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to seats at the Council Table.

Mr. Ante Jelavic, Chair of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Alija Izetbegovic, Member of
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
Mr. Zivko Radisic, Member of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina were escorted to seats at the
Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in
its prior consultations.
At this meeting the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Ante Jelavic, Chair of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Alija Izetbegovic, Member
of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
Mr. Zivko Radisic, Member of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to whom, on behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome.

I should like to recall that members of the Council
may put questions to the Members of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina after their briefings.

The first speaker is Mr. Ante Jelavic, Chair of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, whom I now
invite to make his statement.


