Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): I thank the Secretary-
General for his report; the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, for his
comprehensive presentation; and the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) for the
good work it has done. I also congratulate them all.

Timor-Leste is now entering the final phases of
the drawdown in UNMISET's presence. We note from
the report and the briefing that Timor-Leste has made
remarkable progress in governance and the
development of its civil service. The development of
basic skills among the Timorese is continuing and
progressing well. We welcome the initiation of an open
presidency by President Gusmao and the continuation
of the open governance initiative by the Government.
We note with satisfaction that the National Parliament
has concluded its first year of legislative activity.

I am sure that the Security Council and the
international community continue to share the concerns
that the Secretary-General had raised prior to the
independence of the country, such as the lack of
expertise in the areas of finance, justice, rule of law,
human rights and policing. This shortcoming could
remain as an impediment to successful progress
towards viable nation-building. However, we believe
that with the resolve of the Government and of the
people of Timor-Leste, and with international
assistance, this shortcoming can be overcome in due
course.

We note that with regard to civilian advisers, 37
per cent of the total posts identified have not yet been
funded. According to the Secretary-General, 22 per
cent of the prison population is comprised of
individuals in detention under expired warrants. The
National Police of Timor-Leste still requires
international assistance, especially in the areas of
effectiveness, impartiality and accountability. Of
particular concern are the specialized areas such as
investigations, forensics, intelligence gathering and
special operations to counter acts of terrorism,
hijacking and kidnapping. Furthermore, it is envisaged
that the Timor-Leste Defence Force would unlikely be
in a position to conduct sustained operations
immediately following the withdrawal of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET).

Malaysia believes that continued efforts to
improve public administration and sustain a peaceful
environment will provide the critical foundation for the
promotion of social and economic development in
Timor-Leste. The concerns highlighted by the
Secretary-General certainly require a thorough analysis
by the Council and the international community at
large. We note that significant progress has been made
towards the major milestones identified in UNMISET's
implementation plan. But the Secretary-General has
also assessed that it will not be possible for Timor-
Leste to achieve self-sufficiency in certain key areas of
UNMISET's mandate by 20 May 2004. It is therefore
fitting that thought be given to what should follow the
expiration of UNMISET's mandate. In this regard, I
note the statement made earlier by Ambassador John
Dauth, the permanent representative of Australia,
regarding Australia's proposal for a follow-on United
Nations mission, as well as the remarks made by
Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani, the permanent
representative of Singapore.

We note that Timor-Leste remains a
predominantly agrarian society. Poverty is still a
critical problem. Unemployment is still high. Urban
unemployment is now a major concern. Although the
Government has been able to collect $44 million in
revenue this year, much of it derived from petroleum-
related earnings, the national budget still requires
international assistance to cover a shortfall of some
$26.6 million. The heavy reliance of the economy on
external factors has to be addressed on an urgent basis
by UNMISET and the Government.

In this connection, Malaysia believes that the
development of the private sector is also critical to
stimulating economic growth. The role played by the
United Nations Development Programme and the
World Bank, concerning proposals for projects that
would employ the Timorese people, will also be
critical.

The process of nation-building and reconciliation
is a highly complex and sensitive matter. At the same
time, the formation of a sustainable democratic State
would require a higher level of maturity by the people
of Timor-Leste than what they have achieved so far. It
is important that all parties concerned put aside their
differences to maintain the political stability of the
country. In this regard, we hope that the leaders of
Timor-Leste will pay equal attention to the rights of
each of the minority populations, including the
minority Muslim population. Malaysia believes that,
with political stability and sound economic and social
planning, the economy will gradually progress and
develop.

As a country in the region, Malaysia will play its
part in assisting the Government and people of Timor-
Leste in their nation-building efforts. We will assist
within our capability to do so. We would continue to
provide the appropriate assistance, bilaterally and
through regional and international efforts, including
our participation in the United Nations mission. In this
connection, we are appreciative of the acceptance of
and support given by the Government of Timor-Leste
to the current Force Commander of UNMISET, who is
from the Malaysian Armed Forces.

We have also deployed under UNMISET a self-
sustained police unit comprising 125 personnel from
the Royal Malaysian Police. In addition, we have 30
additional Malaysian civilian police personnel serving
with UNMISET. They have also been able to assist in
training the National Police of Timor-Leste. Malaysia
has also provided training to the Timorese in various
areas of human resources, including archiving,
firefighting, policing and diplomacy, through the
Malaysian Technical Cooperation Programme.

Additional areas of assistance and cooperation
between Malaysia and Timor-Leste are also being
explored. The Embassy of Malaysia in Dili would be in
a position to facilitate further cooperation. The first
Malaysian resident Ambassador to Timor-Leste has
been at his post in Dili since August. Timor-Leste has
also appointed its Ambassador to Malaysia. The
exchange of high-level visits between the two
countries, including visits in the very near future,
would definitely further strengthen relations and
cooperation.

Clearly, in this early stage of its post-
independence period, Timor-Leste will face many
challenges in nation-building. In this, the friends of
Timor-Leste in the region and beyond can play a
constructive role. In this regard, we warmly welcome
the cordial and constructive contacts and bilateral
engagements between Timor-Leste and its immediate
and important neighbour, Indonesia. We think that this
augurs well for Timor-Leste in its effort to play a
meaningful role in the region.

It is clear to Malaysia, from the Secretary-
General's report, that the international community must
assess and take stock of the progress and challenges
faced by the Government and people of Timor-Leste
and the international community in fulfilling the
common responsibility to further progress in the nation
after the withdrawal of UNMISET. It is crucial for us
to meet the urgent and indispensable requirements of
the country in the remaining period and to secure the
progress achieved so far. In this connection, my
delegation looks forward to receiving a report from the
Secretary-General in early 2004.

In conclusion, I wish to join the Secretary-
General and others in paying tribute to the late Sergio
Vieira de Mello, the Secretary-General's former
Special Representative, for the remarkable and
enormous contribution that he made to Timor-Leste
and the United Nations efforts in the country.

