Mr. Kandeel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking the High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia

and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his very
comprehensive briefing on his latest report (S/2017/379, annex) on the implementation of the Agreement. Egypt
fully supports his efforts.

Egypt welcomes the positive developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular the improvement
in good-neighbourly relations and efforts to join
European and Euro-Atlantic institutions. That could
help to consolidate security and stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and will lead the country to reforms
that will ensure complete integration with the rest
of Europe. By way of example, we would mention last
November's defence review, the European Commission
questionnaire to be completed by various institutions
in the country and the signing, last December,
of the protocol on adapting the Stabilization and
Association Agreement.

However, Egypt is concerned about the worsening
of the political situation in the country, with increased
political and religious polarization, as a result of the
attempt to submit a request for revision of the judgment
of the International Court of Justice of 26 February
2007, as well as the activities of Republika Srpska
authorities to celebrate "Republika Srpska Day", which
contravenes a decision of the Constitutional Court.
We would also like to express our concern about the
deterioration of the rule of law and the non-respect of
Court rulings by Republika Srpska authorities. Egypt
believes that will damage the country's cohesion
and stability.

Those events are taking place against the
backdrop of progress on the five objectives and two
conditions - the 5+2 plan - being delayed as a result
of various challenges and secessionist calls on the part
of certain political parties in the Serbian entity, which
represents a danger for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and which could
have repercussions not only for the country but also for
the entire region. We call upon all political leaders to
overcome their narrow political interests and advance
the national interests of the people.

Finally, Egypt reaffirms that the Dayton Accords
remain the framework for peace and the cornerstone
for institutional stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We also reaffirm the importance of respecting the unity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, its stability, territorial
integrity, its Constitution and all the rulings ofits courts
by all parties in order to build stability in the country.
Egypt calls on all factions in Bosnia and Herzegovina
to address those challenges and underscores the
importance of everyone working together to fully
implement the 5+2 plan.

Egypt urges coexistence among all communities
and religious groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Only
through serious efforts to embrace the concept of
peaceful coexistence and political consensus will the
country succeed in consolidating peace and speeding
up the reform process, which must go hand in hand
with genuine international and regional support for
those efforts.

