Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to congratulate the delegation
of Bolivia on the start of its presidency of the Security
Council and to note the timeliness of today's joint
briefing on three of its important subsidiary bodies.
We thank the briefers, all of whom clearly identified
the tasks facing the Council and the entire international
community in combating the threat of terrorism.

We are grateful to the Permanent Representative
of Peru for his detailed report on the activities of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and its Executive
Directorate (CTED). The core of the CTC's mandate
should continue to be the professional and impartial
assessment of States' anti-terrorism efforts. We
recognize that the number of monitoring missions,
including those carried out jointly with other Security
Council bodies and the Office of Counter-Terrorism,
has increased significantly, and we have taken positive
note of the efforts of Under-Secretary-General Vladimir
Voronkov and Executive Director Michele Coninsx.

We would like to remind the Council that paragraph
12 of resolution 2395 (2017) directs the leadership of
the Committee to report to the Council on problems
in obtaining the consent of States to country visits
and concluding reports, as well as on how the CTC's
recommendations are being implemented. We hope
to see a detailed analysis of the situation in this area.
We agree that providing information on current threats
and best practices in the fight against terrorism is an
extremely important aspect of the CTC's activities.
However, it is very clear that the Executive Directorate's
attention has frequently been concerned with topics
such as rehabilitating and reintegrating terrorists,
strengthening the role of women, protecting human
rights and collaborating with civil society at the expense
of its counter-terrorism tasks. Those are all important
issues, of course, but they are not directly related to
the Committee's basic mandate, and it is important to
ensure that it continues to focus on the area of counter-
terrorism or run the risk of losing key reference points.

We believe that it is counterproductive to attempt
to transform the CTC and its Executive Directorate,
with their unique tools, into a quasi-human rights
protection mechanism. Introducing individual ways
of working with some violent extremists and violent
extremist groups into the Committee's agenda is even
less acceptable, and in our view is a targeted approach
to undermining the international legal base of counter-
terrorism with the aim of exempting tame terrorists from
responsibility. Instead, we propose that the Committee
and Executive Directorate confine their focus to
genuinely topical issues of countering incitement to
terrorism and terrorist propaganda, in accordance with
resolutions 1624 (2005) and 2354 (2017), as well as
suppressing the supply of arms to terrorists, in line with
resolution 2370 (2017). There is still much to be done
in those areas.

Speaking of the unique nature of the CTC and
CTED mandate, we would like to draw attention to
the depoliticization and professionalism that have
distinguished both bodies since their establishment. We
believe that the attempts of some Committee members
to pressure the Executive Directorate into limiting its
collaboration with international organizations working
on counter-terror issues are unacceptable. We hope that
CTED itself will strictly follow its own procedures and
practices developed over the years and will continue to
be a unifying platform.

We note the work of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities and consider it one of the
Council's most effective mechanisms on the counter-
terrorism front. We are pleased to note that this is
Kazakhstan is in large part responsible for this, as is
Ambassador Umarov personally as the Committee's
current Chair.

We believe it is crucial to ensure the effective
implementation of Council resolutions on the counter-
terrorism sanctions regime with regard to the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida. Given
the growing presence of ISIL in Afghanistan and the
threat of the further expansion of jihadists into the
countries of Central Asia, we believe that one of our
priorities should be expanding the Security Council's
counter-terrorism sanctions regime to individuals and
organizations that are part of or directly connected
to the Afghan wing of the Islamic State's extremist
organization. It makes sense to continue to concentrate
on the problem of foreign terrorist fighters on the
counter-terrorism sanctions lists who are actively
moving to States of origin or to third countries from
Syria and Iraq, in order to prevent and suppress their
criminal activities.

We support the effective work of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to
resolutions 1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015) concerning
ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, whose reports are an important
tool for our joint work, and we urge Member States
to work closely with their experts. We expect the
Monitoring Team's reports to be as objective as possible
and rely only on verified sources of information. The
Monitoring Team's country visits are a significant
factor in its work, and we hope that it will focus on
trips to countries that are in armed confrontations
with international terrorism and States that are dealing
directly with terrorist efforts. That is critical to
obtaining first-hand information.

Resolution 1540 (2004) is a key, universal, legally
binding instrument in the area of the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs), requiring
all countries to adopt effective measures to prevent
weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery
and related materials from falling into the hands of
non-State actors. On the whole, we are satisfied with
the implementation of the resolution. We commend
the efforts of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) under the chairmanship of
Bolivia, and of its Group of Experts, for organizing
courses for national focal points, conducting country
visits to develop voluntary national action plans,
providing assistance to countries that need it and
maintaining contacts with relevant specialized
international, regional and subregional organizations.
However, much remains to be done to achieve the
main goal, the full implementation of the resolution by
all countries.

Russia is working actively not only to implement
the resolution but also to provide appropriate assistance
to other States. With the support of the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), we
have held courses on resolution 1540 (2004) issues for
OSCE member States in Rostov-on-Don. In a few days'
time, Russia's Federal Service for Technical and Export
Control is organizing a seminar in Moscow on export
control issues for member States of the Commonwealth
of Independent States.

The Security Council must respond robustly to
any violations of resolution 1540 (2004) and actions
to help non-State actors to gain access to weapons
of mass destruction, particularly chemical weapons.
The challenges in that area demand that we unite
international efforts and reject double standards. In
that regard, we would like to remind the Council of
the initiative by the Russian Federation to develop
and adopt a convention for the suppression of acts of
chemical and biological terrorism.

Today's discussion confirms that eradicating
terrorism is possible only with broad international
cooperation. We urge that practical steps be taken to
establish an international counter-terrorism coalition.

The meeting rose at11.35 a.m.
