Mr. de Gucht (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium is coming to the end of its mandate as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council for the
period 2007-2008. I wanted to underscore the
importance of this task for my country through my
presence here today.

First of all, I would like to welcome the presence
of my colleague, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I welcome in particular the adoption of this
resolution to renew and clarify the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).
MONUC's role in stabilizing the situation in the east of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is crucial.
Therefore, the Mission requires a clear and robust
mandate.

The resolution that we have just adopted is a
significant step forward in that regard for a number of
reasons. First, the new mandate underscores the
importance of protecting the civilian population and
states that that is an absolute priority for MONUC. The
mandate unequivocally provides for MONUC acting
independently in this area. It can now also take action
if uncontrolled elements of the Armed Forces of the
08-66423
Democratic Republic of the Congo (FARDC) commit
acts of violence against the population. However, since
the means of MONUC are limited, it cannot act
everywhere all the time. But, wherever it is present,
wherever it can be deployed on time, it must act.

Secondly, the new resolution makes it possible
for MONUC to act more independently against armed
groups. That is important because the FARDC in its
present status cannot be the sole foundation for a
strategy against armed groups. However, solid
coordination of these actions with the authorities and
with the Congolese army is still essential.

Thirdly, the mandate as now renewed gives
precedence to strengthened action by MONUC in
combating the illegal exploitation of natural resources,
one of the main causes of the ongoing conflict.
MONUC must use its powers to the utmost to carry out
inspections, so that it can make a contribution to
putting an end to the exploitation and illegal trade of
raw materials, such as coltan or cassiterite. Such action
taken by MONUC can be seen within a broader
framework in which the international community is
supporting the Congolese authorities to restore their
control over the exploitation of natural resources,
including through the mapping exercise recommended
by the group of experts of the Security Council
Sanctions Committee.

The fourth important point is an urgent appeal to
establish and implement a comprehensive plan for
security sector reform. This reform began a few years
ago but has not yet led to the establishment of truly
disciplined and trustworthy police and armed forces.
The role of MONUC in this area must be
complemented through reinforced and better
coordinated efforts by bilateral and multilateral
partners and better follow-up by the Congolese
authorities of the results of these efforts, including
through the setting up of operational command
structures.

Finally, the resolution requests the Secretary-
General to strengthen the organization of MONUC by
laying down clear and robust rules of engagement.
These rules of engagement and the concept of
operations must be well reflected in the MONUC
mandate, and there must be no ambiguity with regard
to troop commanders on the ground.

The five points I have just outlined reflect the
substance of suggestions I made a month ago when I
08-66423

spoke before the Council (see S/PV.6024). Today I am
pleased that these points can be found in the resolution
we have just adopted. I would like in particular to
thank the French delegation for the quality of the text,
which they drafted.

The resolution we have just adopted requests the
Secretary-General to make recommendations on the
progressive transfer of the civilian tasks carried out by
MONUC to the United Nations country team and to
multilateral and bilateral partners, so that MONUC can
concentrate its efforts on the east. Belgium is prepared
to contribute to the consideration of the modalities for
such a transfer and would be willing to facilitate the
setting up an association of such partners.

The additional capacities that MONUC is to
benefit from, following the adoption of resolution 1843
(2008), will not be in place for several months.
Belgium continues to support the deployment of a
transitional European force while awaiting the arrival
of reinforcements for MONUC. Belgium is prepared to
contribute to such a force. Belgium is willing to
contribute substantially to efforts to strengthen
MONUC by providing means of transport, information
analysts and training programmes.

Allow me to conclude my statement by
expressing my appreciation for the remarkable work
carried out by MONUC in very difficult conditions. I
truly hope that the new mandate will be an adequate
basis for guiding the actions of MONUC in the coming
months and that MONUC will thus fully contribute and
meet the challenges of restoring peace in this strategic
area of Africa.

