Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation): We thank the
Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006), Permanent Representative of
Colombia Nestor Osorio, for his briefing on the
Committee's work.

In the reporting period, the Committee pursued
its active work addressing the tasks facing it. In View
of the heightened sensitivity of the problem of
sanctions, it is particularly important for the
Committee to act in a balanced, objective manner and
not breach the terms of its mandate. That needs to
continue in the future, and also applies to the
Committee's Panel of Experts, working under its
leadership and giving this body practical assistance. It
is important for the activities of the experts to be built
on an impartial and independent basis, using only
credible sources and reliable information.

Russia fully complies with all Security Council
sanctions against Iran. In that context, we believe that
the effectiveness of the sanctions regime and the
overall integrality and unity of the international
community's actions on outstanding issues related to
the Iranian nuclear programme are undermined by
introducing further unilateral restrictions. In a number
of cases, they have an extraterritorial effect. That is
categorically unacceptable from an international legal
point of View. The members of the international
community must scrupulously fulfil the relevant
Security Council resolutions and not exceed their
remit.

We do not deny the gravity of the problem of
restoring trust in the exclusively peaceful nature of the
Iranian nuclear programme. We share the concerns in
that regard. At the same time, we oppose attempts to
artificially inflame the atmosphere around that subject.
After two rounds, the talks between the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and Iran should
continue. We expect a speedy resumption of dialogue
between the six international mediators with Iran, at
which the Iranian nuclear programme will be one of
the key topics of discussion.

For our part, we are doing our utmost to achieve a
comprehensive, long-term settlement to the situation
concerning the Iranian nuclear programme, using
exclusively political diplomatic means through
dialogue between the P5+1 group and Iran in a spirit of

mutual respect and on the basis of phased mutual
principles. It is important that the resolution adopted
by the IAEA Board of Governors in November and the
8 March statement by the Chinese representative to the
Board of Governors on behalf of the P5+1 both refer to
those principles and confirm the resolve of the
international community to find a comprehensive
political diplomatic settlement.

