Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): The convening
of this emergency meeting of the Security Council is
necessary and timely in response to the urgent
humanitarian situation in the occupied Gaza Strip. I
thank you, Mr. President, for the efforts undertaken in
your capacity as President of the Council to make this
meeting happen. I also thank Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his briefing, as well as the
representatives of Palestine and Israel for their views
on the matter.

As this meeting is convened in response to the
emergency humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, I
will confine my statement to this particular issue. We
associate ourselves with the statement to be delivered
later by the representative of Cuba on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

The humanitarian situation in the occupied Gaza
Strip, an issue that has for a long time been of grave
concern of the international community, the United
Nations and the Council, has gone from bad to worse
since the recent escalation of the military campaign
waged by Israel, the occupying Power, against the
Palestinian civilian population living there. It has led to
the loss of lives of dozens of innocent people, among
them women and children, and has injured many
dozens of others.

The measures undertaken by Israel over the past
few days, such as the intensified closure of the
occupied Palestinian territory by sealing all border
crossings, preventing the delivery of food supplies,
continuing to reduce fuel supplies, and even
completely cutting off fuel supplies to the main power
plant in Gaza, have made the humanitarian situation in
the occupied Gaza Strip deteriorate to an appalling
level. As reported by the representative of Palestine,
such collective punishment measures are already
affecting the people on the ground, who have to live in
darkness and with no heat owing to the electricity and
fuel supply suspension. More seriously, the stoppage of
generators in hospitals as the result of this fuel supply
suspension is affecting the lives of sick patients and
creating the potential for negative health impacts on
the civilian population.

Member States always insist that any solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian issue must be based on
guaranteeing not only the right of the Palestinian
people to establish an independent State of their own,
but also the security of Israel, a State with which Viet
Nam has established and maintains normal relations.
Nevertheless, we consider the acts undertaken by the
Israeli authorities against Palestinian civilians, like any
act that literally targets the innocent civilians of a
country, to be unjustifiable, even in the name of
security or under any other pretext. Those acts, which
constitute violations of international law, including
international human rights and humanitarian law, are
not only causing great suffering to the people on the
ground; they are also undermining the Middle East
peace process, which had gained new momentum
following the Arab Peace Initiative and the Annapolis
and Paris conferences.

Viet Nam joined other countries in calling upon
Israel to respond to the appeal of the Secretary-General
and of the international community to immediately put
an end to those measures, to open border crossings, to
restore normal fuel, medical and food supplies and to
ensure unhindered access for humanitarian assistance
to the Palestinian people in the occupied Gaza Strip,
thereby relieving the Palestinian civilian population
living there of suffering of a magnitude hardly ever
seen before and helping to bring the Middle East peace
process back on track.

We call upon the international community, United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations
to extend necessary emergency and humanitarian
assistance to the Palestinian people in the occupied
Gaza Strip, with a View to helping them to overcome
this humanitarian crisis. For its part, Viet Nam stands
ready, as ever, to contribute to the collective efforts of
the international community in this connection. We
support, and will join, the Council's timely action in
issuing a presidential statement on the matter. We look
forward to working constructively with other Council
members with a view to adopting such a statement on
the basis of the draft text already circulated.

