Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Mr. President, my
delegation also welcomes you in the Chair and wishes
you all possible success during your tenure. We would
also like to thank the Permanent Representative of
Spain for the very able and efficient manner in which
he conducted the business of the Council over the past
month.

Germany is very concerned about the recent
escalation of violence in the northern Gaza Strip. We
deeply regret the loss of human lives and call upon
both sides to avoid actions that might further aggravate
the situation.
Germany condemns the Qassam rocket attacks on
Sderot, which show a blatant disregard for human life.
We call upon the Palestinian Authority to do all it can
in order to stop those attacks. In a special meeting last
Sunday, the Palestinian Legislative Council expressed
its criticism of the Qassam rocket attacks against
Israel. We feel that that was an important sign and we
expect that it also signals that the Palestinian Authority
will take the necessary action towards de-escalation.

No doubt, the State of Israel has the right to self-
defence, in particular to protect its citizens against
militant attacks. At the same time, we believe that that
right should be exerted in accordance with the rule of
law and within the framework of international law. We
believe that it is clearly in Israel's interest to respect
the principle of proportional reaction and to take into
consideration the medium-term consequences of its
actions. Violence against the civilian population,
against people's homes, farmland and infrastructure,
will enhance misery, frustration and hatred among the
Palestinian population.

Both parties are called upon to refrain from
actions that might strengthen extremist forces and
impede the implementation of the road map. If the
cycle of attacks and counter-attacks continues it will
endanger a coordinated implementation of the
withdrawal from Gaza and parts of the northern West
Bank.

At this critical juncture, we appeal to all sides -
the Israeli Government, the Palestinian Authority and
the international community - to work together in a
constructive way towards a withdrawal that creates the
conditions for stability, economic recovery and
security.

