Mr. De Serpa Soares: I would like to begin my
briefing by providing a short outline of the legal
regime of immunity for United Nations staff members
in Kosovo, since that is an important element for the
appreciation of the overall response to the events of
28 May and their follow-up.

The regime of immunity applicable to the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and its personnel in Kosovo is spelled out
in UNMIK Regulation No. 2000/47 of 18 August 2000,
on the status, privileges and immunities of the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) and UNMIK and their personnel in
Kosovo. The pertinent provisions are sections 3.3 and
3.4, as read with section 5.

Pursuant to section 3.3 of UNMIK Regulation
2000/47, UNMIK personnel, including locally recruited
personnel, shall be immune from legal process in respect
of words spoken and all acts performed by them in their
official capacity in Kosovo. That is what is often termed
functional immunity. Pursuant to section 5 of the same
UNMIK regulation, that specific immunity continues
after the expiration of the Mission's mandate or after
the personnel are no longer employed by UNMIK.

Section 3.4 of UNMIK Regulation No. 2000/47
further provides that UNMIK personnel shall be
immune from any form of arrest or detention, and
that, if they are erroneously detained, they shall be
immediately turned over to UNMIK authorities.

Allow me to highlight that the immunity from legal
process enjoyed by UNMIK personnel in Kosovo is
held in the interests of UNMIK and not for the benefit
of the individuals themselves. Importantly, it is the
Secretary-General who has the right, and the duty, to
waive the immunity of UNMIK personnel in any case
where, in his opinion, the immunity would impede the
course of justice and can be waived without prejudice
to the interests of UNMIK. That is all clearly stated in
section 6.1 of UNMIK Regulation No. 2000/47.

As will readily be appreciated, in order for the
immunity and the procedure that I have just outlined
to be effective, the local authorities, before they take
any legal action against UNMIK personnel, should
first inform the Secretary-General - in this case, his
Special Representative, Mr. Tanin - of the facts and
circumstances of the acts of the personnel concerned
and do so with a degree of specificity sufficient for
a determination to be made on the applicability of
immunity to those acts. Mr. Tanin would then inform
the authorities whether immunity applied and, if it did
not, the legal action against the UNMIK personnel
could go ahead.

Resolution 1244 (1999), pursuant to which
UNMIK was established, remains in force and the
legal framework established by UNMIK pursuant
to the powers assigned to it under resolution 1244
(1999) continues to apply, albeit under very different
circumstances today. That includes UNMIK Regulation
No. 2000/47 on the Status, Privileges and Immunities
of KFOR and UNMIK and their Personnel in Kosovo.

Following the adoption of the declaration of
independence by the Assembly of Kosovo on 17 February
2008, the Secretary-General reported to the Security
Council on that development and stated that

"pending guidance from the Council, the
United Nations would continue to operate on the
understanding that resolution 1244 (1999) remained
in force and that UNMIK would continue to
implement its mandate in the light of the evolving

circumstances" (S/2008/354, para. 4).

Since that development, the Secretary-General has
maintained a position of status neutrality. That refers
to the continued operation of UNMIK in the light of
the prevailing circumstances and to the constructive
engagement with the Kosovo authorities in a manner
that does not imply recognition of any statehood. That
approach continues to be followed.

As Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Tanin has noted, two UNMIK staff members
were arrested and detained on 28 May during a police
operation in northern Kosovo. They were later released
from detention. The internationally recruited staff
member Mr. Mikhail Krasnoshchekov, who is the
team leader of the UNMIK office in Zubin Potok and
a Russian national, was released on 28 May. Mr. Dejan
Dimovic, a Kosovo Serb and a Programme Assistant
in the UNMIK office in Zubin Potok, was released on
29 May. The arrest and detention of Mr. Krasnoshchekov
and Mr. Dimovic were not consistent with their
privileges and immunities as UNMIK personnel, as set
forth in UNMIK Regulation No. 2000/47.

It is our understanding from the facts, as we
know them so far, that both Mr. Krasnoshchekov and
Mr. Dimovic were on official assignment to monitor
the police operations in northern Kosovo at the time of
their arrest. As Mr. Tanin noted - and I must say that
we share his alarm, it is of serious concern that both
staff members were apparently beaten and mistreated
upon their arrest. Both required medical attention upon
their release. Mr. Krasnoshchekov was transferred to
a hospital in Belgrade on 30 May, where he remains
admitted. Mr. Dimovic, for his part, was hospitalized
in Kosovo on 30 May and released from hospital on
3 June.

As is required in all such incidents, the United
Nations Department of Safety and Security undertook an
internal investigation to gather all available information
regarding the circumstances surrounding the arrest and
detention of Mr. Krasnoshchekov and Mr. Dimovic and
to look into the allegations by the Kosovo authorities
regarding their conduct. It is our understanding that both
staff members still face the possibility of criminal legal
process in Kosovo. Regarding Mr. Krasnoshchekov,
UNMIK is in receipt of a request from the Chief
Prosecutor in the municipality of Mitrovica for a waiver
of immunity which, although the name is not correctly
stated in the document, we believe concerns him. The
request is made in respect of charges of co-perpetration
in "obstructing official persons in performing official

duties" and in "participating in a crowd committing
a criminal offence and hooliganism". That request is
being looked at by my Office.

As for Mr. Dimovic, UNMIK has not received a
request for a waiver of his immunity. What we know
is that he was arraigned on charges of "obstructing
official persons in performing official duties" and
that he appeared with five co-accused before the
Basic Court of Mitrovica, Zubin Potok branch, on
29 May. The hearing was to consider a request from
the Prosecutor for his continued detention, as well as
for the detention of the five other persons arraigned
with him. UNMIK has obtained and forwarded to
United Nations Headquarters a summary translation of
those proceedings. On the basis of that document, we
understand that Mr. Dimovic's release, and that of his
five co-arraigned, on 29 May was decided on the basis
of a lack of sufficient evidence to confirm a reasonable
suspicion of the alleged criminal offence. Mr. Dimovic
was represented by private counsel in the hearing and
accompanied by an UNMIK staff member. As we
understand it, the decision to release the co-accused is
still subject to an appeal by the Prosecution. The appeal
is scheduled to be heard during the week of 10 June.

The results of a thorough internal United
Nations investigation will help to establish a better
understanding of the relevant facts, which will aid the
Organization in considering the next steps, including
under UNMIK Regulation No. 2000/47 on the Status,
Privileges and Immunities of KFOR and UNMIK and
their Personnel in Kosovo.

Before I conclude, I would recall that Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin has noted
UNMIK's receipt of a formal notification on 31 May,
declaring Mr. Krasnoshchekov persona non grata in
Kosovo. As Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Tanin noted in a very clear statement to the
Kosovo authorities, and as the Deputy Spokesperson
also noted at his noon briefing of 3 June, the doctrine
of persona non grata is not applicable to United Nations
personnel and is not contemplated under UNMIK
Regulation No. 2000/47. Any concerns regarding a
member of UNMIK personnel should be addressed to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin
so that UNMIK can address the matter in line with its
status, privileges and immunities. In that regard, I Wish
to emphasize that allegations of misconduct by United
Nations personnel throughout the Organization are
taken very seriously by the Organization and prompt
action is taken where it is warranted.

The fullest measure of cooperation by the Kosovo
authorities will continue to be required to facilitate
the United Nations investigation so as to allow the
Secretary-General to determine the next steps under
the legal framework that I have outlined.

I would like to thank the Council and its members
for the opportunity to provide this briefing.

