Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, our delegation, too, wishes to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your work in the presidency
during the month of December and to thank you above
all for convening this open debate. We reiterate the
importance of the Security Council's holding public
meetings that enable all the Members of the
Organization to express their views and to interact with
Council members. Also allow me to thank through you
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
for his very comprehensive briefing of the Council in
this morning's meeting.

The issue of drug abuse and illicit trafficking in
narcotics and related crimes is one of the most
disturbing problems on the international agenda today.
The reports prepared by UNODC, the International
Narcotics Control Board and other sources cite
countries in every part of the world - consumer
countries, countries that produce the various drugs and
countries of transit and sale. The Argentine Republic
upholds the principle of shared responsibility between
producer, consumer and transit countries and stresses
the need for a focus balanced between combating drug
trafficking and related crimes and taking measures to
prevent consumption and ensure help for addicts.

In the fight against drugs and drug trafficking, a
comprehensive approach is needed, through
coordinating policies for monitoring trafficking,
preventing addiction and helping addicts. At the same
time, it is essential that States' responses be
strengthened through an ongoing dialogue with civil
society, and that the fight against drug trafficking and
related crimes be conducted with full respect for
human rights and with a nuanced focus that seeks the
social rehabilitation of addicts.

We are convinced that it is important to have a
regional focus that reinforces cooperation at the
international level. In our hemisphere, the Inter-
American Drug Abuse Control Commission monitors
the implementation of binding legal instruments and
the Anti-Drug Strategy that was approved in Buenos
Aires in 1996. We believe that monitoring and
assessment should be conducted through multilateral
mechanisms that coordinate international cooperation
and are based on objective, reliable information. We
particularly wish to highlight the importance of the
regional Multilateral Evaluation Mechanism as an
objective instrument for measuring member States'
progress in controlling the illicit drug problem, as well
as for identifying vulnerabilities and areas that need
improvement and for strengthening solidarity and
cooperation in the hemisphere.

Argentina takes an active part in international
initiatives on this subject, and we contribute to the
work of the United Nations Commission on Narcotic
Drugs, of which we are a member. We also support the
central role of the International Narcotics Control
Board and UNODC, as well as other multilateral
initiatives and agreements. Among those I should
single out the Political Declaration adopted in March
during the high-level segment of the fifty-second
session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs (see E/2009/28-E/CN.7/2009/12), which proposes several
measures to intensify international cooperation, a key
factor in this area.

I shall conclude by stressing that the transnational
nature of illicit drug trafficking calls for a coordinated
response on the part of the international community
and of every region. To that end, the action of existing
mechanisms with specific competencies must be
strengthened in order to fully implement international
and regional legal instruments. That will strengthen
judicial cooperation and cooperation among security
forces and will ensure the resources essential for
combating this phenomenon through international
cooperation, even in the most vulnerable regions.

