Mr. Danon (Israel): Israel was not blessed with
an abundant supply of fresh water. Since its early
beginnings, we had to find innovative ways to provide
our people with access to this vital resource. As the late
President of Israel Shimon Peres once said,

"In Israel, a land lacking in natural resources,
we learned to appreciate our greatest national
advantage: our minds."

Faced with adversity, Israel developed groundbreaking
water technologies, including drip-irrigation systems.
In Israel we make every drop count.

While Israel still faces challenges to peace and
security, it has successfully overcome its water crisis.
After years of water shortage, today Israel enjoys the
first water surplus in its history. In less than seven
decades, the pioneering spirit of Israelis has made the
desert bloom and transformed the land of swamps and
sand into a start-up nation. Out of necessity, Israelis
learned to squeeze the most out of every drop, while
finding solutions to create as much as possible using as
little as possible.

Today, Israel is committed to sharing those
solutions with countries in need. This strong sense
of responsibility towards others is rooted in our own
history and the Jewish principle of tikkun olam - the
duty to repair the world. It was in that spirit that our
founding fathers and mothers created Mashav, Israel's
Agency for International Development Cooperation.
Mashav utilizes cutting-edge technologies such as
drip irrigation in humanitarian operations around the
world. Drip by drip, Mashav experts are introducing
this technology around the world, making a big splash
from the greenhouses in South Africa to the sugarcane
fields of Peru.

Israel continues to seek out new partnerships
and to build bridges between nations. In 2012, the
Governments of Israel, Italy and Senegal entered
into a trilateral partnership to address the critical
issues of food security and income growth for the
people of Senegal. Today, Israel is helping the people
of Senegal by sharing modern farming practices, as
well as technical and business skills, with smallholder
farmers, especially women. By decreasing labour
requirements for irrigation and weeding, Mashav
experts are empowering Senegalese women, helping
them to improve crop yields, achieve financial security
and bring a better quality of life to their families
and communities.

Israel's water cooperation also takes place close to
our home. Since the historic peace treaty with Jordan
in 1994, the two countries have worked closely in many
areas, including water technology. Recently, Israel
signed a new agreement to supply Jordan with additional
fresh water from the Sea of Galilee, thereby creating
benefits for both countries and further strengthening
our partnership for peace.

As we did with our friends in Africa and with
our Jordanian neighbours, Israel is ready to assist
the Palestinian Authority to address critical water
challenges. We have taken important steps towards
improving the conditions on the ground. Israel recently
authorized additional water supplies to the Palestinians
in the West Bank and Gaza within the framework of the
memorandum of understanding known as the Red-Dead
Memorandum. The additional supply to Gaza covers the
entire amount of the Palestinian request for increased
water supply from Israel. The Palestinians have made
clear that they are not interested in an additional supply
beyond that amount.

Israel is currently preparing a comprehensive,
multi-year master plan for improving the water
infrastructure in the West Bank. Moreover, Israel has
also reaffirmed its approval of desalination, water
infrastructure and sewage projects in Gaza, including a
large desalination plant that is being planned.

Unfortunately, the Palestinian leadership refuses
to cooperate with the Government of Israel on water-
related issues. Despite our dedicated efforts, we
have encountered several obstacles standing in the
way of the improvement of the current situation. The
Palestinian Authority has yet to sign the protocols for
the implementation of the Red-Dead Memorandum, and
therefore prevents the implementation of the authorized
addition of water to the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip. Moreover, due to the Palestinian Authority's
unwillingness, the joint water committee has yet to
be renewed, preventing progress on dozens of water
infrastructure projects in the West Bank.

Those actions on the part of the Palestinian Authority
clearly deepen the crisis and hinder progress towards
a solution. We continue to hope that the Palestinian
Authority will start demonstrating responsibility for
its own people. However, the international community
should be aware of the fact that, without an immediate
change in the Palestinian refusal to engage with Israel
on the critical issue of water, a severe water crisis is to
be expected this coming summer.

Water knows no borders and technology knows
no language. United States President John F. Kennedy
once said,

"Anyone who can solve the problems of water will
be worthy of two Nobel prizes - one for peace and
one for science."

Israel is committed to promoting innovative solutions to
the challenges of water to bring nations closer together
and to bring the life-giving power of water to all people.

