Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir Tanin, for its informative
briefing and for his work. We express our appreciation
to and welcome the First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Daeic',
and Ms. Vlora Citaku for their statements.

Bolivia calls for the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999), including respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of the Republic
of Serbia. That resolution remains fully in force,
requiring ongoing supervision by the international
community. In that context, we reiterate that any
attempt to transform the security forces of Kosovo into
an armed force would be in contravention of resolution
1244 (1999) and of international law. We call on the
authorities of Kosovo to refrain from such action.

At the same time, we view with great concern and
condemn the violent acts during the 26 March visit by
the Director of the Office of the Government of Serbia
for Kosovo and Metohija, Marko Duric'. We urge the
authorities of Kosovo to avoid such occurrences,
and on both parties to refrain from inflammatory
rhetoric, which does nothing but detract from any
future arrangement between Belgrade and Pristina and
undermine efforts to build trust between the parties.
Likewise, we call on the authorities to investigate
those events.

Furthermore, we express our concern regarding
the slowness of progress in the investigation into the
assassination of Mr. Oliver Ivanovie, leader of the
Civic Initiative "Freedom, Democracy, Justice" party.
As long as the investigation stalls, efforts intended to
build trust between the communities of Kosovo will
continue to be undermined. We therefore call on the
relevant authorities to redouble the investigation into
the events that culminated in the assassination of the
Kosovo-Serb politician on 16 January.

With regard to the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and
the Specialist Prosecutor's Office, we reiterate that the
rule of law and its impartial application are essential
to fight impunity. Perpetrators of war crimes must
answer for their actions, regardless of their condition or
origin. In that connection we hope that the authorities
of Kosovo fulfil their responsibilities and obligations
pursuant to the agreements reached.

Bolivia values the efforts carried out by the
European Union and the mediation of the High
Representative of the European Union for External and
Security Affairs aimed at advancing the implementation
of existing agreements. In our view, it is important that
the parties comply with the commitments undertaken
in the negotiations under the auspices of the European
Union. In that regard, we encourage them to impart
new energy to the dialogue process, which seems to
have stalled after a brief resumption.

We also call on the parties to work towards apeaceful
solution through dialogue and in compliance with the
obligation to negotiate, as stipulated in international
law. Along the same lines, the establishment of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
in Kosovo, set forth in the Brussels Agreement more
than four years ago, should be established in accordance
with that Agreement; failure to do so would contravene
the Agreement. We call on the Kosovo authorities to
respect what was agreed and make progress in that
regard in order to ensure the security and rights of
Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija.

We appreciate the work done by UNMIK in
accordance with its mandate within the framework of
resolution 1244 (1999). We encourage the Mission to
continue to work on building confidence between the
parties, to resort to good offices to ease tensions, to
use peaceful means to seek consensual solutions and
to promote political dialogue and respect for rights in
safeguarding peace, as provided for in the Charter of
the United Nations.

We also commend the work that UNMIK
continues to do through its engagement with municipal
authorities and representatives of the Kosovo province
in protecting the rights of communities, promoting
intercommunity reconciliation, strengthening the
rule of law, bolstering interethnic cooperation and
facilitating the return of internally displaced persons,
as well as its work in providing document certification
services. In particular, in the past period, we wish
to highlight the importance of its work on gender
equality and the activities carried out on the occasion
of International Women's Day.

Finally, in line with the Secretary-General's
statement in his latest report (S/2018/407), we call on
the international community to contribute to the trust
fund established to implement community-assistance
projects to benefit the Roma, Egyptian and Ashkali
minority communities affected by lead poisoning in
Kosovo, in order to meet their needs in terms of health,
economic development and infrastructure.

