Mr. Alfassam (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, the delegation of Kuwait would like to
congratulate you, Madam President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council. We wish you every
success and would also like to take this opportunity to
thank the delegation of Peru for its success during its
presidency for the month of April.

I would like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
his very useful briefing and his most recent report
(S/2018/416, annex) on the implementation of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Peace Agreement. We would
like to assure him of our full support for his work in
implementing his mandate and his efforts to help the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina deal with their
many challenges.

We welcome the positive developments that have
occurred, including the implementation of various
commitments such as Euro-Atlantic integration,
the response to the European questionnaire and the
adoption of a fiscal law, which will be finalized as
soon as the International Monetary Fund concludes
its consideration of the law. All these efforts will help
the country implement the necessary reforms that will
enable it to join the European Union.

Two decades after its signing, the Framework Peace
Agreement for Bosnia and Herzegovina remains the
cornerstone of the country's institutional stability and
a stable framework for ensuring lasting peace. We are
concerned about the fact that the report cites a number
of challenges related to the peace agreement during the
period covered, particularly statements inciting hatred
and divisive rhetoric. We urge all of the country's
political leaders to prioritize the national interests of
the Bosnian people and to reject narrow ethnic interests
that undermine stability and unity. In that regard, we
urge all political leaders to place national interests
above any other consideration and to rise above narrow
political and ethnic interests that would undermine the
chances for progress and stability, and we call them
to engage in serious political consultations to discuss
reforms proposed to the electoral law and the Criminal
Procedural Code in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in order to
avoid a potential serious political crisis in the country.

These developments are taking place at the same
time that we are seeing limited progress towards the
implementation of the 5+2 plan, which has hindered
the closure of the Office of the High Representative,
in particular with regard to the registration of military
assets, as mentioned in the report (S/2018/416, annex). Kuwait fully supports the Office of the High
Representative, in accordance with the Dayton Peace
Agreement and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, and calls on the High Representative to step
up his efforts to ensure the full implementation of the
5-1-2 plan.

Lastly, Kuwait would like to reaffirm the importance
of respecting the unity, stability and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, its Constitution and all the
decisions issued by the courts, which should be upheld
by all the parties concerned in order to strengthen
stability in the country. We call on all stakeholders
to tackle the challenges they are facing and to pool
their efforts to ensure the full implementation of the
5-1-2 plan.

