Mr. Harasymenko (Ukraine): I would like to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.
Indeed, it is very important to develop effective
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and the relevant statutes of regional
organizations.

In his latest report (S/2016/621) to the Security
Council on the cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and other organizations, the Secretary-
General underscored that such cooperation had
significantly grown and diversified in recent years, and
had proved critical in ensuring effective international
peace and security engagements. We fully agree with
his conclusion and we welcome positive examples of
such cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union, the African Union, the League of
Arab States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and many others. Such organizations have proved to be
capable of taking the lead in promoting peace, security
and stability.

As a current non-permanent member of the
Security Council, Ukraine has already commended
their increased contribution to the maintenance of
peace and security and has welcomed their continued
and important efforts and enhanced peacekeeping
role to prevent, mediate and settle conflicts. Still,
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations has yet to reach its full potential and
should be substantially mainstreamed, since the
nature and structure of that cooperation are often
overshadowed or undermined by the interests of certain
Council members. Unfortunately, we must admit that,
in today's world, the roles of regional organizations in
maintaining peace and security are rather different.
Some of them are committed to their charters and
work to prevent, manage and resolve crises. Others,
on the contrary, tend to abstain from such actions and
politicize their activities because of the distractive
actions of their members.

Since the topic of our discussion today is the
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), I would
like to raise a couple of issues that are very important
for creating a full picture of the nature, results and
effects of that interaction.

First, let me remind the Council that, according to
the CSTO and CIS Charters, respectively, their members
should be "acting in strict compliance with their
obligations" under the Charter of the United Nations
and Security Council resolutions "being guided by
the universally recognized principles of international
law"; and "build their relations in accordance" with
the principles of "the inviolability of State borders,
the recognition of existing borders and the rejection of
unlawful territorial annexations" and the "resolution of
disputes by peaceful means".

However, the facts are very clear. These
organizations demonstrated a complete lack of will to
take appropriate measures to respond to the conflicts in
the region. First of all, I refer to the Russian aggression
in Ukraine and Georgia. The Russian Federation,
one of the founding members of these organizations,
continues to blatantly violate the Charter of the United
Nations, the CIS and CSTO Charters, international law,
as well as multilateral and bilateral agreements.

At this very moment, these organizations are still
pretending that there is no ongoing Russian aggression
against Ukraine, no occupation of Crimea, no de facto
occupation of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, and no war
crimes committed against the Ukrainian and Georgian
peoples. I take this opportunity to call on the member
States of these organizations to speak up collectively
and individually and to make a difference. This is also
about their security and their future. Their voices are
important in our common efforts aimed at defending
the Charter of the United Nations and the credibility
of the cooperation of regional organizations with the
United Nations.

Until then, unfortunately, we cannot agree that
the CIS and the CSTO are able to "make every effort
to achieve pacific settlement of local disputes", as
enshrined in Article 52, paragraph 2, of the Charter
of the United Nations. Until then, we do not see any
added value in deepening interactions between these
organizations and the United Nations on the basis of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. In
that regard, I would like to commend the SCO members
that during the conflict in Georgia in 2008 underscored
the need to respect the territorial integrity of States.
We wish the same approach to be maintained vis-a-vis
the temporary occupation of Crimea and the Russian
aggression against Ukraine.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore that
the Russian aggression against Ukraine clearly
demonstrated the insufficiency of mechanisms of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. In our View, there is an urgent need
to develop mechanisms of coordination for regional
organizations with the United Nations at a stage when
there are early signs of emergency. It would help us to
shorten the time needed to start actions for the sake of
the prevention and settlement of conflicts.

