I join Council members in thanking Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for presenting her Office's the thirty-first report to the Security Council pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). Efforts by the Government of the Sudan to bring justice to the victims of the conflict in Darfur, as outlined in the Prosecutor's report, are laudable. Together with the ongoing negotiations in Juba, they are pivotal for restoring peace and stability in Darfur and reconciliation throughout the entire country. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes these positive developments. However, we remain concerned about the protracted security and humanitarian challenges in Darfur, including threats against internally displaced persons; grave violations against children, persons with disabilities, women and youth made most vulnerable; and sporadic inter-communal conflicts. We therefore renew our call for institutional strengthening and capacity-building to protect the most dispossessed groups, and for the prosecution of perpetrators of atrocity crimes. We also look forward to the implementation of resolutions 2525 (2020) and 2524 (2020) to assist in this regard. My delegation is mindful that the Sudan is not party to the Rome Statute and that its national judiciary is primarily responsible for prosecuting atrocity crimes. Equally, we are cognizant that all States are required to fulfil their international obligations in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. With the adoption of resolution 1593 (2005), both the Sudan and the ICC were encouraged to cooperate and engage constructively to tackle impunity and do justice by the victims of atrocity crimes. In this context, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines stresses the importance of cooperation and reiterates the principle of complementarity in the application of international criminal law. We applaud the efforts of countries that led to the surrender of Mr. Ali Kushayb. We also emphasize that the jurisdiction of the ICC is invoked only when States are unable or unwilling to prosecute alleged perpetrators. Finally, my delegation remains confident in the ICC's fundamental role of providing justice for the victims of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity, as well as ending impunity for perpetrators of these atrocities. We stand in solidarity with the people of the Sudan and reiterate our commitment to the ICC. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines looks forward to the day when all States Members of the United Nations can ratify the Rome Statute.
