Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
would like to say how grateful we are to you, Mr. Minister,
for convening this open meeting of the Security Council on
the situation in Angola. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Fowler, the Chairman of the Council's
sanctions Committee on Angola, for his constant efforts to
ensure the follow-up to the strict implementation of the
sanctions regime against UNITA. Our meeting today
follows the Council's very important debate yesterday on
general questions relating to sanctions - which was also
held under your presidency, Sir - and clearly
demonstrates, if there is a need to do so, the resolve of the
Council and, through it, that of the international community
to give its full attention to the question of sanctions
imposed by the Council in accordance with the Charter with
a view to establishing peace and security.

In the case of Angola, sanctions against UN ITA have
proved their effectiveness because they have significantly
weakened Mr. Savimbi' s military capability and reduced his
supply sources and the income he utilizes for the war effort.
The Chairman of the Committee and the Panel of Experts
have made laudable efforts to ensure rigorous follow-up to
the implementation of the sanctions regime. Their tenacity
has enabled us to send an unequivocal message as to the
Council's determination to ensure respect for its resolutions
and to demonstrate to UNITA that it cannot indefinitely
continue to threaten peace and stability in Angola and in
the subregion.

The report of the Panel of Experts is the outcome of
six months of research and investigation. That report, which
we welcome, has been the object of a prior debate within
the Security Council and has raised questions as to some of
its conclusions and recommendations.

Although, as we said earlier, irrefutable evidence is
required, commensurate with the significance of the deeds
reported, we still believe that the report deserves special
attention and serious consideration by many States and
parties.

The official responses addressed to the Security
Council following the publication of the report, and the
measures already taken by some countries that have, inter
alia, established national commissions of inquiry, certainly
demonstrate the serious approach to this question in Africa
and elsewhere. These are important inputs that should be
taken duly into account in order to give a complete picture
of violations of the sanctions regime against UNITA. They
will certainly be helpful to the future monitoring
mechanism as it carries out its tasks.
The six-month period provided for in the resolution
that is to be adopted, which we support, will enable the
Council to have a better grasp of this issue.

