Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): France,
together with the European Union, offers its steadfast
support for the two-State solution. We continue to defend
this position, not only because it is just and in line with
international law, but also because it is realistic. It is the
only way to meet the aspirations of both the Israeli and
the Palestinian peoples and, ultimately, bring lasting
peace to the region. It must enable the establishment
of a fully functioning Palestinian State, living in peace
and security alongside the State of Israel, within secure
and internationally recognized borders along the 1967
lines, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States.

For its part, France will continue to defend, as
it always has, the creation of a Palestinian State. We
will also continue to oppose, as we always have, all
those who attack the security - and indeed, the very
existence - of Israel. Every day we witness how
the absence of a political perspective fuels despair,
radicalization in all its forms and the risk of regional
destabilization. The parties must therefore refrain from
any measure contrary to international law that could
endanger the viability of the two-State solution.

Bolstered by those convictions, the international
community and the Council in particular have defined
and endorsed this two-State solution. All Council
resolutions remain valid and relevant, from resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) to resolution 2334 (2016)
on settlement building, as well as resolution 1515
(2003), adopted unanimously by the Council and which
enshrines the two-State solution. The jurisprudence of
the Council must be respected in its entirety; it is not
an a la carte menu.

At a time when the prospect of a two-State solution
may seem to be further and further away, it is more
important than ever to remind the parties that there is
no viable alternative. Any peace plan that distances
itself from the two-State solution is an illusion. The
aspirations of one people cannot be sustainably realized
to the detriment of the rights and aspirations of the other.
The economic development of the occupied Palestinian
territories is a necessary condition, and that is why
France and the European Union support the action of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians. But that is not
enough - there will be no peace without a genuine and
comprehensive political solution.

The most recent developments must be considered
in the light of this collectively defined objective of the
two-State solution. France welcomes the announcement
made by President Abbas to the General Assembly on
the holding of general elections (see A/74/PV.7). In
order for these elections to be pluralistic and inclusive,
it is important that they be held in all Palestinian
territories, including the Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem.
In any case, President Abbas' announcement must be
an element of inter-Palestinian reconciliation, which
constitutes one of the conditions for achieving peace.
I wish to highlight the efforts made by Egypt in
this regard.

The arrangement reached at the beginning of
October between Israel and the Palestinian Authority on
the transfer ofincome is also commendable, pending the
conclusion of a comprehensive and lasting agreement.
Despite that, the situation on the ground continues to
deteriorate and renders peace more difficult. In the
West Bank and East Jerusalem, the ongoing building
of settlements, illegal under international law as
reaffirmed by resolution 2334 (2016), is fuelling
tensions and undermining the viability of the two-State
solution. Recent statements on the possible annexation
of certain areas of the West Bank are also very
worrying. This would constitute a barrier to peace and a
grave and unprecedented violation of international law.
Along with our European partners, we will continue to
monitor the situation closely, including any movements
towards annexation, and act accordingly.

In Gaza, despite the maintenance of a precarious
calm and respect for the truce since mid-September,
the humanitarian situation remains catastrophic.
Beyond emergency responses, there will be no lasting
improvement in the situation in Gaza without a
political solution involving the return of the Palestinian
Authority and the lifting of the blockade, with credible
security guarantees for Israel. We call for respect for the
right to peaceful demonstration and the proportionate
use of force.

As we await lasting peace, which will provide ajust
response to the issue of refugees, our collective support
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East remains essential.
Such support is all the more important as we approach
the triennial renewal of its mandate by the General
Assembly this fall.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that France will
continue to work towards the two-State solution.
Because France is a friend to both Israel and Palestine,
we stand ready to encourage them to resume dialogue.
Since the spring of 2014, there has been no peace
process, only constant announcements of postponed
initiatives that never see the light of day. The Security
Council must play its role, both in terms of ensuring the
implementation of its past resolutions and supporting
the emergence of a solution that can only come from the
parties themselves.

