Mr. Essy (spoke in French): I am very moved to
be in this Chamber again, where I have felt much joy
and emotion in the past, given all the crises that we
have had to address here.

At the outset, I am very pleased, on my own
behalf and on behalf of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), sincerely to congratulate the Republic of
Mauritius on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. Through Mauritius, the entire
continent of Africa is honoured and recognized as one
of the main actors in international relations today.

Addressing the other African members of the
Council, Cameroon and Guinea, I wish to pay tribute to
their commitment to Africa and to the international
community as a whole and to their efforts to promote
international peace and security. I also thank the
Permanent Representatives of the outgoing African
members, Mali and Tunisia. Finally, I pay tribute to all
members of the Council, entrusted by the international
community to discharge the noble mission assigned to
them by the Charter. I congratulate them on their work on
behalf of peace and stability throughout the world and
particularly in Africa. As it is early in the year, I extend to
them my best wishes for a pleasant and happy year.

The United Nations, and particularly the Security
Council, have adopted the custom of regularly inviting
the Organization of African Unity to address them on
the situation in Africa. Such exchanges offer us an
excellent opportunity to share the hopes and fears of a
continent that, despite its apparent marginalization,
continues to believe deeply in the ideals of the 1945
Charter. It is also an opportunity to exchange with all
the members of the Council certain reflections on the
crucial issues and on ways of overcoming the
difficulties encountered by some of our African States.
Thus, today's meeting itself will reveal the interest and
the attention that the Council and, through it, the
United Nations and its Secretary-General have devoted
to the future of our continent.

The recent decisions taken by the Council,
particularly with regard to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, also indicate the resolute commitment of
the Council, which cannot be separated from the
unceasing efforts, day after day, of my friend Kofi
Annan to secure a better future for Africa.

At the top of our concerns are the problems in
achieving peace and security and the conflict situations
that unfortunately continue to characterize the African
continent. This situation intervenes at a very particular
international juncture, following the events of 11
September 2001, which have made the world aware
more than ever that security issues are a vital concern,
not only for certain countries and peoples, but also for
the entire international community. This context lends
even more significance to our meeting and also allows
the Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) to insist on the part the continental
organization intends to play in strengthening the
instruments to combat terrorism and, in a more general
way, to promote peace and security in the world.

From this point of View, the contribution of the
OAU is a natural result of the partnership it has
established with the United Nations over the years.
Without a doubt, Africa is aware that it needs to work
together with the United Nations and other
international, regional and subregional organizations to
seek ways and means of strengthening peace in the
world. To that end, many concrete actions to prevent,
manage and settle conflicts have been carried out, and

these have often resulted in solutions to preserve the
peace.

Without failing to recognize the many political
and financial constraints, among others, that interfere
with the functioning of the mechanism adopted by our
continent in 1993, that mechanism, without a doubt,
has nevertheless been extremely useful in reconciling
institutional and programmatic approaches. The
ongoing reform of the structures, working methods and
procedures of the central organ gives us an opportunity
to improve performance and learn from experience.

If, at the continental level, the fact that the OAU
has undertaken work on conflict situations permits in
many respects a certain optimism, yet at the
international level there is a certain scepticism, which
is a cause of concern for us. The globalization currently
under way, and the profound technological changes that
accompany it, illustrate clearly some of the handicaps
Africa suffers from and highlight our fear of seeing our
continent disconnected from the movement that is
fashioning international relations and their current
evolution. If no serious thought is given to improving
the situation and allowing Africa to truly become part
of the new international trade system, the
marginalization of our continent could be seriously
detrimental to its stability, security and development.

As I have said, today's meeting is taking place at
a very critical time, when conflict situations,
particularly on the African continent, are characterized
not only by their increasing number, but also by their
complexity and the multiple internal, regional and
international dimensions that they encompass. If there
has been a significant drop in the number of inter-State
conflicts in Africa, this development has been offset by
the appearance of internal conflicts, for which the
settlement mechanisms of the United Nations and the
OAU do not always seem adequate.

The Secretary-General of the United Nations has
often reiterated that the problems of international
security - and the situation in Africa is one of the
chief concerns - arise in a context different from that
of 1945, when the Charter was adopted. From now on,
it is not so much the security of States that is at stake,
but the very existence of the State as an organized
system of government. Today, there is as much need to
guarantee the collective security of States as provided
for under the Charter of the United Nations and
increasingly taken over by regional and subregional
organizations as there is need to ensure the global
security of societies beset by civil war or other threats
like organized crime and major pandemics like
HIV/AIDS. The wars that continue to tear Africa apart
often lead to both economic and social disaster. It is out
of recognition of this that greater cooperation has
developed between the OAU and the United Nations,
and Kofi Annan has been personally involved in this
area. His 1998 report was indeed a watershed, among
other things, in its focus on the causes of conflict in
Africa, and it attracted the attention of many Security
Council members to the necessity of investing in the
settlement of conflicts.

Common cultural, geographic and historical
factors are determining factors in conflict settlement.
Our approach must consist in identifying them and
using them to promote the means of conflict settlement.
In the case of partnership with the United Nations,
regional organizations and the OAU are increasingly
sought after. Their proximity to hotspots and wars
undoubtedly helps them identify more easily the causes
of conflicts and the actors involved. This proximity
also gives them the advantage of being able to
anticipate the reaching of an agreement that is likely to
end a crisis. That being said, this same proximity can
also generate tensions and make certain situations more
complex, in particular when neighbouring countries do
not feel the obligation to remain impartial and become
parties to the conflict.

However, the challenge of security is that it
requires the input and contribution of everyone.
Therefore, we continue to advocate the strengthening
of the partnership between the OAU and the United
Nations. This must also extend to subregional African
organizations, which have demonstrated their real
commitment and availability to help in conflict
management directed by our continental organization.
Mme. Frechette has touched on this subject. The
modalities of the partnership must be further refined,
however, so that efforts at the subregional, continental
and global levels are consistently harmonized and
coordinated.

In this spirit, I remain deeply convinced that in
order to ensure an effective partnership, the United
Nations must intensify cooperation with continental
and subregional organizations, which are the very
foundation of and key partners in any global approach
to conflict settlement on the continent.

Following on from this policy of partnership and
cooperation that we are trying to define and build
together, I would like to recall and emphasize the
position of the OAU between the United Nations and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of peace
and security in Africa. Thus, the OAU and, even more,
the African Union, plays a key role in promoting and
coordinating activities deployed by regional entities.
As we are considering ways and means to strengthen
this cooperation, I would suggest a mechanism for
consultations between the Security Council and the
central organ of the OAU mechanism on conflict
resolution.

In this context, I would like to emphasize - not
without pride and satisfaction - the spirit of
collaboration, cooperation and coordination that
inspired the efforts of the OAU, the United Nations, the
European Union and other partners in their search for a
solution to the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea.
This exemplary coordination, based on a collective
approach and a common vision of the means of conflict
settlement, was very helpful in finding an effective
solution and should, you will agree, be seriously
considered as a model for addressing other conflicts,
especially on the African continent.
The partnership between the OAU and the United
Nations must also ensure the necessary coordination of
peace initiatives in Africa. If the increasing number of
such initiatives reflects the commitment of African
countries to peace, they still need to be coordinated
more effectively. As for the role of the United Nations,
I would emphasize the Council's primary role in the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
success of this partnership, which we all wish for,
depends fundamentally on the will and ability of the
Council to act as the guarantor of international peace
and security. It depends largely on the commitment of
the United Nations to work side by side with the OAU
and subregional African organizations.

In emphasizing the paramount responsibility of
the Security Council, we must remember that Africa
remains determined to shoulder the responsibilities that
are its own. It is the most interested party that must
address the crises prevailing on the continent. Because
of this fact, the OAU has for some years been trying to
assume its full share of responsibility. It has also been
very dynamic in conflict prevention, management and
resolution. Its efforts to find a solution to the conflict
between Ethiopia and Eritrea met with outstanding
success in the Algiers Agreements. Its firm
commitment, since 1997, to stand by the Comoros
parties in their efforts to reach reconciliation and
restore constitutional order seems to be bearing fruit.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Burundi and Sierra Leone, the OAU has made a key
contribution to the efforts towards peace that have been
deployed jointly with the United Nations and the
relevant subregional organizations.

The OAU must play a more active role in the area
of conflict prevention, management and resolution. In
this context, we must endeavour to enhance the
effectiveness of the OAU mechanism, as called for by
the OAU Summit in Lusaka.

All of these efforts and initiatives in the area of
peace and security can have a genuine impact on
stability in Africa only if they are accompanied by
stronger and more determined support on the part of
the international community, with a view to helping
Africa to take up the many tremendous challenges
facing it in the socio-economic field and as concerns
development in general.

I should like to take this opportunity to speak
about the OAU's transition to the African Union and the
New African Initiative, which has been renamed the New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD).
As is well known, the Constitutive Act of the
African Union entered into force on 26 May 2001,
following its ratification by more than two thirds of the
member States of the OAU. At the Lusaka Summit in
June 2001, at which I was appointed to head the
organization, the African leaders charged me with the
important mission of ensuring the transition from the
OAU to the African Union and with setting up its
principal organs - the Assembly, the Council, the
Commission and the ambassadorial Committee charged
with translating this reform into reality.

Seeking transparency and wishing to promote
trust, I immediately began to consult with political
leaders and OAU staff with a View to implementing the
Lusaka decision and to achieving this lofty mission.
Those consultations included representatives of the
member States of the OAU at Addis Ababa and some
of OAU's external partners, for example, the European
Union, which we consider to be a model of economic
integration.

Those consultations, which were followed by
seminars on these issues, allowed for an overall view
of the structure of the African Union, its various bodies
and their respective responsibilities. Draft texts on all
of these organs, their spheres of competence and their
methods of work are now being finalized. Last week in
Addis Ababa a meeting of ambassadors and African
experts was convened to consider those texts, which
were drawn up by the secretariat.

Further meetings are also scheduled. For instance,
from 3 to 8 March, jointly with the Economic
Commission for Africa, we will be holding the Third
African Development Forum, under the theme "Defining
priorities for regional integration". Thousands will attend:
highly placed officials, ambassadors, ministers,
parliamentarians, trade unionists, students, women's
groups and top African experts on integration-related
matters. In other words, we are making every effort to
make the Union into a reality.

I have also signed an agreement with the United
Nations Development Programme to provide logistical
backup to our secretariat in the transition process.

We are not carrying out this task in isolation; we
are trying to involve all interested parties - not only
African ones, but also all examples of integration, such
as the Southern Common Market and the Association
of South-East Asian Nations, in order to profit from
their experience during this transition.

All of this leads us to the South African summit
on the proclamation of the African Union - a
proclamation that is set to take place in June 2002 in
South Africa. To succeed in its mission, the OAU will
spare no effort to earn the trust of its member States to
ensure cooperation, transparency and confidence
among all actors as we proceed with this institutional
transformation. We want to work in the spirit of
African unity, which is so dear to all Africans.

African unity is not something that is
accomplished by just one head of State, or even a few,
but a long-standing dream that Africa has been trying
to realize for a very, very long time - since the 18005,
with DuBois, Padmore, Nkruma and Nyerere.

For us, and for the African heads of State and
Government, the African Union must not become OAU,
part two. This is not a simple name change. We want it to
reflect a renewed aspiration to integration on the part of
African States and genuine progress towards African
unity. It must have strong organs, including a commission
that must be the driving force behind the Union and
reflect the common and individual interests of the entire
membership and their desire to build a Union that lives
up to the hopes placed in it by the peoples of Africa.

The Council will also be aware of the
developments that took place in 2001 with respect to
the launching of the New Initiative aimed at setting up
a new global partnership between Africa and the
developed world. Now called the New Partnership for
Africa's Development, it is aimed at laying the
foundation for a new partnership between Africa and
the developed countries on the basis of mutual interests
and common concerns.

It is aimed also at strengthening democracy and
sound economic management in the continent. The
goal is for Africa to become an active partner in the
new world economy, so that it will not be marginalized.
The initiative aims to ensure the renewal of Africa and
to promote development, while reiterating that this task
is the responsibility of the African Governments and
peoples themselves. They must create a political,
economic and social environment conducive to
ensuring the structural transformations that are required
for people-centred development.

I would like to stress that the initiative, submitted
to the General Assembly last September, exists within
the context of the African Union. Of course, it was
initiated by heads of State, but at Lusaka we decided to
integrate it into the framework of the African Union.
Last week, in South Africa, I attended a seminar on
NEPAD; how the OAU is becoming the African Union;
and how NEPAD will be integrated into the African
Union.

In the document that we elaborated jointly with
UNDP, a working group was created whose single goal
is to focus on integrating NEPAD into the African
Union. So there is no dichotomy, no competition. There
is only one organization, and that is the African Union.
NEPAD deserves active support from our other
development partners, including, in particular, the
agencies of the United Nations system.

I cannot end my statement without expressing my
deep appreciation for the tremendous contribution made
by the Security Council in the context of its growing role
in the resolution of conflicts in Africa. I wish the Council
every success in the lofty task with which it has been
charged by the international community.

In a fast-moving world characterized by rapid and
profound upheavals, there is great potential for

confusion. That is why the Council will remain the
light that is guiding us in our march forward towards
realizing the ideals of peace, security and development
of humanity as a whole. In this lofty task, the OAU
will always be at its side in trying to build a world of
peace and justice.

Africa, through the OAU today and the African
Union tomorrow, will unflinchingly and unfailingly
work as a full partner in the context of these efforts
towards peace, justice and development, which we all
so ardently yearn for.

