Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking Special Representative Kai Eide for his very
helpful briefing this morning. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/6l7) is also appreciated.

We share the Secretary-General's candid
assessment of the challenging situation in Afghanistan.
The security and humanitarian situation, in particular,
is of serious concern. At the same time, we should
acknowledge the significant achievement of State-
building efforts over the past seven years. With the
resolute efforts of the Government and people of
Afghanistan and the united support of the international
community, we strongly believe that the situation can
be reversed. Today's meeting will be an important
opportunity to demonstrate our unwavering
commitment to assisting Afghanistan to achieve its
aspirations.

The security situation is of paramount concern.
As the insurgents have come to rely more on
asymmetric attacks, the number of innocent civilian
victims has increased. We are deeply concerned that
even humanitarian workers and their convoys have
increasingly become targets. A Japanese aid worker
was killed recently. Such heinous attacks are not
acceptable. We condemn all attacks against those
innocents who are genuinely supporting Afghanistan.

Afghan security forces must be strengthened
urgently. Japan fully supports the Joint Coordinating
and Monitoring Board decision to expand the Afghan
National Army. The reform of the Afghan National
Police and the Ministry of the Interior should be also
accelerated. Japan has supported the efforts of the
Afghan Government by providing assistance for the
police payroll through the Law and Order Trust Fund
for Afghanistan. In order to improve the security
situation, the issue of governance of the central and
local Governments is essential and must be seriously
addressed. We expect commitments for anti-corruption
efforts to be followed through and effective measures
to be taken.

International forces are playing an indispensable
role in the security of the country. Japan welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1833 (2008) as a
demonstration of the solidarity of the international
community in the fight against terrorism. Japan is
determined to continue to play its important role in
supporting the activities of the Operation Enduring
Freedom coalition in the Indian Ocean.

The disbanding of illegal armed groups
contributes to improving the security situation. In
Afghanistan, more than 370 illegally armed groups
have been disbanded. The implementation of
development projects in the districts committed to the
disbanding of illegal armed groups is becoming more
efficient than ever before. However, given the
importance and urgency of those efforts, the pace of
progress must be accelerated. The establishment of a
unit for the disbanding of illegal armed groups in the
Ministry of the Interior in the coming weeks will be a
step forward. Japan will continue to do its utmost to
support the Government of Afghanistan through policy
coordination and by providing necessary assistance in
that area.

Counter-narcotics is another priority issue
requiring urgent action. Building on ongoing efforts,
including full implementation of the National Drug
Control Strategy, additional measures have to be
explored to cut the link between the insurgents and
drug production and trafficking.

In the area of reconstruction and development,
concrete steps have been taken to implement the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy on the
basis of the outcome of the Paris Conference. We
welcome the recent decision to make the decision-
making process of the Joint Coordinating and
Monitoring Board streamlined and more effective.

However, much remains to be done on both the
Afghan and the international sides. The commitment
and pledges of the international community must be
followed through and implemented promptly. I am
pleased that Japan, for its part, has fulfilled almost all
of its previous financial commitments, and the
additional pledge we made in Paris will also be
implemented in a timely manner. I would join in the
call of the Secretary-General for pledges to be
translated into urgent action.

The elections in 2009 and 2010 are too crucial to
fail. Their success is essential to consolidate nation-
building efforts and democracy in the country. It is
necessary to ensure that the will of the Afghan people
will be faithfully reflected. Voter registration has
started as a first step in the preparations, with other
steps to follow. The Afghan Government and the
international community together must make every
possible effort to complete the necessary preparations
in time so that the elections are organized in a free, fair
and secure manner. Japan will lend its full support to
the Afghan Government and the United Nations.

Regional cooperation is another essential element
in achieving stability and development in the country.
We welcome positive steps, such as the planning for
the next peace jirga and the Afghan economic
cooperation conference, which is now under way.
Japan places priority on assistance to the Afghanistan-
Pakistan border region, including follow-up of the G8
initiative.

To reverse the current negative trend and achieve
social and economic stability is a major challenge for
the international community as a whole. In that

endeavour, the coordinating role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) is more
important than ever. I applaud the leadership of
Mr. Kai Eide in carrying out that challenging task, as
well as the dedication of UNAMA staff, who are
working under very harsh conditions. Japan supports
strengthening the capacity and priority needs of
UNAMA so that the Mission can fully accomplish the
mandate given to it by the Council.

