Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The tasks outlined in resolution 2347 (2017)
regarding the protection of cultural heritage during
conflicts, and in particular from terrorists, have not
lost their relevance. I would like to thank the briefers
for their detailed information on the work of the bodies
they head and their thorough analysis of the challenges
currently facing the international community in this
area. We join others in congratulating Ms. Azoulay on
her appointment as Director-General of UNESCO and
wishing her every success.

We support strengthening and actively involving
the expert capacity of the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, including in providing States with
technical assistance for combating crimes involving
cultural property. We have great hopes for the future
work of the Office of Counter-Terrorism, which has
been entrusted with the vitally important task of
coordinating the anti-terrorist efforts of the United
Nations and partner organizations.

My delegation has studied the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/969) on the implementation
of resolution 2347 (2017) with interest. We note its
information on my country's active efforts to combat
the destruction and illegal trafficking of cultural
treasures. Our fight against the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) in the Middle East and North
Africa is coming to an end, and a key contribution to
that achievement has been the success of the Russian
aerospace forces in Syria. Nevertheless, it will take a
long time to repair the damage that the terrorists have
done to the region's cultural heritage. Much has been
lost forever. Moreover, the revenue from trading in
artefacts continues to be one of the main sources of
funding for terrorists, despite the fact that combating
this type of illegal activity has been on the Security
Council's agenda for some time now. With the support
of our delegation, the task of combating the financing
of terrorism through trafficking in cultural property
was set out in resolutions 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015).
However, many unresolved issues remain with regard
to their implementation.

Terrorists and the criminal groups affiliated with
them exploit every possible loophole to send cultural
property abroad. For example, Russia's border-control
authorities were able to confiscate Ottoman-period
tiles and other Syrian artefacts that had been stolen
from territory under ISIL's control. If they had not,
part of Syria's cultural property would have wound up
illegally in the hands of private collectors. According
to our information, this trade in cultural property is
carried out mainly by anonymous dealers. Cases of the
illegal acquisition of such items via the Internet have
also been documented. Unfortunately, it is difficult
to track such transactions owing in large part to the
difficulty of identifying the smuggled artefacts. A
couple of months ago there was an interesting article in
The New York Times on the methods used to smuggle
artefacts into Europe and elsewhere. In the light of
that, we once again call on all States to immediately
submit to the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities any information they have on
sources of funding for those organizations. We would
like to highlight the importance ofincluding individuals
and organizations involved in trading cultural property
with terrorists on the sanctions list.

Demining cultural sites and objects, in accordance
with resolution 2347 (2017), is a major priority. The
resolution calls on Member States, the relevant United
Nations entities and other international bodies to
provide assistance in that area. My country was one of
the first to respond. Nowhere is the humanitarian issue
of demining and preserving historic cultural heritage
more acute today than in Syria. The specialists in the
Russian armed forces' international anti-mine centre
are contributing to those efforts. In Palmyra alone
we have cleared more than 2,000 hectares while also
identifying and defusing more than 24,000 explosive
devices. However, our efforts to preserve Palmyra's
cultural heritage have not been limited to that. The
fourth Saint Petersburg Cultural Forum, in November,
for example, mounted a Palmyra photo exhibit that
included a three-dimensional model of the ancient city
and high-definition relief maps provided by specialists
from the Russian Academy of Sciences.

In general, we want to highlight the importance
of involving experts in the field of cultural-
heritage conservation. A good example in that regard was
the signing, between UNESCO and the State Hermitage
Museum, of a memorandum of understanding on the
issue of the safeguarding and restoration of cultural
property in conflict areas, primarily in the Middle East.

In conclusion, we reiterate our determination to
develop cooperation with all interested parties in the
context ofimplementing resolution 2347 (2017). We stand
readily to actively share our experience in protecting
cultural property from terrorists. We are convinced that
fighting the barbarous attempts by terrorists to destroy
the memory of ancient civilizations is the common and
historic task of the global community.

