Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
are grateful to Mr. Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General
for Peace Operations, and Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Horn
of Africa, for their briefings. We support the Special
Envoy in his very important new role.

At present, the situation in the Abyei Area
is generally stable. Over the past six months, the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan have
strengthened their interaction on the Abyei issue and
have actively cooperated with the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) in the
discharge of its mandate. Intergovernmental working
mechanisms such as the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism and the Joint Border Commission continue
to function normally. This shows the two Governments'
willingness to cooperate in settling the Abyei issue,
which we welcome. At the same time, however, many
challenges remain in the area. A proper settlement of
the issue is important to ensuring the stability of both
countries and the region as a whole. The Security
Council should continue to monitor the situation and
support African countries solving African problems in
African ways.

The work for the next phase should focus on two
specific aspects. First, we should continue to promote
good cooperation between the Governments of the
Sudan and South Sudan so as to achieve a political
solution to the Abyei issue as soon as possible.
Good cooperation between the two countries is the
prerequisite for securing a political solution to the
Abyei issue. The Council should continue to fully
respect the ownership of the Sudan and South Sudan on
this question, listen carefully to their views and support
the mediation efforts of regional and subregional
organizations such as the African Union (AU) and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
in promoting improved good-neighbourliness and
enhanced mutual trust between the two Governments.
Right now the international community should assist
the two Governments in working together to establish
administrative, judicial and public-security institutions
in the area, ease tensions among ethnic groups and
improve the community security environment.

Secondly, we should continue to UNISFA in
performing its mandated functions, as it is an important
force for maintaining stability in the Area. China
supports the continued renewal of UNISFA's mandate
and has taken note of the recommendations contained
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/305). With
regard to the mission's reconfiguration or adjustment,
the Security Council should listen carefully to the
views of both Governments, the AU and the troop-
contributing countries. The Secretariat should
strengthen coordination and communication with the
relevant parties in order to enable the peacekeeping
force to better play its role in facilitating a proper
settlement of the issue. China is ready and willing
to work with African countries and the international
community to promote a settlement of the Abyei issue
and to make its contribution to advancing peace,
stability and development in Africa.

