Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
My delegation would first of all like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this public debate on the
situation on the Middle East. We would also like to
thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his briefing on the
most recent events in the region.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement, as well as with those to
be delivered by the representative of Mauritania on
behalf of the Arab Group, and by the representative of
Tajikistan on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference. I should now like to make some additional
comments in my national capacity.

The international community has followed with
great interest and hope the positive signs that emerged
in the month of September. Thanks to the flexibility
demonstrated by the Palestinian side, with the support
of Arab countries, as well as the efforts of the
American Administration, direct Israeli-Palestinian
peace negotiations were relaunched in Washington,
D.C., on 2 September, following 12 months of
suspension. The resumption of negotiations, with the
ultimate goal - as announced by President Barack
Obama on 23 September in his speech in the General
Assembly - is to reach an agreement that will bring in
a new Member State into the United Nations, namely, a
sovereign and independent Palestinian State living in
peace with Israel.

However, that hope was quickly eclipsed by the
persistence of the Israeli Government in its
colonization policy after having refused to extend its
moratorium. In addition, some days later, the
international community learned of the decision by the
Israeli Government, in spite of all the appeals made of
it, to authorize tenders for the building of 238 housing
units in the eastern part of the Holy City of Jerusalem.
There is no doubt that this illegal decision is a serious
development that could endanger the chances for
renewing peace talks. As a response to those illegal
measures, the Arab Peace Initiative Follow-up
Committee, which met recently in Sirte, has confirmed
the conviction of the Arab party that a return yet again
to Israeli-Palestinian negotiations must be contingent
on the total cessation of Israeli settlement in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Al-Quds.

My country, whose King, His Majesty
Mohammed V1, is Chair of the Al-Quds Committee,
wishes once again to express to the Council its deep
concern about the decisions by Israeli authorities in the
matter of the eastern part of Al-Quds, whereby it
intends to modify the demographic composition of the
Holy City and thereby undermine any possibility for
success in establishing a viable Palestinian State. The
persistence of such unilateral measures, which create
an untenable situation, weakening those who work for
peace and choose the path of dialogue to regain their
legitimate rights, makes clear the policy of Israel
towards the Arab population of the Holy City,
especially the plan to raze 20 Palestinian homes in the
Silwan neighbourhood.

It is worrisome to see that, even as they renew
their commitment to achieve peace, Israeli authorities
have continued throughout this past summer their
policy of confiscating, seizing and expropriating lands
for the construction of settlements, bypass roads and
walls, thus leading to the expulsion of more that 600
Palestinians living in the eastern part of Al-Quds and
the rest of the West Bank. Meanwhile, Israeli police
continue to violate the compound of the Holy Al-Aqsa
mosque. Given the central place of Jerusalem in the
Middle East crisis, and what that city represents for all
religions, we urge the international community, and
especially the Security Council, to live up to their
responsibilities and take action to put an end to these
practices.
Today there is an international consensus about
the need for a two-State solution and a comprehensive
peace in the Middle East, in accordance with the
relevant decisions and the Arab Peace Initiative,
adopted in 2002. The international community, in
recognition of the gravity of the cessation of the peace
talks, must take a stronger and more effective position
so as to create the basic conditions necessary to re-
launch genuine negotiations to preserve the
fundamental common interests of the peoples of the
region and thereby ensure an environment of peace,
security and cooperation.

Our deep concern about the proliferation of
obstacles to restarting direct talks nevertheless goes
hand in hand with our firm and unalterable conviction
that the peace process is an inevitable choice and that it
will result in ensuring a just and comprehensive peace
in the region, in the interest of all its peoples,
guaranteeing their security and the recovery of their
rights.

In that regard, the Kingdom of Morocco
continues to follow with great interest the increased
efforts of President Obama and the Quartet and all
international efforts, especially those of the European
Union. We hope that they will lead to a return to
genuine and sincere talks based on the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, the Arab
Peace Initiative, the Road Map and past agreements
and arrangements between the parties.

For its part, the Kingdom of Morocco will
continue to work within the Arab Peace Initiative
Committee to find through negotiation a lasting,
comprehensive solution to all final status issues,
especially that of Al-Quds - with the understanding
that such a fair and comprehensive solution will only
be possible if Israel withdraws from all Arab territories
occupied since June 1967, including the Syrian Golan
and the rest of occupied Lebanese territory, and if a
viable Palestinian State with Jerusalem as its capital is
created.

