Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would first like to thank the United Kingdom
for requesting this briefing on the implementation of
the Stockholm Agreement. I would also like to thank
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, for their briefings
and their efforts.

As this is the first time my delegation is taking the
floor in the Security Council on the subject of Yemen,
we would first like to welcome the agreement reached
in Stockholm. It is a remarkable achievement, and I
congratulate Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and assure
him of our full support. It is essential that the agreement
now be respected and implemented within realistic
deadlines. In view of the humanitarian emergency, the
agreement on the port of Al-Hudaydah is of particular
importance. That port is the lifeline for the rest of the
country in terms of access to humanitarian aid and the
import of commercial goods. It is essential that the
operation of the port be ensured.

The situation is fragile and mistrust between the
parties remains strong. There have been incidents,
but we call on all parties to exercise restraint, to
abstain from heated rhetoric in the media and mutual
accusations of ceasefire violations, and to focus on
the implementation of the agreement in good faith.
In addition, the parties should try to reach a common
understanding on the implementation of the agreement
on Al-Hudaydah, including modalities. They must also
agree on a monitoring mechanism within the framework
of the Redeployment Coordination Committee.

In order to enable the United Nations to monitor
the implementation of the agreement, it is important
that the parties issue visas to United Nations personnel
in a timely manner and allow the Redeployment
Coordination Committee access to the entire territory
of Al-Hudaydah governorate. In addition, the security
of United Nations personnel must be ensured.

Belgium supports the adoption of a resolution as
soon as possible in order to provide a legal basis for
a United Nations mission, and we will contribute
constructively to the adoption of such a resolution.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, as we
have heard from Mark Lowcock, efforts are still needed
to improve it. It is essential that all parties facilitate
access to humanitarian aid throughout the country,
and the bureaucratic obstacles to such access must
be removed.

Finally, we hope that the Stockholm Agreement
can serve as a basis for building an agreement on
a negotiating framework for future talks and for
launching an inclusive political process.

