Mr. Frommelt (Liechtenstein): We welcome the
report of the Secretary-General on small arms and light
weapons and commend you, Sir, for organizing this
timely and important open debate. We hope that it
constitutes the resumption of the leadership role of the
Council on this topic.

The enormous socio-economic costs caused by
small arms and small light weapons are one of the big
obstacles to the efforts of many countries to reach the
Millennium Development Goals, and the topic thus has
very wide ramifications. Small arms and light weapons
are widely used in inter-State and intra-State conflicts
by Government armies, paramilitaries and rebel forces.
In situations outside of armed conflicts, they are the
weapons of choice of organized crime groups and
criminal gangs.

The numbers speak for themselves. Small arms
and light weapons kill at least 300,000 people a year in
both conflict and non-conflict situations, and are
responsible for 60 to 90 per cent of direct conflict
deaths. Some 640 million small arms and light
weapons, which are frequently exchanged between
various conflicts, are already in circulation. Another
8 million new weapons enter the market every year.
With all the attention paid to weapons of mass
destruction, the weapons with the most lethal impact
are small arms.

The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
can be regarded as a cluster of related problems
stretching from the illicit trade and transfer of weapons
to production, ammunition and brokering. We believe
that strict domestic brokering legislation is a
prerequisite for effective international cooperation in
that area and adopted such legislation in 1999. But
better control should not be limited to brokering
activities; it should also encompass the physical
transfer of small arms and light weapons. Such control
of arms transfers should be based on international
standards, which prohibit in particular the transfer of
small arms and light weapons to end users who do not
respect international human rights and humanitarian
law. We therefore support all efforts geared towards an

international framework for authentication,
reconciliation and standardization of end-user
certificates. The improvement of end-user certificates
for man-portable air defence systems could set an
important precedent in that regard.

The adoption of an international instrument on
marking and tracing was an important step towards
achieving a comprehensive regime in the global fight
against the spread of small arms and light weapons.
The use of the new politically binding International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a
Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons should, however, not be limited to
Member States. If it were incorporated into the
mandates of future peacekeeping missions, it could
significantly reduce the number of small arms and light
weapons available in conflict and post-conflict
situations.

Although the International Tracing Instrument
includes provisions for marking new weapons
production, Government stocks and imports, it does not
cover the marking or tracing of ammunition. That
shortfall contradicts the main purpose of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, which, as its name
suggests, is to address the issue of the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons in all its aspects. We
therefore believe that the question of ammunition must
also be addressed over time. Here, the safeguarding of
ammunition warehouses and the destruction of surplus
stockpiles should be among the priorities of relevant
peacekeeping missions and an initial part of any
peacebuilding effort.

The link between small arms, violence and lack
of development is undeniable. Moreover, the direct and
indirect human, social and economic costs of armed
violence are tremendous. Halting the spread of small
arms and light weapons would therefore make an
important contribution to the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals.

In that regard, Liechtenstein supports multilateral
initiatives beyond the United Nations framework and
commends those States that have adopted the Geneva
Declaration on Armed Violence and Development.
Given our belief that effective arms embargoes depend
upon the removal of arms from circulation within the
embargoed State and that the problem of small arms
and light weapons cannot be solved by arms control
measures alone, we will further support activities in the
field of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants.

