Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
congratulates Kuwait on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the current month. We also
commend Kazakhstan for its accomplishments during
its presidency last month. I wish to thank the High
Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing.

China welcomes the progress achieved in the
verification and destruction of the two remaining
chemical-weapon facilities within Syria's borders. We
support the Organization for the Prohibition ofChemical
Weapons (OPCW) in continuing its coordination
and cooperation with the Syrian Government so as
to properly settle all the questions revolving around
the initial declarations of chemical weapons by Syria
through the OPCW platform.

China expresses its deepest sympathy to the Syrian
people for their suffering as the result of chemical
weapons. No use of chemical weapons will be tolerated.
Lately, there have been some media reports of suspected
use of chlorine and other poisonous chemicals as
weapons within Syria's borders, over which China
wishes to register its deepest concern. It is hoped that
the parties will carry out verification of the related
incidents as soon as possible.

When it comes to the question ofchemical weapons,
China's position is as clear cut as it is consistent. We
stand firmly against the use of chemical weapons by
any country, organization or individual for whatever
purpose and under any circumstances. China supports
conducting comprehensive, objective and impartial
investigations into any alleged use of chemical weapons
within Syrian borders so as to come up with results that
withstand the test of time, square with the facts and
help bring the perpetrators to justice.

Establishing a new chemical-weapon investigative
mechanism is critical to getting to the bottom of the
chemical-weapon incidents as well as warding off any
future recurrences in Syria. All Council parties should
work together to that end. China supports the efforts
on the part of Russia to promote the establishment
of a new investigative mechanism into the use of
chemical weapons in Syria. We hope that the members
of the Council will continue to engage in constructive
consultations so as to achieve consensus at an early date.

The chemical-weapon issue in Syria is closely
related to a political settlement to the Syrian situation.
Major achievements have been made at the Syrian
National Dialogue Congress, held recently in Sochi,
which played a positive role in advancing the Syrian
political process, while lending impetus to relaunching
the Geneva talks. It is China's hope that relevant parties
will support the Security Council and the OPCW in
continuing to act as the main channel for tackling the
Syrian chemical-weapon issue, adopt a constructive
attitude, seek proper solutions through consultation,
maintain the unity of the Council and work with
the United Nations and with the relevant parties in
advancing the political process in Syria.
