Mr. Rishchynski (spoke in French): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to take
the floor.

In late January, I travelled to Sierra Leone to take
stock of progress on peacebuilding. Let me express my
gratitude for the warm welcome, strong support and
frank engagement of all national and international
interlocutors. Drawing on the findings of that visit, this
morning I would like to offer advice on three important
issues for Sierra Leone, namely, the forthcoming
elections, regional challenges to peacebuilding, and the
transition process that will take place in the country.

First, technical and financial preparations for the
elections are on track. At the same time, there is a clear
need to encourage more open dialogue, both among the
political parties and with the national electoral
institutions. It is also crucial to better convince the
public that all relevant stakeholders will behave in a
professional and responsible manner. Political leaders
have a particular responsibility to demonstrate their
commitment to free, fair and peaceful political
competition, including collectively through interparty
mechanisms and at public events. As electoral
campaigning begins in earnest, all parties must
redouble their efforts to implement their commitments
under the joint communique of 2009.

The international community has a clear and
constructive role to play in support of the electoral
process. Sierra Leone's partners should respond
favourably to the Government's requests for electoral
observers. The United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) must
continue to have a unique legitimacy and mandate with
respect to enabling a favourable political environment.
That should be the mission's immediate priority as we
approach the elections. The Security Council and the
wider United Nations system should stand ready to
provide any necessary support to UNIPSIL's efforts.

In that respect, the configuration looks forward to
working closely with Mr. von der Schulenburg's
successor, because the departure of Mr. von der
Schulenburg has created an unfortunate vacuum. The
configuration encourages the Secretary-General to fill
that position as quickly as possible. I would also like to
take this opportunity to commend Mr. von der
Schulenburg's strong leadership and the considerable
contribution he made during his years of service in
Sierra Leone. At the personal level, I would like to say
that it is a pity that he will not have the opportunity to
see the conclusion of that excellent work.

(spoke in English)

The Security Council has recently focused more
closely on transnational threats to peace and security.
That is a welcome development, but much more is
needed. Sierra Leone has taken impressive steps
towards fighting transnational crime, yet it is hampered
by the slower pace of progress elsewhere in the
subregion. Stronger and more outcome-oriented
engagement with regional organizations, such as the
Economic Community of West African States, as well
as increased support for regional programmes such as
the West Africa Coast Initiative, is very much needed.
The United Nations Office for West Africa plays a vital
role in those issues and warrants continued strong
support from the Council.

Thirdly, Sierra Leone will face two transitions -
one that is shifting from end-stage peacebuilding to a
focus on longer-term development, while at the same
time the Security Council may wish to consider
drawing down UNIPSIL following successful elections
later this year. Those processes need to be handled with
great care. The United Nations, with strong leadership
from UNIPSIL, has developed an innovative and
integrated approach - a best practice in the truest

sense of that term. Successful mechanisms should be
retained and any transition designed to produce
minimal shocks to existing practices. Some of the
functions currently performed by UNIPSIL will need to
be replaced by reinforcing other aspects of the country
team. Similarly, Sierra Leone will continue to face
significant development challenges and some of the
underlying causes of conflict will linger until long-
term economic development truly takes hold.

International support must, in our judgment,
reflect those realities, and the Peacebuilding
Commission will shortly begin considering how its
own engagement should evolve as part of that
transitional process. The configuration will report back
to the Security Council in due course.

In closing, let me note that Sierra Leone has
made tremendous progress since the end of its civil
war. It is one of the success stories of United Nations
peacebuilding. Yet the process is not quite finished, as
repeated incidents of political violence over the past
year have demonstrated. The Security Council should
continue to pay close attention to peacebuilding in
Sierra Leone and stand prepared to offer any necessary
support. The Peacebuilding Commission will do the
same by working in close partnership with all relevant
national and international stakeholders towards
meeting that goal.

