Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Since this is the first time I have taken the floor of
the Council under your presidency, Sir, I would like
to congratulate you and your country and wish you
a successful month. I would like to heartily thank
Ms. Sandra Honore, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for her detailed briefing and her
ongoing commitment, to which we can testify first-
hand.

Colombia associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by the Ambassador of Uruguay on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti. As others have
before me, I would like to express our condolences to
the Government and people of Brazil and the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
on the death of General Jose' Luiz Jaborandy, Jr., who
worked so tirelessly and with such dedication at the
helm of MINUSTAH.

Achieving security, stability and better conditions
for the Haitian people, as well as strengthening its
democracy's institutional capacities, must continue to be
a priority of the international community's commitment
to Haiti. We were pleased with the results of the first
round of legislative elections on 9 August, since despite
some violent outbreaks, reflected in a somewhat low
turnout - which we hope will improve in the second
round - we can acknowledge the Government of Haiti's
commitment and effort in stabilizing its democratic
institutions and holding the elections. The important
work done by the Provisional Electoral Council and
the Haitian National Police deserves special mention,
and we are sure they will also perform well during the
presidential election and the second round of legislative
elections, which will take place very soon.
We acknowledge the progress that Haiti has made
in such areas as security, reducing violence, relocating
people in the camps - where a lot of progress has
been made e and economic growth, among others,
but, as others have said, the challenges to development
remain huge and the international community must
continue its support. In addition to organizing bilateral
cooperation programmes in the areas of agriculture
and infrastructure, Colombia has assisted Haiti by
contributing police to MINUSTAH. Our contribution
includes institutional advice, operational support,
prevention through checkpoints, training in police
academies, investigations by the judiciary police and
community outreach. We intend to continue training a
group of female Haitian police officers in Colombia.

I would also like to inform the Council that in
accordance withthe commitmentmadebyPresidentJuan
Manuel Santos Calderon on 28 September, Colombia
will expand its support to MINUSTAH, as Ms. Honore
said, with another 58 police officers accredited by the
United Nations. In that regard, I would like to thank
the Canadian Government for sending us instructors to
provide accelerated training for those officers.

There are still many challenges ahead, however,
as the Secretary-General's report (S/2015/667)
indicates. Any decisions on MINUSTAH should be
based exclusively on the conditions on the ground, and
only after the strategic assessment mission that the
Secretary-General will soon put together has made its
recommendations.

I reiterate that we must at all costs safeguard the
gains achieved, and, in line with the report, we think
that, before we take any action, the new Government
should have a reasonable period to consolidate stability.

In conclusion, I want to reiterate Colombia's
support for the invaluable work of MINUSTAH,
which seeks to ensure the sustainable well-being of the
Haitian people. That is why my country is in favour
of a one-year extension of MINUSTAH's mandate
at the same military and police level - as you said,
Mr. President - with the goal of strengthening the rule
of law, good governance and the level of safety and
welfare of the Haitian people.

