Mr. McNee (Canada): I would like to
congratulate and thank the delegation of Mexico for
convening this important debate. I would like to focus
on international humanitarian law and international
criminal justice.

Canada has actively engaged with the
international community to prevent crises, promote
human rights and the rule of law, and respond to
humanitarian emergencies. This reflects our values and
responds directly to Canada's desire to promote peace,
security, prosperity and well-being around the world.
In this regard, we remain committed to encouraging
respect for and implementation of international
humanitarian law as agreed to in the Geneva
Conventions.

And yet, despite the existence of multiple
international legal instruments pertaining to the
protection of civilians and the conduct of armed
conflict, including customary law and Security Council
resolutions, the past two decades have seen State and

10-4285]
non-State actors alike shockingly and deliberately
violate these core humanitarian principles. New
challenges - whether attacks on aid workers or
restrictions on access by civilians to aid - present an
important challenge to our collective commitment to
ensuring the effective implementation of international
humanitarian law.

Indeed, I would argue that the Security Council
has a critical role to play in calling for adherence to
international humanitarian law. It can do this in several
ways, including by better using its own field missions to
monitor respect for international humanitarian law, by
calling for better analysis in country reports provided to
the Council, by encouraging fact-finding missions and by
drawing on the range of tools at its disposal - such as
prosecutions and targeted sanctions - when
international humanitarian law is flouted. The Council
also has a role to play in encouraging States to take
steps to hold accountable those who would violate
international human rights and humanitarian law and in
ensuring that they are brought to justice. It is the duty
of every State to exercise its criminal jurisdiction over
those responsible for serious crimes.

The International Criminal Court is a crucial part
of the international criminal justice system, but it is
also a court of last resort. Where such crimes have
occurred, States must ensure accountability through
effective and genuine investigations and prosecutions
at the national level. In this respect, Canada recognizes
that strengthening domestic capacity to investigate and
prosecute these crimes is essential to closing the
impunity gap. The Council can play an important
supporting role in this respect through, among other
measures, its resolutions that call for United Nations
peace operations to help build the rule of law.

(spoke in French)

Canada's continuing support for international
criminal justice is based on our commitment to the rule
of law and the principle that those who commit crimes
must be held accountable. Within this paradigm,
Canada has supported the work of the International
Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia, the Special Court for Sierra Leone, the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon, the Extraordinary
Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia and, of course,
the International Criminal Court. We also continue to
invest in national justice and rule of law capacity-
building in countries emerging from crisis. While great
strides have been made toward the rule of law at the
international level, there remain areas in need of
further progress.

In conclusion, Member States must be
encouraged to comply with their international
obligations, adhere to international treaties and
incorporate international norms and standards into their
domestic systems.

