Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Wejoin other Member
States in expressing our appreciation to Sweden for
convening this open debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. It is our belief
that these periodic open debates are necessary in order
to mobilize the international community, especially
the Security Council, and to assist both Israel and
Palestine in finding a lasting solution to the conflict
that continues to prevail in both of those countries.

As we engage in this important open debate, we
need to reflect on resolution 2334 (2016), adopted in
late December 2016. The Security Council's decision
is welcome and long overdue, bearing in mind that that
was the first time since January 2009 that the Council
was able to adopt a decision on the Middle East peace
process. What is of specific relevance regarding
resolution 2334 (2016) is the fact that it emphasizes
the illegal nature of the activities undertaken by the
Government of Israel, which include the building of
settlements, the confiscation of land, the demolition
of Palestinian property and the displacement of
Palestinians. The resolution conveys the resolve of the
Security Council not to recognize any changes to the
internationally agreed lines of4 June 1967 as the basis
of a negotiated settlement.

My delegation wishes to highlight the fact that
Israel, as a State Member of the United Nations, is
obliged, under Article 25 of the Charter, to comply with
the decisions of the Security Council.

In that regard, South Africa urges Israel to comply
with all of its obligations under international law.

The reality, however, is that the illegal Israeli
settlements continue unabated. They have led to
the fragmentation of the West Bank and continue to
threaten the viability and territorial contiguity of a
future Palestinian State. The illegal and unilateral
Israeli policies, practices and activities impede the
peace process. We also believe firmly that continuing
the settlement activities will undermine Israel's own
immediate and long-term security prospects and help
to radicalize the entire region.

Negotiations and dialogue are the only way forward,
if we are to reach a lasting solution. The guidelines
for the negotiations are based on an established
international legal framework that includes the relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map, to mention only a few of
its elements. South Africa supports all international
efforts aimed at brokering a just solution to the Israeli-
Palestine conflict. In that regard, we welcome the
Middle East Peace Conference held in Paris this past
weekend and align ourselves with the statement issued
there. We regard it as a vehicle that can help to relaunch
effective and serious peace talks between Israel and
Palestine, leading to the creation of an independent,
free and sovereign Palestinian State coexisting side by
side in peace and security with the State ofIsrael, based
on the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

In conclusion, South Africa is of the opinion that
negotiations between Palestine and Israel should take
place within a clear, mutually agreed-on framework
that includes a reasonable timetable and clear sanctions
to be applied to parties that do not live up to their
commitments. An open-ended approach and process
are by now a luxury that the international community
cannot afford, given the changing reality on the ground
in Palestine, which poses an immense risk to the
achievement of a Viable, contiguous and independent
Palestinian State, as well as of an escalation in violence.

Fifty years of occupation is too long. South Africa
would like to emphasize once again that, at the end
of the day, the prime responsibility for peace falls
squarely in the hands of both Palestine and Israel. As
the international community, we can only support,
encourage, advise and thereafter reward.

