Mr. Takasu (Japan): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for presiding over today's important
debate. I wish to thank the Secretary-General for
personally presenting the very important report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304). We are also grateful to the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the representatives of
the United Nations Development Programme and the
World Bank for their very useful perspectives. I am
particularly pleased that in today's debate the United
Nations system as a whole is according high priority to
the issue of post-conflict stabilization.

Over the course of its history, the United Nations
has been faced with a multitude of challenges. Despite
its best efforts, however, conflicts have not been
brought to an end. Worst of all, peace agreements are
often broken within a few years' time, leaving the most
vulnerable groups of people trapped in a vicious circle
of misery and conflict.

The United Nations has mobilized to reverse that
situation, using several instruments. First, by deploying
peacekeeping operations and extending humanitarian
and development assistance, the United Nations has
contributed to preventing the recurrence of misery and
conflict in many parts of the world. Lately, the
Peacebuilding Commission has promoted integrated
support, but usually well after a peace agreement has
been signed and peacekeepers have left the country.

So there is clearly a gap that is not being fully
met by those existing instruments. In a society just
emerging from conflict, there is a high expectation of
safer and better livelihoods, but we have learned the
hard lesson that a high price must be paid later because
of the failure to take opportunities at the optimal time.

It was against that backdrop that the very
important report of the Secretary-General before us
was requested by the Security Council. Today, I should
like to highlight a few points of a general nature that
are particularly relevant to the work of the Council.

My first point concerns the Council's relationship
with peacekeeping operations. Today, when we discuss
the immediate aftermath of a conflict as being up to
24 months after the signing of a peace agreement, it is
important to clearly understand the relationship
between peacekeeping operations and what we are
talking about - peacebuilding. When a peace
agreement results from United Nations peacemaking
efforts, the security situation is still very fragile, so the
agreement is frequently followed by the deployment of
a United Nations peacekeeping operation mandated by
the Security Council. In this case, we must explore
more precisely to what extent the mandate of a
Council-mandated peacekeeping operation could be
expanded to include peacebuilding activities such as,
inter alia, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, democratic governance, the rule of law
and support for capacity-building.

Recently - particularly over the past eight or
nine years, I believe - the Council has authorized
some of those activities in recent mandates of
peacekeeping operations. But clearly, there is a limit to
the degree to which a peacekeeping operation itself can
carry out all of those peacebuilding activities, given the
range of expertise, implementing agencies,
backstopping authority at Headquarters and financing
methods needed.

On the other hand, if some of these peacebuilding
activities are carried out by other entities - whether
they be United Nations entities or others - in parallel
with the peacekeeping operation, we need to consider
how the mission can better harmonize and coordinate
with those other activities. Therefore, the Council's
comprehensive review of the effective implementation
of peacekeeping operations - including through the
ongoing work of the Working Group of the Whole on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations - is
important. We commend the Secretariat's initiatives,
such as the New Horizon project, which is very useful.
They are all integral parts of the United Nations effort
aimed at ensuring stronger and more coherent
responses to international threats.

I should also like to stress that it is important for
the Council to acknowledge that peacekeeping
operations and peacebuilding should be pursued not in
sequence, but simultaneously.

My second point concerns strategy and
leadership. One of the characteristics of post-conflict
peacebuilding - unlike peacekeeping operations - is
the need for active participation by a diverse range of
experts and many actors and for programmes involving
various methods of work and financing. Therefore, it is
indispensable that various United Nations organs and
other stakeholders work in a coordinated and coherent
fashion from the very outset.

In promoting partnership, national leaders and
diverse partners must share a common vision of what
they are working together to achieve in order to avoid a
relapse into conflict. National ownership is of the very
first order, as everyone has stressed so far. However,
we must recognize that, in the immediate aftermath of
conflict, national capacity is very limited. Therefore,
with full respect for the country's ownership, the
United Nations is expected to take a leading role and to
adopt an action-oriented approach, initially with a
streamlined priority plan and subsequently with an
integrated strategy. We must be flexible in its
sequencing and simplify planning and prioritize
projects for speedy action. It is essential to produce a
tangible, visible outcome in order to gain the
confidence of the local population, even before an
elaborate integrated strategy is in place.

To pursue a common vision and coherence among
various players, we need strong leadership. The most
senior United Nations representative in the field is
usually tasked with the challenges of bringing the
partners to the table and mobilizing resources. It is
equally important to ensure that field representatives
receive coordinated guidance and support from
Headquarters. Therefore, we welcome the Secretary-
General's initiative to strengthen his senior-level
coordinating mechanism at Headquarters. The
responsibilities of the lead department and the role of
other departments, programmes and funds at
Headquarters should be clearly defined so as to
maximize impacts and resources.
My third point concerns implementing
capacity - people and money. In order to implement
peacebuilding efforts according to a vision or a priority
plan, we need to strengthen implementation capacity.
Here, civilians with experience in a wide range of
specialized areas are essential. Recommendations such
as a standing capacity for a quick-reaction team - as
mentioned in the Secretary-General's report - creating
a roster and training are important and deserve detailed
examination and implementation on a priority basis.
The United Nations should also tap into the knowledge
and expertise of particular Member States, especially
those in the developing world. For its part, Japan
initiated a training programme for Asian peacebuilding
experts at the Hiroshima Peacebuilders Centre three
years ago. We are ready to support United Nations
efforts in this area.

Mobilizing additional resources is vitally
important. The recommendations that a new type of
multi-donor trust fund - either country-specific or
general-purpose - be created and that the terms of
reference of the Peacebuilding Fund be expanded need
careful review in terms of their feasibility. In the
current situation, in which the peacekeeping budget is
consuming so many resources, and in the light of the
substantial resource requirements in the immediate
aftermath of conflict - here, we are talking about a
different magnitude of resources - we all need to
think creatively and to make the best possible use of
existing channels, including international financial
institutions such as the World Bank and regional
development banks. The creation of new financial
mechanisms needs to be attractive from the donors'
point of view. We also need to identify non-traditional
partners and expand the donor base.

Finally, the Peacebuilding Commission has
definitely played an extremely important role in
mobilizing support for four specific countries
designated by the Security Council. They are making
serious efforts - in most cases, after the peacekeeping
operation in question has been completed. The strength
and comparative advantage of the Peacebuilding
Commission is its convening and coordinating power,
which is based on an elaborate integrated strategy. I
believe that what is now necessary is to consolidate the
Commission's achievements, rather than to expand its
responsibilities beyond its capacity.

Of course, Japan is open to the idea of examining
how the Peacebuilding Commission can make a
difference in the early phase of post-conflict recovery.
But we need to realize that peacebuilding activities in
the immediate aftermath of conflict require different
methods of work and support mechanisms - not only
on the ground, but also at Headquarters - from those
that have been employed over the past several years.

We should also recognize that, in the situation under
consideration, peacekeeping operations are most often
being deployed in parallel. Therefore, I believe that, as
the parent body, the Security Council has the
responsibility to play its useful role of tasking the
Peacebuilding Commission with providing advice and
assistance on specific aspects of peacebuilding
challenges.

In conclusion, we very much hope to take
advantage of this opportunity and that the United
Nations will strengthen its response to post-conflict
early recovery.

