Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): The Chinese delegation wishes to thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Director Rajasingham for their briefings. China commends Special Envoy' Griffiths for his vigorous efforts to advance the political process in Yemen and supports the hard work of the United Nations and relevant agencies to improve the humanitarian situation in Yemen. We hope that in the new year, the international community, including the Security Council, can achieve breakthroughs in the political settlement of the Yemeni issue. With respect to this year's work, we would like to share the following perspectives. First, the parties in Yemen need to stay the course towards a political solution and continue to advance the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh agreement, with a view to reaching an early relaunching of the United Nations-led comprehensive political settlement. Despite twists and turns in the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, it has played a vital role in easing tensions in Al-Hudaydah and promoting dialogue among Yemeni parties and must continue to be implemented. The implementation of the Riyadh agreement bears directly on the political negotiations in the next step. China has taken note of the recent consensus reached between the Yemeni Government and the Southern Transitional Council on military and security sectors, in addition to many other provisions of the agreement. We applaud Saudi Arabia and other countries in the region for their continued good offices. We encourage Yemeni parties to jointly maintain solidarity and stability in the south, in order to safeguard the country's sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity. China supports Special Envoy - Griffiths' preparations for the new round of peace talks anchored in the existing agreements. We support another renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) and hope that the Mission will remain committed to its mandate and support the implementation of agreements for the maintenance of overall stability in Al-Hudaydah. Secondly, the Security Council, countries in the region and the rest of the international community must carry out robust good offices, work in synergy and create the conditions for dialogue and negotiation among Yemeni parties. The members of the Council must remain seized of the issue of Yemen and discuss how to promote dialogue and negotiation among Yemeni parties through a variety of means. They must exchange views on how to further implement the existing agreements, attenuate the situation in Aden and deliver a complete ceasefire across the territory, among other such measures. Countries in the region need to continue to exercise their positive influence on Yemeni parties to encourage them to build up mutual trust through the exchange of prisoners and other measures and uphold the momentum of the ceasefire and dialogue. China has maintained contact with all Yemeni parties. On 2 January, the Chinese Ambassador in Yemen met with President Hadi Mansour of Yemen. At this meeting, the President reiterated his political will to spare no effort to advance the implementation of the Riyadh agreement and actively participate in the United Nations-led peace process. China will continue with its diplomatic efforts to encourage the parties to bridge gaps and broaden consensus. Thirdly, the international community should improve the livelihood of the Yemeni people with a more tailored approach, prioritize the secure supply of oil, food and drinking water, stabilize currency and commodity prices, contain cholera and other diseases, assist in development and reconstruction projects, focus on education and training for children and youth, and increase employment. Given the dire humanitarian situation in Yemen and the fact that the people of the country have long borne the brunt of the war, it is imperative for Yemeni parties to fully coordinate with the humanitarian operations of the United Nations and other relevant agencies to prevent further deterioration of the humanitarian crisis. China has consistently provided humanitarian assistance to the Yemeni people through bilateral and multilateral channels while upholding the view that peace and stability in countries in conflict shouldbe promoted through development. China signed an agreement on economic and technical cooperation with the Yemeni Government. On 15 January, China signed a further agreement with the Ministry of Health of Yemen under which China will send a consignment of medical equipment to the country valued at ¥ 9.8 million. China stands ready to continue to do more practical work for the benefit of the Yemeni people, engage in Yemen's economic reconstruction and play a constructive role for the prompt achievement of lasting peace and stability in Yemen.
