Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin my statement by paying
well-deserved tribute to and thanking Mr. Jeremiah
Kingsley Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative
for Darfur and Head of the United Nations-African
Union Mission in Darfur (UNAMID), for his excellent
briefing on the bimonthly report the Secretary-General
on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (S/2018/154) and his tremendous efforts at the
helm of this important mission. We also congratulate
and thank Ambassador Joanna Wronecka of Poland
for her substantive and insightful briefing as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005), concerning the Sudan.

Based on the briefings we have just heard, there
has been a marked improvement in the overall security
situation in Darfur with very few, if any, clashes
reported between the Government and armed groups
in Darfur during the dry season, which is encouraging
and highlighted in the Secretary-General's report. The
Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
commends the Sudanese Government for creating an
environment and conditions conducive to ensuring
lasting improvement in Darfur, and urges it to
continue working towards that end. We fully support
it in its search for a definitive solution that will bring
irreversible peace to Darfur.

In order to achieve that objective, the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea believes that in the current
phase, both the United Nations and the international
community must enhance their support for the
Sudanese Government and UNAMID so that they may
in turn address the root causes of the crisis which, at
times, can spark isolated clashes that could potentially
escalate. That is the case of intercommunal attacks,
which require mediation and reconciliation efforts to
prevent and put an end to such conflicts.

Additionally, there is an urgent need to support
the Sudanese Government in its weapons-collection
programme. The full implementation of that programme
is critical not only to maintaining the current peace in
Darfur, but also to restoring definitive peace to the
region, especially since that critical programme is
being carried out in the Jebel Marra zone, controlled by
the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid.

While the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
commends the Sudanese Government for these actions,
it also urges the Government to closely monitor the
activities of the Rapid Support Force during the
weapons-collection operation. It must urge the Forces
to abstain from interfering with internally displaced
persons, especially in Central Darfur, so as to prevent a
resurgence of tension in the zone.

Parallel to the security situation in Darfur
which, according to the report presented today by
Mr. Mamabolo, has been constantly improving, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea would like to see similar
improvements at the political level, accompanied by
significant progress in the political process and the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur to secure a total ceasefire. In that regard, greater
support must be provided to the political process led by
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel.

In order to facilitate all of those aspects, we must
eliminate all obstacles. That is why we once again
thank Ambassador Wronecka, Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005)
concerning the Sudan, for the work of the Committee
in monitoring the activities of rebel groups in Darfur,
Libya and South Sudan with a view to updating and
imposing new sanctions to serve as a deterrent to
activities that derail peace efforts.

In conclusion, we once again applaud the Sudanese
Government and UNAMID for their peace efforts in
Darfur and urge them to redouble their efforts for the
sake of the Sudanese population in general and the
people of Darfur in particular, and to appeal to the
international community to lend all necessary support
to the establishment ofpeace and peacebuilding in order
to ensure the rebuilding of Darfur and the launching of
a plan for its development.

