Ms. Tawk (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing. I
also welcome Mr. Vuk Jeremic', Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and thank him for his statement. I
also thank Mr. Skender Hyseni for his statement.

It is encouraging that the number of security
incidents has decreased, compared to the period
covered by the previous report (S/2010/ 169).
Nevertheless, progress remains relative, particularly in
northern Kosovo, where security incidents continue to
create an atmosphere of tension. It is therefore
important for security forces to remain vigilant and for
the perpetrators of acts of violence to be prosecuted in
order to reassure all citizens, including minorities.
We welcome the efforts of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to maintain security and stability, facilitate dialogue
and encourage reconciliation among the various
communities. We appreciate its role in encouraging
regional cooperation and facilitating Kosovo's
participation in regional and international forums. We
also commend the coordination and regular exchanges
of information between UNMIK and the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo within the
context of the status-neutral role called for in
resolution 1244 (1999).

We support the Secretary-General's call in his
report (S/2010/401) on the European Union to join
efforts with the United Nations and to coordinate with
the Organization in facilitating dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina aimed at peacefully resolving the
outstanding issues.

We welcome the progress made on missing
persons, as well as the protection of the religious and
cultural heritage sites of the Serbian Orthodox church.
We hope that this cooperation between Belgrade and
Pristina will extend to all areas. There is no doubt that
it remains necessary to ensure international support for
the rapprochement between the two sides. However,
the primary responsibility for finding a way out of the
current impasse lies with the political leaders of both
sides. We call on them to extend the hand of dialogue
and to tackle controversial issues in a spirit of
openness and flexibility in order to address the
interests and achieve the aspirations of the peoples of
the region to a brighter future.

On the other hand, efforts must focus on
transparent and flexible dialogue towards
reconciliation among all communities in Kosovo,
pursuant to the calls made by this Council in the
meeting held following the 2 July incidents (see S/PV.6353), at which most members stressed the need
for dialogue. This was also noted by the Secretary-
General in his report, in which he expresses concern
about the potential for instability that could result from
a lack of concrete progress on reconciliation among the
various communities, combined the difficult
conditions.

In this context, it is imperative to ensure
complementarity between reconciliation efforts and the
promotion of economic and development activities for
various groups. This will have a positive impact not
only on security and stability, but also on the
sustainable return of refugees and internally displaced
persons, which remains scant.

Finally, we take note of the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice issued on 22 July. We
express the hope that the next stage will be propitious
for a peaceful settlement of this issue and will lead to a
climate of stability in the Western Balkans.

