Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
am greatly honoured to attend this Security Council
meeting on the Middle East as Special Envoy to
Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi. I wish to thank the
Government of the Russian Federation for this
initiative and you personally, Mr. President, for
presiding over today's meeting. My thanks go also to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing on the
current situation in the Middle East.

Resolution 1860 (2009), adopted by the Security
Council in January this year, is the result of arduous
efforts by all parties. It brought about the Israeli-
Palestinian ceasefire and created conditions for a
resumption of the Middle East peace process.
Regrettably, however, the resolution has not been
implemented comprehensively or effectively. Israel
should open the border crossings to Gaza in order to
facilitate reconstruction efforts and improve access to
Gaza for humanitarian supplies in order to ease the
humanitarian crisis there. Israel should also put an end
to its ongoing construction of settlements in the West
Bank. Palestine should strengthen its internal unity and
reconciliation process. The parties concerned must
avoid the use of force, prevent civilian casualties and
ensure the implementation of resolution 1860 (2009).

Political negotiation is the only path towards a
lasting peace in the Middle East; the use of force will
not achieve it. To the contrary, the cycle of violence
will only exacerbate hatred and confrontation. The
situation in the Middle East is now at a very critical
stage. We hope that the parties concerned will hold
firm in their determination to resolve the issue through
political negotiations and refrain from any action that
could undermine mutual trust and reconciliation in
order to create conditions for a resumption of
negotiations.

At the core of the Middle East issue is the
Palestinian question. The ultimate solution to the
Palestinian question is the realization of the vision of
two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace. The parties concerned should continue to act in
the spirit enshrined in the relevant United Nations
resolutions and adhere to the principle of land for
peace and the two-State solution. They should press for
the early achievement of reconciliation between Israel
and Palestine, the establishment of an independent
State of Palestine, and peaceful coexistence between
Arabs and Jews. We hope that both Israel and Palestine
will bear in mind the fundamental interests of their
peoples and make the right choice.

The achievement of a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East depends on the
resolution of all relevant issues in the region. The
negotiations between Syria and Israel and between
Lebanon and Israel are important components of the
Middle East peace process. They should be promoted
as part of a holistic approach. At the same time, other
volatile issues in the region should also be
appropriately addressed in order to create an external
environment favourable to the peace process.

The Middle East process cannot succeed without
the assistance and support of the international
community, which should continue to support the
development of Palestine and immediately fulfil its
commitment to reconstruction in Gaza. The parties
concerned should uphold justice and strengthen
mediation while, at the same time, considering the
establishment of a broadly representative, balanced and
effective multilateral mechanism to provide oversight
and support for the Middle East peace process.

China supports the efforts of the Quartet. We
welcome any initiative that will contribute to the
Middle East peace process. We support Russia's
proposal to hold an international conference on the
Middle East in Moscow.

China always attaches great importance to the
issue of the Middle East and is committed to promoting
the peace process there. Chinese leaders have worked
vigorously to promote peace and negotiations in the
region through frequent communications with leaders
of the countries concerned.

Two weeks ago, Chinese Minister for Foreign
Affairs Yang Jiechi visited Egypt, Palestine, Israel and
Syria, where he had in-depth exchanges of views of the
leaders of those countries and with the Secretary-
General of the League of Arab States on the Middle
East peace process. He put forward China's proposals
on how to promote the Middle East peace process and
provided further assistance to Palestine for its
reconstruction efforts.
China will continue to work with the rest of the
international community for the early and appropriate
settlement of the Middle East issue and will play a
constructive role in the achievement of a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the region.

