Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras)(interpretation from Spanish): Since the coup d'etat of October 1993, the
situation in Burundi has been steadily deteriorating. The
central aspect of the crisis continues to be the mutual
mistrust between the Hutu and Tutsi groups. There is
widespread fear that this mistrust and the actions of
extremists could lead inevitably to civil war, unless a
broad-based political dialogue is soon established in that
country to promote national reconciliation, democracy,
security and law, and unless ways are found to put an end
to the impunity that has held sway for so long.

That political dialogue should take place with all
sectors prepared to talk: political parties, recognized or
not, the armed forces, civil society and the church.
Although it is up to the Burundis to resolve their national
problems, we believe that the commitment and
participation of the international community is essential to
establish a general framework for reconciliation.
Accordingly, we should recognize the efforts being made

 

by the Organization of African Unity, the European Union
and the facilitators.

In Burundi there are various problems that must be
resolved. First, there must be an end to impunity. That is
one of the main factors that cause the continuous violation
of human rights, and we therefore believe there is an urgent
need to strengthen the judicial system. Secondly, the system
of security and domestic order must be strengthened; the
responsibility of the various authorities entrusted with
maintaining order and domestic security must be clearly
delineated, and the authorities must be trained in the field
of human rights so that a climate of better understanding
and tolerance can exist in the country. Moreover, all
activities that incite violence and ethnic hatred and that
heighten tensions must come to a halt, and the role played
by the media must be strictly monitored. If we wish to
prevent the tragedy of Rwanda from taking place in
Burundi, the international community must contribute to
creating mechanisms designed to foster confidence and to
promote acceptance of the ethnic composition of the
Burundi population. All efforts to bring an end to the crisis
should enjoy the full support of the international community
and should be accompanied by the necessary resources to
meet the goals of national reconciliation, reconstruction and
economic rehabilitation in Burundi. Above all, we must
recognize that the peace and stability of Burundi are also
the peace and stability of the whole Great Lakes region.

My delegation shares the concern of the members of
this Council at the steady deterioration of the situation in
Burundi, and we reiterate that we must spare no effort to
promote dialogue and reconciliation in that country. But at
the same time, we regret the treatment given the
international humanitarian assistance personnel working in
that country. As the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Mrs. Sadako Ogata, reported, the continuation of
humanitarian aid is essential to attend to the needs of the
Burundis and the refugees, who for more than two years
have been affected by turbulence in the region. It is
impossible to conceive of a moment when, for reasons
relating to the security of personnel responsible for
humanitarian activities, these activities have to be
suspended, thus creating a true emergency situation. My
delegation therefore agrees with the decision to send a
technical mission to Burundi to study, present security
arrangements for United Nations personnel and facilities,
with a view to improving them. We urge the Burundi
authorities and security forces to cooperate with that
technical mission.

To conclude, my delegation wishes to appeal to all
those responsible for the deterioration of the situation in
Burundi to participate in a constructive spirit in the broad
political dialogue, referred to in the draft resolution we
are going to adopt; we will vote in favour of it.

