Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency for the Council for the month of March, as
well as to thank you for convening this open debate on
this very important subject.

As a nation that has experienced the impact of the
illicit trafficking and the smuggling of small arms,
Indonesia well recognizes how dangerous they can be
and how they can hurt the process of development,
security and national integrity.

My delegation is pleased to note the efforts that
have been made so far towards the implementation of
the various recommendations contained in the report of
the Secretary-General before us. It is important to
emphasize that those recommendations clearly focus
on areas of competence of the Security Council alone,
that is, the maintenance of international peace and
security. In view of the time available to delegations to
contribute to this debate, I shall limit myself to making
a few general observations and specific
recommendations of particular interest.

We fully support every initiative to develop a
mechanism to identify and trace illicit small arms and
light weapons in a timely and reliable manner. In that
respect, we are gratified that, last December, the
General Assembly adopted an International Instrument
in that regard. Despite its non-legally binding nature,
we hope that Member States will be committed to fully
implementing its provisions. We believe that sound
cooperation among countries in the field of tracing
illegal small arms will be a critical factor for success in
the overall struggle to prevent, combat and eradicate
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all
its aspects.

With regard to recommendation 4, concerning
means by which the Security Council might enhance its
interaction with the General Assembly in the area of
long-term strategies to halt the scourge of the illicit
proliferation of small arms, we believe that enhanced
interaction between the General Assembly and the
Security Council would contribute to developing a
coherent and comprehensive United Nations policy on
small arms and light weapons. While, currently, the
two principal organs have addressed the issue of small
arms within their respective mandates, interaction and
coordination between them on that issue would
encourage the complementarity of their work and
would therefore be welcomed. Indeed, that would be
fully in line with paragraph 70 of resolution 60/1 -
the 2005 world summit outcome document - which
recognizes that, in accordance with the Charter,
addressing matters of peace and collective security
requires cooperation among all the principal organs of
the United Nations within their respective mandates.

With regard to recommendation 5, we share the
concern that was raised by a coalition of international
non-governmental organizations in a report that quite a
number of United Nations embargoes imposed in the
last decade have been repeatedly violated. Further
steps by the Council are required to remedy that.

Let me turn to recommendation 7, by which the
Security Council is encouraged to call upon relevant
parties to conflicts under its consideration to recognize
the importance of activities related to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) and of
including such measures in negotiated agreements. The
Council has continued to do that and to draw the
attention of relevant parties to their obligations in that
respect. We encourage the continuation of DDR
programmes in conflict areas, such as the programme
that was implemented by the United Nations Operation
in Cote d'Ivoire.

With reference to recommendation 9 on the
Council's encouraging States that lack legislative or
other measures to ensure effective control over the
export and transit of small arms and light weapons, my
delegation has no doubt that such mechanisms could
indeed contribute to more responsible and legal
transfers of weapons. However, we hope that it will
continue to be implemented without prejudice to the
right of States to legally trade or acquire such weapons
for the purpose of their defence and security.

My delegation commends the Security Council
for its continued commitment to eradicating the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons within its
mandated area of international peace and security.
However, as we look ahead to the 2006 United Nations
conference to review the implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, it is necessary to remind
ourselves that the problem is of a broader dimension
than the mandate of the Security Council. As we all
know, there is a tremendous amount of work being
done elsewhere, particularly in the General Assembly.
The Programme of Action adopted by the General
Assembly in 2001 is a powerful tool and remains the
cornerstone for building norms on small arms and light
weapons.

In our view, the door to success on that issue is
cooperation between all relevant parties, and we
encourage all the principal organs and agencies of the
United Nations that have a contribution to make to do
so in the spirit of the common objective. Let us be
conscious of the fact that the illicit trafficking of small
arms and light weapons is a major problem and may
indeed be the key obstacle not only to peace, but also
to development. As we have seen, it has also been the
factor that opens the door from peace back to chaos
and war.

In conclusion, we hope that the result of this
debate may contribute to the substantive outcome of
the review conference on the Programme of Action.

