The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Costa for the clarifications he has provided. I note
that he made reference to the notion of trust in
international relations, and I am reminded that in an
office of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of a Council
member is written the sentence: "In God we trust;
others, we verify".

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.

"The Security Council notes with concern
the serious threats posed in some cases by drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime to
international security in different regions of the
world. These transnational threats are a source of
growing concern.

"The Security Council, in this context,
further notes with concern the increasing link, in
some cases, between drug trafficking and the
24

financing of terrorism, including through the use
of proceeds derived from illicit cultivation,
production of and trafficking in narcotic drugs
and their precursors, as well as illegal arms
trafficking.

"The Security Council notes that these
transnational crimes may threaten the security of
countries on its agenda, including post-conflict
States, and expresses its intention to consider
such threats, as appropriate.

"The Security Council notes with concern
that drug trafficking and transnational organized
crime contribute to undermining the authority of
States.

"The Security Council notes that, in a
globalized society, organized crime groups and
networks, better equipped with new information
and communication technologies, are becoming
more diversified and connected in their illicit
operations, which in some cases may aggravate
threats to international security. In this context,
the Council expresses concern at the increase in
incidences of kidnapping and hostage-taking, in
some areas of the world with a specific political
context, with the aim of raising funds or gaining
political concessions. The development of
cybercrime is another particular source of concern.

"The Security Council calls upon Member
States to increase international and regional
cooperation, on the basis of a common and shared
responsibility, as well as their cooperation with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and the International Narcotics Control Board, in
order to counter the illicit production of, demand
for and trafficking in drugs, and to identify
emerging trends in drug trafficking. It welcomes
relevant initiatives such as the Paris Pact. The
Council also encourages Member States to
undertake further action, as well as to consider,
on the basis of concrete proposals by UNODC and
INCB, through the United Nations Commission
on Narcotic Drugs, possible new international
initiatives aimed at strengthening the combat
against illicit trafficking in chemical precursors.

"The Security Council encourages the
coordination of United Nations actions, including
those of its agencies, funds and programmes, in
order to enhance the effectiveness of appropriate
international efforts.

"The Security Council reaffirms and
commends the important work of UNODC in
collaboration with other relevant entities of the
United Nations.

"The Security Council encourages States to
strengthen international, regional and subregional
cooperation to counter drug trafficking,
transnational organized crime, terrorism and
corruption and to investigate and prosecute, as
appropriate, persons and entities responsible for
these crimes consistent with international law.
Through compliance with their obligations under

international law, including the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, States can
help strengthen international peace and security.
The Council notes relevant international
conventions such as the Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972
Protocol, the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances of 1971, the United Nations
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988, the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime of 2000 and the Protocols
thereto, the United Nations Convention against
Corruption of 2003 and the relevant international
conventions and protocols related to terrorism.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
about the number of Victims caused by acts of
terrorism in various regions of the world. The
Council further reiterates that acts, methods and
practices of terrorism, as well as knowingly
financing, planning and inciting terrorist acts, are
contrary to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations. The Council calls upon States to
continue to condemn in the strongest terms all
10-25007
terrorist acts, irrespective of their motivation,
whenever and by whomsoever committed, as well
as the incitement of terrorism.

"The Security Council invites the Secretary-
General to consider these threats as a factor in
conflict prevention strategies, conflict analysis,
integrated missions' assessment and planning and
to consider including in his reports, as
appropriate, analysis on the role played by these
threats in situations on its agenda.

"The Security Council welcomes further
briefings, as necessary, on a more regular basis,
by the Executive Director of UNODC."

In French, at least, that was hardly an example of
literature.

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2010/4.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.
