Mr. Schori: In formulating a new way forward
for the peace process, the Addis Ababa summit, which
was preceded by the Abuja summit of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), has
given hope to the people of cote d'Ivoire. It has also
helped to dispel some of the uncertainty about what
would happen after 30 October. However, the Ivorian
leaders are yet to embrace the new path to peace and to
bury their deep-rooted mutual distrust and suspicion.
At the same time, several major challenges stand in the
way of sustainable peace and security. Let me offer a
few brief observations from the field, so to speak.

In the whole of Cote d'Ivoire there is too much
anxiety and fear in the air and too many Kalashnikovs
in the streets. Rampant insecurity seems to be the order
of the day. This results from continued violations of
human rights; threats to foreigners, especially to
ECOWAS citizens; intimidation of political opponents;
and repeated obstruction of the impartial forces'
freedom of movement. The stalemate in the processes
of dismantling the militias, of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) and of the
preparations for elections, as well as the aggressive
media environment, are other reasons for the insecure
situation.

The latest human rights report of the United
Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire (UNOCI), covering
the period May to July 2005, which was released five
days ago in Abidjan, makes gruesome reading. The
report depicts in detail numerous human rights
violations committed with increasing frequency by
elements of the Government-controlled defence and
security forces, military elements of the Forces
nouvelles, armed and unarmed militia associated with
either side of the Ivorian conflict, and criminals. The
lack of rule of law has taken root.

The perpetrators of those violations have thus far
enjoyed near-total impunity for the gross human rights
violations that they inflict upon a defenceless
population. That makes it difficult for ONUCI human
rights and police officers to identify the individual
perpetrators of the serious human rights violations that
they discover daily in the course of their work. Human
rights offenders apprehended by the impartial forces in
the zone of confidence are, as a rule, released without
further action by the authorities.

Serious violations of the fundamental human
rights of Ivorian citizens are both a cause and a
consequence of the political and military crisis in Cote
d'Ivoire since September 2002. Sustained efforts by the
international community to achieve lasting peace and
promote national reconciliation will prove incomplete
unless decisive action is taken to end the culture of
impunity for serious human rights violations.

In that regard, I would like to emphasize the call
by the Secretary-General to the Security Council to
urgently consider the report of the International
Commission of Inquiry into allegations of serious
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law committed in Cote d'Ivoire. The
report covers the period from 19 September 2002 to
16 October 2004, and was transmitted to the Council
by the Secretary-General on 23 December 2004.

As indicated in the report of the Secretary-
General before the Council (S/2005/604), efforts by the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) to
restore and maintain a secure and stable environment
in the country have been severely hindered by the
recurrent obstruction of the impartial forces' freedom
of movement and operation. Since the incidents in
Anyama and Agboville in July, more than 60 cases of
obstruction to UNOCI's freedom of movement have
been registered. The majority of them have occurred in
the Government-controlled southern part of the
country. As a result, UNOCI is developing a more
assertive strategy aimed at preventing and curbing
further cases of obstruction, which includes steps taken
at the highest political and military levels and nation-
wide public information campaigns to better promote
the role and mandate of the mission in Cote d'Ivoire.

The proliferation of militia groups in various
parts of the country has also seriously hampered the
mission's efforts to enhance security, especially in
view of the close association of those groups with
political forces. A few first steps have been taken to
dismantle and disarm the militias. Unfortunately, the
process lacks the necessary transparency and
credibility.

Preparations for the disarmament and
demobilization of combatants have progressed
significantly. The construction and rehabilitation of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration sites
has been completed in 70 per cent of areas controlled
by the Forces nouvelles, in the north, and in 95
per cent of Government-controlled areas. However, the
commencement of the process is still being held
hostage by the demand of the Forces nouvelles that the
question of identification should first be adequately
resolved. In an effort to break that stalemate, UNOCI
has proposed a step-by-step approach starting with the
pre-cantonment of combatants in the villages of Bouna
and Bondoukou, on opposing sides of the zone of
confidence, as a prelude to the dismantling and
disarming of the militias. All outstanding political
issues, including identification, would be addressed in
parallel.

Mr. Monteiro will report to the Council on the
preparations for the elections. Progress in those
preparations will also depend upon the creation of
adequate political and security conditions to allow for
unhindered humanitarian access, freedom of movement
and campaigning throughout the country.

In considering the report of the summit meeting
that the African Union just presented to the Security
Council, Council members may wish to pay urgent
attention to the following points, in order to facilitate
the effective implementation of the Addis Ababa
decisions. In that connection, the following steps could
be considered.

First, the conclusions of the African Union
Summit should be endorsed, so as to send a strong
message about the need to preserve and reinforce the
international community's unity of purpose and action.

Secondly, the urgent convening of the meeting of
the international working group aimed at defining a
new timetable, with key benchmarks, for the
implementation of the remaining provisions of the
Pretoria Agreement should be encouraged. That could
be linked to automatic imposition of targeted sanctions.

Thirdly, in order not to delay the implementation
process, the Prime Minister and his, or her,
Government should be in place as soon as possible.

Fourthly, noting that the mandate of the National
Assembly ends in December 2005, timely
recommendations should be made on the role of the
legislature thereafter.

Fifthly, Presidents Obasanjo and Mbeki should be
supported in their forthcoming visit to Cote d'Ivoire, in
order to secure the commitment of all Ivorian leaders
to implementing the Addis Ababa decision.
Finally, there is a need to clarify the role of the
United Nations, given the critical and concrete tasks it
is expected to perform in support of the
implementation of key aspects of the peace process.
With the current mistrust among Ivorian leaders, I
personally also believe that UNOCI's impartiality can
significantly help shape and implement a proactive and
forward-looking agenda for the peace process in Cote
d'Ivoire.

In closing, I would like to say that I could hardly
have failed to come here today, given that a couple of
days ago thousands of people accompanied me on the
way to the airport. It was young patriots who
accompanied me; it was overjoyed Ivorians celebrating
their country's successful qualification for soccer's
World Cup matches, to be held in Germany next year.
They showed tremendous unity, pride and hope in their
country. I think that also gives us hope. At the same
time, we are now seeing unique unity in the
international community as regards cote d'Ivoire. Let
us therefore join those two "spirits" of unity, in Cote
d'Ivoire and here, and help the people of Cote d'Ivoire
move forward.

