The Secretary-General: Today, I report to the
Security Council for the last time on the situation in the
Middle East. It saddens me that my last such briefing
brings no sense of optimism for the future.

Some may ask why, given all the crises in the
region, I have chosen to address the Council on the
question of Palestine. To them, I say that while the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is not the cause of the wars
in the Middle East, its resolution can create momentum
for peace throughout the region. In 1947, on the basis
of General Assembly resolution 181 (II), the world
recognized the two-State solution and called for the
emergence of independent Arab and Jewish States.
On 14 May 1948, the State of Israel was born. Almost
seven decades later, the world still awaits the birth of
the Palestinian State.

As the Security Council has made clear, Gaza and
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, have been
under military occupation since 1967. These lands
comprise the future Palestinian State, ultimately to
be agreed by the parties through direct negotiations.
History has shown that peace and security can be built
only on the basis of respect and mutual acceptance.
The right of the Jewish people to have a State does not
negate the right of the Palestinian people to statehood.

Yet Palestinian frustration and grievances are
growing under the weight of nearly half a century of
humiliating occupation. Ten years ago, the majority
of both peoples believed in the two-State solution;
today, that majority is unravelling. Leaders on both
sides increasingly speak to their ever more radicalized
constituencies, rather than to each other. The
expanding Israeli settlement enterprise and an ever-
more entrenched status quo is preventing Palestinian
development and locking in Gaza. Some Israeli
politicians increasingly call for the so-called full
annexation of the West Bank. Gaza and the West Bank
remain politically divided, and Palestinian factions fail
to make the compromises necessary for national unity.
Israelis feel that there is no end in sight to terrorism,
as incitement and calls for Israel's obliteration continue
unchallenged by Palestinian leaders.

The framework for peace remains unchanged - the
establishment oftwo States, on the basis ofthe principle
of land for peace and a just and comprehensive regional
peace consistent with relevant Security Council
resolutions, as well as with existing agreements signed
between the parties. As I took office 10 years ago, the
Middle East was still recovering from the years of
the second Palestinian uprising and the war between
Israel and Hizbullah in 2006. The reaffirmation by the
League of Arab States of the Arab Peace Initiative and
the convening of the Annapolis conference in 2007
brought some hope.

Despite early optimism, attempts to reach a final
resolution failed to make headway and were upended
with the eruption of conflict in Gaza in December
2008. Further attempts at peace in 2010 and 2013 were
equally eclipsed by renewed hostilities. The summer
of 2014 saw the most devastating conflict in Gaza to
date. During the height of the fighting, I traveled to the
region and met with regional and international partners,
as well as with the leadership in Israel and Palestine,
to push for a ceasefire. An agreement, sadly, came too
slowly for those who paid a heavy price during those 50
days of horror. I said then and I continue to insist that
without addressing the deeper causes of this conflict,
such cycles of escalation will persist.

Yet another troubling measure of the current state
of play is that, during my tenure, the Security Council
has adopted only two resolutions on the Middle East
peace process, the most recent almost eight years ago.

We are fast approaching a precipice as a direct result
of the actions of those seeking to destroy the prospects
for peace. But there is a way out of this deadlock - by
both sides implementing the recommendations in the
recent report of the Middle East Quartet. That would
demonstrate that Israelis and Palestinians are serious
about building trust and laying the foundations for
meaningful negotiations that would end the occupation
based on the 1967 lines, establish a viable, independent
Palestinian State, and resolve all final status issues.

But there are also major obstacles. As I have

consistently stated, Israel's settlement activity beyond
the 1967 line is in flagrant Violation of international
law and the Fourth Geneva Convention. Settlements
eat away at the land meant for a future Palestinian
State. Over the past decade, the number of Israelis
living in settlements in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, has increased by some 30 per cent to about
600,000 people. A bill currently being debated in the
Israeli legislature risks the regularization of more than
50 outposts and thousands of housing units built on
private Palestinian land in the West Bank, which would
be a clear violation of international law. If adopted, this
legislation would for the first time apply Israeli law on
the status ofPalestinian land in the occupied West Bank.
I strongly urge legislators to reconsider advancing the
bill, which would have negative legal consequences for
Israel and substantially diminish the chances for Arab-
Israeli peace.

Bold steps by Israel to empower the Palestinian
Authority, based on the transition envisioned in previous
agreements, could bring benefits to the Palestinian
people and increase Israeli security. Progress in this
area, however, will be difficult unless the Palestinian
authorities take brave and concrete steps to address
incitement and violence. Acts and statements that glorify
terror are unacceptable. I have repeatedly and strongly
denounced incitement and all acts of terror. Stabbings,
vehicle rammings and other attacks by Palestinians do
nothing to advance their dream of statehood.

Israel must also understand that continued occupation
and heavy-handed security responses - including the
possible excessive use of force and the highly restrictive
closure policy in Gaza - play into the hands of
extremists. These actions risk undermining moderate
voices, and further deepening the gulf between the two
sides. I have also decried the practice of administrative
detention and ill-treatment in detention by Israeli and
Palestinian authorities alike. Similarly, executions of
prisoners by Hamas in Gaza are absolutely unacceptable,
and I continue to speak out against constraints on
freedom of expression by Israeli and the Palestinian
authorities, including against human rights defenders.

The absence of Palestinian unity throughout the
occupied territory presents an obstacle to the two-State
solution. The failure to organize Palestinian general
elections has remained one of the clearest signs of
this disunity and of the fragile Palestinian democratic
process. The divisions between the West Bank and Gaza
can be overcome only with the formation of a single,
legitimate and inclusive Palestinian Government,
on the basis of Palestine Liberation Organization
principles. We must urge a renewal of the democratic
legitimacy of Palestinian leadership and institutions
and ensure that they represent all Palestinians. It is
unacceptable that Hamas still boasts an anti-Semitic
Charter that aspires to the obliteration of Israel. Hamas
must once and for all renounce the use of Violence
and recognize the right of Israel to exist alongside a
Palestinian State, in accordance with all relevant
Security Council resolutions and previous agreements
between the parties.

Over the past 10 years, the Palestinian Authority has
made strides in building its institutions. In 2011, these
achievements were recognized by the international
community as being well positioned for establishment of
a State. Palestine received non-member observer State
status in 2012, and I witnessed, alongside President
Abbas, the raising of the Palestinian flag for the first
time at the United Nationsjust last year. Still, Palestine's
State-building and democratic governance aspirations
continue to be undermined by the occupation and the
lack of Palestinian national unity.

The centrality of the challenges facing Gaza cannot
be overstated. Indiscriminate rocket fire by Hamas
towards Israel for a decade has convinced many Israelis
that there is no hope for peace. After three brutal
conflicts, Israel's crippling closures and a decade-long
political divide have left 2 million Palestinians trapped
in a humanitarian tragedy, without hope for a political
horizon. I have witnessed this devastation on my four
trips to Gaza. I must warn, as I have repeatedly stated,
that Gaza is a tinder box. It is almost certain to explode
unless movement and access restrictions are lifted and
humanitarian needs are addressed; unless rocket attacks,
tunnel construction and smuggling stop; and unless
progress is made towards establishing a Palestinian
State, with Gaza as an integral and peaceful part.

I also want to take this opportunity to commend the
efforts of United Nations colleagues working with such
diligence and dedication to promote peace and prevent
yet more violence. Let me begin by honouring the
24 United Nations staff members based in the occupied
Palestinian territory who have been killed in the line of
duty during my tenure. Their sacrifices shall never be
forgotten. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East provides a much-
needed element of stability for 5.3 million Palestine
refugees across the region. It continues to face serious

financial challenges. I urge Member States to honour
their commitment and increase their contributions to
the Agency.

The Office of the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process has
been instrumental in bridging differences between all
sides, facilitating negotiations and engaging with the
region and international partners. The United Nations
country team is working under difficult circumstances
to provide relief to vulnerable Palestinians and to
help build the institutions and policies of a future
independent Palestinian State.

During the past 10 years, I have argued that we
must never accept bias against Israel within United
Nations bodies. Decades of political manoeuverings
have created a disproportionate volume of resolutions,
reports and conferences criticizing Israel. In many
cases, rather than helping the Palestinian cause, that
reality has hampered the ability of the United Nations
to fulfil its role effectively. At the same time, Israel
must realize that the reality in which a democratic State
governed by the rule oflaw keeps the Palestinian people
under military occupation will continue to generate
criticism and calls for accountability.

As we look to the future, I call on the Security
Council to reaffirm without reservations that there is
no alternative to the two-State solution. The status quo
entrenches a one-State reality of perpetual occupation
and conflict. We must not give up on the right of
Palestine to exist, just as we must protect the right of
Israel to exist in peace and security with its neighbours.

I urge the Council to explore the vast potential
of incentives and begin immediately to develop, in
consultation with the parties, an agreed framework for
advancing a final resolution to the conflict on the basis
of direct negotiations. The upcoming conference in
France could be an opportunity to begin that discussion.

The Arab Peace Initiative presents a chance to
develop a comprehensive settlement of the conflict. But
there cannot be sustainable peace between Israelis and
Arabs without progress towards Palestinian statehood.

Ten years ago, my predecessor, Kofi Annan, called
for a revitalized Middle East Quartet, working closely
with international and regional partners, to facilitate
and sustain direct negotiations. I fully believe that
architecture remains critical.

Since becoming Secretary-General, I have Visited
the region 11 times, including during periods of war.
For 10 years, I pressed Israelis and Palestinians to
start believing in a common future, bound by their
undeniable historic, religious and national connections
to the land. Those aspirations have not been fulfilled.
I will continue to hope that the majority of Israelis and
Palestinians are tired of the tug-of-war over historical
narratives.

But hope alone will not end the occupation, or rid
the Palestinian and Israeli peoples of their legitimate
fears. There must be a major shift to courageous and
concrete action by the parties that enables meaningful
negotiations. The United Nations will continue to assist
that process.

Ultimately, it is up to Israelis and Palestinians to
make peace - we cannot do it for them. They must
rebuild trust in each other as the only way to address
the fears and suspicions that have led to the deep
polarization we see today. At the same time, we all
can - and must - contribute to building trust, so
sorely needed in the Middle East and the world today.
That work must begin now, before it is too late.

