Mr. Ruiz Massieu (spoke in Spanish): It is an
honour to present to the Council the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia (S/2019/530). I wish to take this
opportunity to welcome the presence of Mr. Nestor
Popolizio Bardales, Minister for Foreign Relations of
Peru and President of the Security Council; Mr. Carlos
Holmes Trujillo Garcia, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia; and Mr. Emilio Archila, Presidential
Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation.

(spoke in English)

During their visit to Colombia last week, Council
members were able to appreciate the achievements of
the peace process since their last visit two years ago,
as well as the remaining challenges. The visit was a
timely reaffirmation of the international community's
strong support for this process. It was well received by
the Government, the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Comun (FARC), political parties from across the
spectrum, the heads of the transitional justice system,
civil society organizations, local authorities and
community leaders with whom the Council met in the
department of Cauca.

As pointed out by the Secretary-General in his
report, and as the Council was able to observe on
the ground, the assessment of the peace process
is mixed. While the efforts of the Government to
advance the reintegration of former Fuerza Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) members have begun showing important
concrete results, security in conflict-affected areas
remains of grave concern.

It is also important to highlight that, despite some
recent examples to the contrary, the great majority of
former FARC-EP members, as well as the leadership
of the FARC party, remain strongly committed to the
peace process. This commitment is reflected in their
participation in Congress, their preparations to take
part in the upcoming elections and their efforts to
reintegrate into civilian life and to build a better future
for their families and communities. To cite just a few
examples of what has been accomplished through
the perseverance of former combatants, last week
products of FARC-led cooperatives were on display
at Colombia's largest agricultural fair in Bogota,
including coffee, beef products and handicrafts. In
May, five former combatants and three community
members, who have become rafting trainers as part of
an ecotourism project, competed under the Colombian
flag at the World Rafting Championships in Australia.
The support of the Government, local communities and
the international community, among others, has been
instrumental in making this possible.

Over the past six weeks, the Government and the
FARC, joined by the Mission, have undertaken visits
to the ten territorial areas to discuss their future with
former combatants, communities and local authorities.
We commend both the Government and the FARC
for their flexibility and willingness to find mutually
agreeable solutions. This successful joint effort led by
the Government to overcome a hurdle in implementation
through dialogue should set an example to advance in
other areas.
The Government has reassured former combatants
ofits commitment to formalizing land arrangements for
the territorial areas for training and reintegration and to
maintain the monthly allowance for former combatants.
It is essential to ensure the adequate resources to meet
Government goals for housing, health, education
and childcare.

It is urgent to increase the number of productive
projects for former combatants and to provide the
necessary technical assistance and access to markets in
order to ensure their sustainability. Both parties have a
responsibility to re-energize the process ofpresentation,
approval and disbursement of funding for the projects.
Communities, ethnic populations and women should be
at the centre of these efforts.

Proper attention must also be paid to the
approximately 8,000 former combatants living outside
the territorial areas, including in new settlements and
urban areas. All actors involved in supporting the
reintegration process must recognize this changing
landscape and adapt strategies accordingly with a view
to providing these former combatants with reintegration
options and security guarantees.

As the Council heard directly from communities in
Cauca, the security situation is extremely concerning
in former conflict areas. Since the Secretary-General's
report was issued three weeks ago, four more former
combatants have been killed, bringing the number
of former FARC-EP members killed since the peace
agreement was signed to 127. One of those killed
was a former mid-level commander who had been
active in the negotiations in Havana and was leading a
productive project.

The Special Investigation Unit of the Office of
the Attorney General reports advances in half of the
cases of killings of former combatants. This progress is
key, as timely investigations are essential to combating
impunity, including for the intellectual authors of
these crimes. In this context, we welcome the new
measures announced by President Duque Marquez to
improve security and protection for former combatants.
Sufficient resources should also be provided to the
National Protection Unit, which provides protection for
FARC members.

It is important to make every effort so that the
upcoming October elections can be as peaceful as
last year's presidential and legislative elections. These
elections will be another important step in the political
reintegration of the FARC. To date, the party has
registered more than 120 candidates, approximately
half of whom are former combatants. Additional steps
must be taken to ensure their security, as well as that of
candidates from all other political parties.

We remain gravely concerned about the situation
of social leaders and human rights defenders. As was
mentioned earlier, one leader from Cauca, Francia
Marquez, was not able to attend the meeting with
the Council after being threatened by an illegal
armed group. The plight of hundreds of brave leaders
under threat around the country is unacceptable. The
subcommission of the National Commission on Security
Guarantees recently met to receive inputs from civil
society organizations, but we remain concerned that
the Commission itself has not met for many months.
Its mandate, which is the design and implementation of
a public policy to dismantle criminal organizations, is
essential to putting a stop to these killings.

It is important to note that the Government has
just announced protective measures for leaders of
the National Comprehensive Programme for the
Substitution of Illicit Crops. I welcome those measures,
as well as recent efforts to implement a comprehensive
programme to address the specific situation of women
leaders. These populations are particularly vulnerable
to threats from criminal armed groups and deserve the
special attention they are being given.

The presence of illegal armed groups in former
conflict areas affects all actors present in those areas,
including members of the public security forces, whose
deaths at the hands of these groups we also strongly
deplore. In this context, the importance of establishing
an integrated presence of the State - both security
and civilian institutions - in conflict-affected areas
cannot be overstated. It is not surprising that local
communities and authorities have been unanimous in
their desire for the territorial areas for training and
reintegration to remain, as the resulting increased
presence of State institutions has brought improvements
in security and economic activity. The implementation
of the development programmes with a territorial focus
should also have a positive effect in bringing much-
needed investments to these areas.
Thepastfewweekshavebeenmarkedbytheincreased
participation of victims in the Comprehensive System
of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition. For
instance, on 26 June the Truth Commission held its first
national event on truth, focused on victims of sexual
violence during the conflict. Colombia's innovative
model of restorative justice is starting to deliver on
its promise to ensure justice and reparations for the
victims. Continued support for the comprehensive
system, including adequate financial resources, is of
the essence.

(spoke in Spanish)

On 15 July, President Duque enacted one of the
Government's proposed constitutional reforms, which
focuses on provisions of the Final Agreement for the
Termination of Conflict and the Construction of a Stable
and Lasting Peace for dealing with certain crimes, but
clearly establishes that it applies only to future peace
processes. This principle of non-retroactivity is critical
to providing legal security.

We are confident that next week, when
Congress begins a new term, the issues related to
the implementation of the peace agreement will be
discussed in conformity with the spirit and essence
of the agreement and through inclusive dialogue. In
that connection, allow me to reiterate the call of the
Secretary-General for Colombians to focus on what
unites them rather than what divides them.

Finally, I reiterate that truly sustainable peace
requires parallel progress in all components of the final
agreement, including comprehensive rural reform, the
substitution of illicit crops, security guarantees, the
reintegration of former combatants and justice and
reparations for the victims.

(spoke in English)

The peace agreement has resulted in thousands
of lives being saved. It has generated opportunities
for victims and their families to heal and receive
justice, and has enabled economic development for
vast stretches of the country that were ravaged by war
for decades. As was mentioned repeatedly during the
visit, the Council's steadfast and unified support has
been critical to those achievements, and the Colombian
people and institutions are deeply grateful to the
Security Council. The Colombian peace process is an
outstanding example of how much support the United
Nations can provide when the Council is firmly united.
Its continued commitment is needed to help Colombia
secure the peace.

