Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the presence of United States Secretary of
State John Kerry, as well as ofthe Ministers and Deputy
Ministers who have joined us today.

We hope that resolution 2254 (2015) contributes
to the ceasefire and the start of a process of formal
negotiations to achieve a lasting political settlement in
Syria. My delegation would have appreciated having
more time to consider the text of the resolution.

The recent meetings of the International Syria
Support Group are a step forward towards dialogue,
bringing together at the same table the relevant
international and regional actors with influence on the
parties in conflict. However, the next step is to overcome
the existing substantive differences and, as noted by the
Secretary-General, to be able to reduce them and build
areas of shared understanding. We believe that all Syrian
actors who are willing to reach a political solution for
lasting peace should be brought together in an inclusive
manner. The Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex)
is clear: there must be a political process led by the
Syrians themselves. That also involves the active and
proportionate participation of women.

The parties have an obligation to the Syrian people
to commit firmly to reaching an agreement, and our
role as the international community is to support that.
Any political solution must preserve the independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian
Arab Republic. State institutions must remain intact
to avoid situations where the erosion or collapse of
institutions leads to catastrophic consequences for the
civilian population.

Terrorism, which has greatly affected Syria and
many other countries, must be fought in a united manner
similar to the valued unity with which the Council has
addressed the terrorist threat in recent weeks. However,
terrorism should not be an impediment to the political
process.

We have said here in the Chamber that a political
solution is the only way to deal with the humanitarian
crisis. We must not forget that the civilian population,
including millions of children, has been the most
affected of all in almost five years of conflict. Nor can
we think oflasting peace withoutjustice, accountability
and reconciliation. Nevertheless, a political solution
will remain distant so long as the militarization of the
conflict continues. We therefore call for an end to the
supply and flow of weapons to all parties.

