Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to congratulate you, Mr. President, for
the excellent manner in which Pakistan and you
yourself have guided the work of the Security Council
during the month of May. You proposed an agenda that
took into account the varied interests of the Security
Council with regard to the maintenance of international
peace and security.

During their respective presidencies of the
Council, many delegations have initiated important
thematic debates. That has made possible an exchange
of views and a broadening of the concept of
international peace and security. The outcome of those
various discussions should serve the Council as a
reference in approaching the issues it takes up. The fact
that several non-members of the Council take part in
this exhaustive exercise is a positive sign that the
Council should take advantage of.

The relevance of the theme put forth by the
President for the Council's discussion today should
also be highlighted, especially as it enables us to
consider as much as possible tension and conflict
situations in their regional and subregional contexts
and to ensure that there is greater interaction between
the Council and subregional actors in the quest for
solutions to problems.

It is reassuring to note that conflicts in Africa are
the subject of constant follow-up by the Security
Council, and that sustained and sincere efforts are
being made by all members to alleviate as much as
possible the political, economic and social ills that
afflict our continent. However, it is important that the
Council's commitment to Africa be enhanced even
further. It would perhaps be appropriate for the Council
to occasionally carry out an evaluation - as it is doing
today - of its own actions with regard to ongoing and
increasingly complicated African conflicts in order to
lay out the real problems and, if necessary, explore new
avenues that may provide the most favourable solutions
for those problems.

The missions to be carried out by the Security
Council to two African regions next month are in
several respects innovative initiatives. They are to be
welcomed, as they make possible direct involvement in
helping the parties to conflicts to negotiate a peaceful
and speedy solution to their disputes.

The recognition of the interdependence of the
situations in the Central and Western African
subregions, as well as of the role played by the African
Union and other African participants, is a good
illustration of the way in which we should proceed so
that Council may effectively become aware of
subregional machinery falling within the framework of
Chapter VIII of the Charter. In developing their
relations, the United Nations and the African Union
have already established machinery for consultation
and cooperation aimed at improving the joint efforts of
the two organizations, in particular in the areas of
maintaining peace and preventing conflict. In that
regard, it is important to emphasize that the efforts and
initiatives to be carried out should be based on
parameters established by African States themselves in
pursuance of the principles and objectives of the
African Union and in close cooperation with the
Security Council.

Similarly, and given the fact that the activities of
the United Nations and of the African Union
complement each another in the maintenance of peace
and in preventing conflict, we believe that it is
essential that the international community give all due
importance to strengthening Africa's capacity through
substantial material and financial support for the
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution in Africa.

Tunisia has constantly strengthened its
participation in peace efforts carried out by the
Security Council. We believe those efforts should be
part of a comprehensive approach that takes into
account political, social and economic aspects. In
particular, it should take into account the close linkage
among development, peace and security. It is therefore
important for my country to see the development of an
international strategy that is based on integrated steps
and that makes it possible to address the deep-rooted
causes of conflict, such as poverty and exclusion. Such
an approach requires greater involvement by
development bodies and an emphasis on quick-impact
programmes that can contribute to helping populations
emerging from conflict to resume normal lives.

It is for that reason that we believe that we must
continue to insist on the need for the Security Council
to authorize the participation of countries affected by
conflict, United Nations actors and others in the
preparation, expansion and renewal of the mandates of
United Nations missions. That would make it possible
to take into consideration their views and
reconstruction expertise, as well as the urgent needs of
countries in conflict, thereby guaranteeing the success
of those missions.

