Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First, I would like to thank the Government
of Peru through you, Mr. President, for its initiative to
organize this debate on the theme of youth, peace and
security. We also thank the Secretary-General's Envoy
on Youth and Mr. Simpson, Ms. Pierre-Antoine and
Ms. Ekomo-Soignet for their informative briefings.

Argentina has from the outset embraced the
Secretary-General's new emphasis on conflict
prevention and the development of the concept of
sustainable peace or sustaining peace - a narrative
in which young people and women have an essential
role. Our country recognizes that peace and security
are interrelated and mutually reinforcing. We recognize
the important role of youth in conflict prevention and
resolution and as a key aspect to the sustainability,
inclusivity and success of peacebuilding and the
maintenance ofpeace activities. That is why we support
the implementation of resolution 2250 (2015), which
promotes young people, at the international level, being
instruments of peace, dialogue and understanding and
fight against poverty, violence and intolerance.

Argentina believes that armed conflict hampers
educational and employment opportunity for young
people, who are vulnerable and are often exposed to
dangerous situations that impede their development and
affect their schooling. It is estimated that approximately
300,000 armed children and young people live in
conflict zones. They are victims, forced into a situation
that is an ongoing violation of their rights, and are
subject to recruitment, mutilation, abduction, sexual
violence, attacks against schools and hospitals and a
denial of humanitarian aid.
In addition to suffering violations oftheir most basic
human rights, young people are affected psychologically
and socially, which inhibits their development. They
can lose access to education and other age-appropriate
activities. They can experience feelings of guilt or a
normalization of violence if they have joined an armed
group - either voluntarily or by force - or if they
have witnessed or committed acts of extreme violence.
In many cases, feelings of loss, rootlessness, sexual
violence and addiction to toxic substances can also
adversely affect their mental health.

In the context of conflict, many young people are
drafted into military service or participate in war-
related illicit subeconomies. Often they are forcefully
recruited and, in other cases, are motivated by cultural,
social, economic and political pressures, since the
informal economy linked to conflicts can sometimes
offer work and social opportunities that are seen as
preferable to poverty and hunger.

We must pay greater attention to the root causes
of conflicts and the importance of finding solutions
based on national participation in which young people
can play a significant role in conflict prevention and
the maintenance of peace - if they are guaranteed an
inclusive environment through the attainment of the
Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

In its participation in the Economic and
Social Council, Argentina has maintained that the
Peacebuilding Commission serves a bridging and
advisory role between the Organization's peace and
security efforts and efforts related to development,
human rights and humanitarian assistance. In line with
that view, we believe that the Commission, in its active
role of supporting the Security Council, can highlight
the contribution of young people during the design
and evaluation stages of the mandates of peacekeeping
operations, especially in their peacebuilding phases.
In that context, Argentina supports UNICEF's call for
urgent progress in efforts to protect children and young
people affected by conflict through the development of
national legislation, policies and actions to protect the
youngest members of society.

Education is fundamental to peace, security,
development and the full enjoyment of human rights.
Continuous access to safe education helps to protect
young people from the dangers of armed conflict.
Education is not only a human right but also an essential
protection mechanism for young people affected by
armed conflict, helping them to reach their potential and
to contribute to the building of stronger communities.
In turn, ensuring the security of young people allows
them to become relevant actors in reconstruction and
post-conflict peacebuilding processes, which can take
place more rapidly if the education sector has overcome
the effects of war.

Recognizing that young people represent a large
proportion of the civilians who are harmed by armed
conflict and that the interruption of their access to
education and economic opportunities has decisive
consequences for lasting peace and reconciliation, in
March 2017, together with Norway, Argentina organized
the second International Conference on Safe Schools to
raise general awareness of the seriousness of attacks
against students, teachers, schools and universities
and of the military use of schools and universities. The
Conference was also intended to disseminate the Safe
Schools Declaration and the Guidelines for Preventing
Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict, adopted in Oslo in May 2015.

Argentina believes that it is essential for young
people to increase their meaningful and inclusive
participation as future leaders of peacebuilding with
a transformative potential, rather than engaging in
violence. Young people clearly have an important role
to play in developing their own future and in building
peace. They should be involved in aid, recovery and
reconstruction programmes and as part of transition
and national reconciliation processes. Governments
and civil society, including in partnership with the
private sector, must harness the energy, ideas and
experiences of young people in order to create a new
post-conflict society.

Similarly, Argentina reaffirms what is set out
in the Ibero-American Youth Pact with regard to
boosting the role of young people as promoters of a
culture of peace by establishing training programmes
on violence prevention and conflict resolution. In that
regard, Argentina promotes developing the ability and
skills of young people, as well as creating jobs for
them so that they can actively contribute to sustaining
peace. Special youth employment and training plans
and the development of human resources should
form the basis of innovative rehabilitation and social
reintegration programmes for young people in post-
conflict situations, in particular children, young former
combatants, those with disabilities and those who have
missed out on education opportunities.

Finally, we would like to emphasize that the ideals
and energy of young people - who are key agents of
social change, economic development and technological
innovation in their communities - constitute an
essential potential to help to prevent conflict and to
participate in shaping lasting peace. We therefore
believe that is appropriate to continue to deal with this
issue in the framework of the Council and to continue
to deepen knowledge about the relationship between
the role of young people and maintaining, building and
sustaining peace.

