Mr. Lowcock: The picture I am holding shows
Mwasi Kallunga and her seven children, including her
18-month-old baby, Shabani. Members of the Council
all have the picture in front of them. They can see
that little Shabani has the distended belly of many
malnourished children. I met them last Tuesday in
Katanika camp, in Kalemie, in the stunning and rich
landscape surrounding Lake Tanganyika in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Mwasi's husband
and two of her nine children were killed when her
Village, 50 kilometres away, was attacked and burnt
down by militiamen in January. They fled, walked for
two straight days and now live in squalid conditions
under a plastic sheet in a tiny so-called shelter in a
congested, cramped, unsanitary, hilly camp at constant
risk of fire and flood. Her children can no longer go
to school. Her entire family - traumatized, sobbing
and destitute - are too terrified to contemplate
returning home.

Mwasi and her children are among the 4.5 million
people displaced right now in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Humanitarian needs caused by internal
conflict have doubled over the past year. Thirteen
million people need humanitarian assistance. More than
4.6 million children are acutely malnourished, including
2.2 million suffering severe acute malnutrition. We are
seeing mushrooming epidemics including the worst
outbreak of cholera in 15 years.

There is also an epidemic of sexual violence,
most of it unreported and unaddressed, and much of it
against children. I am glad that Jeanine Bandu Bahati
has joined us as a briefer and to see Julienne Lusenge,
a strong and courageous defender of women's rights
and an activist against sexual violence, in the Chamber
among the guests. Almost 746,000 Congolese have
fled to neighbouring countries, while the Democratic
Republic of the Congo itself hosts more than 540,000
refugees. Without a halt to the violence and a successful
political transition, these numbers will all increase.

What Minister Sigrid Kaag of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands - with whom I travelled - and I saw
last week requires our urgent action. There is despair,
but there is also hope. The people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are resilient and resourceful. I
am very impressed by the selfless solidarity of many
Congolese families. They have so little, yet they
welcome their brothers and sisters from within and
outside the country into their homes when those people
are displaced by violence.

Without humanitarian assistance, things would
be much worse. In 2017, the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners reached more than 4.2 million
people with life-saving protection and aid. This year,
we aim to reach 10.5 million. To scale up the response,
we have reinforced our leadership, strengthened
our field presence and stepped up our advocacy.
Humanitarian agencies continue to deliver despite
persistent insecurity and bureaucratic impediments.
There have been kidnappings and hijackings of aid
workers in recent weeks in Tanganyika.

I had constructive discussions with the authorities
on tackling these challenges and on how the Government
can fulfil its responsibility for the provision of services
and protection to the affected population, and on what
they can do to facilitate humanitarian access through
the quicker issuance of Visas and lower tariffs, fees
and faster customs clearance for aid supplies. Minister
Kaag and I also witnessed the signing of a cooperation
agreement in Tanganyika between the United Nations
Humanitarian Coordinator and the provincial Governor
to reduce local taxes and fees for humanitarian
assistance. The Government in Kinshasa told us that it
would support similar agreements in other provinces.

I also want to emphasize the importance of the
work of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is
creating space for humanitarian delivery and protecting
civilians. Things would unquestionably be much worse
without the Mission.

Underfunding is the single largest impediment
to the humanitarian response in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. This year, our appeal requires
$1.7 billion - nearly four times what we secured last
year. The Netherlands, the United Arab Emirates,
the European Union and the United Nations will, on
13 April, co-host in Geneva the first-ever high-level
humanitarian conference on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The goal is to secure immediate and
substantial financial contributions and to launch a
multi-year campaign in support of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I ask Council members today
to ensure that the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is on the agenda
of their Governments and to encourage high-level
participation and pledges on 13 April.

We also need solutions to address the root causes
of the worsening crisis, including by making progress
on the political front and fair elections. We need the
Democratic Republic of the Congo's neighbours to
behave responsibly as well. While the violence persists,
all parties must take steps to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure, in line with their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.

Progress in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is possible. Over the 15 years since I first visited
the country, infrastructure in many major cities has
improved, access to education has increased, child
mortality rates have fallen and immunization rates
have increased. We need to strengthen our support to
the Congolese people.

For Mwasi, the local Government and humanitarian
agencies provide aid for her survival. Her new
neighbours help with food for the children when they
can. I asked her about her hopes for the future. She
wants to be resettled, given a small plot of land to farm,
and get her children back into school. It is not much to
ask for, is it?

