Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for
her thorough presentation of the twenty-sixth report on
the activities of her Office with regard to the situation
in Darfur. We believe that this type of transparent and
frank report provides added value to the analysis of the
issues under the Security Council's mandate.

At the outset, Uruguay wishes to express its
thanks for the opportunity to reiterate its full support
for the role of the International Criminal Court as an
institution established to strengthen the rule of law at
the international level by prosecuting those who are
responsible for the most serious violations of the rights
that affect humankind as a whole. In that that regard, we
renew our call on States Members of the United Nations
that are not yet parties to the Rome Statute to accede
to the Statute, which will help make this instrument
universal in the fight against impunity and defend the
victims of heinous crimes that constitute a serious
threat to the peace and the security of all humankind.

We regret that the situation with regard to this
issue remains virtually unchanged since June, when we
discussed it the last time (see S/PV.7963). Having just
listened to Prosecutor Bensouda, we wish to express
our consternation at the lack of cooperation by States
parties to the International Criminal Court and the
lack of compliance with, and implementation of, the
Rome Statute.

As a State party to the Rome Statute, Uruguay is
concerned by all the cases of non-cooperation with
the International Criminal Court. In this particular
case, it is worth recalling that resolution 1593 (2005)
states, in paragraph 2, that the Government of the
Sudan and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur
must fully cooperate with the Court and the Prosecutor,
but also urges all States and regional organizations
and other relevant international organizations to also
cooperate fully.

There is a shared responsibility among the States
that do not cooperate and the Council, which lacks
effectiveness and action, in contravention with what is
provided by the Rome Statute in its article 87.7. Uruguay
is supportive and willing to work to ensure that the
Council can play a more active role in considereng
cases of non-cooperation with the International
Criminal Court and to ensure that arrest warrants are
implemented - a necessary condition for the Court to
be able to carry out its mandate.

With regard to issues on the Council's agenda,
accountability is probably the word we hear the
most. However, regrettably, calls for the perpetrators
to be held accountable are not accompanied by real
actions. In that connection, we reiterate our view that
the proposals for action that were submitted by New
Zealand a year ago, and which were also well received
by the Office of the Prosecutor in her recent reports,
would make it easier for the Security Council to take
action in cases of non-cooperation with the Court.
Specifically, the proposals are, first, that the Council
adopt a more structured approach when addressing
cases of non-cooperation, with the aim of determining
which of the tools that the Council has at its disposal
provides the most appropriate response and, secondly,
to overcome the current stagnation in the relations
between the Council and the Government of the Sudan
in this area by making the most of the improvement in
that relationship with regard to the political process in
Darfur and cooperation with the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

In conclusion, I would like to send a message of
encouragement and congratulations to the Prosecutor
for the investigative work on the crimes committed in
Darfur. This undoubtedly promotes the strengthening
of the rule of law and the building of a society in
which there is accountability and where the rights and
guarantees of all its inhabitants are fully respected.

