Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
issue of illicit drug production and trafficking is one of
the most daunting challenges that the international
community faces today. Illicit drugs pose major threats
to the socio-economic and security situation of all
societies. The pervasive nature of this phenomenon has
made it such an international problem that it can be
curbed only through collective and concerted efforts
based on the principle of shared responsibility.

In the past couple of years, the bulk of the
Council's consideration of drug-related topics concerns
the issue of drug trafficking in some regions, including
West Asia and West Africa, and a number of
resolutions and presidential statements contain
references to that issue. Resolution 1817 (2008)
specifically focuses on the connection between drug
production and security, terrorism and organized crime
in our region. In these decisions, the Council
recognized the need for the international community to
come up with an integrated and balanced approach to
address drug-related problems as a shared
responsibility.

The Islamic Republic of Iran is presiding over the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs as of this month and
until December 2010. In this regard, I would like to
enumerate briefly the efforts undertaken by my
Government in curtailing illegal narcotics.

Over the years, we have dedicated thousands of
Iranian police personnel and allocated billions of
dollars to this issue. Based on this approach, the
Islamic Republic of Iran has mobilized about 30,000
troops of its military and disciplinary forces all along
our extensive border areas. Iran has also strived to
reinforce and modify the fortifications, facilities and
intelligence control systems at transit and border
checkpoints in order to prevent the entry of trafficking
caravans into the country. All those measures have
resulted in the confiscation of massive amounts of
various types of narcotics. That has helped to rank Iran
first in the world, as we are responsible for 80 per cent
of the world's total opium and heroin seizures. I should
mention that the aggregate amount of drugs seized by
the Islamic Republic of Iran in 2008 amounted to 702
tons.

In the area of regional cooperation, Iran has
cooperated with neighbouring and Balkan route
countries. Two regional information-exchange centres
based in Iran, namely, the Anti-narcotics Police and the
Drug Control Headquarters, are fully engaged in
information exchanges with drug liaison officers in
regional and neighbouring countries. The Islamic
Republic of Iran has held eight rounds of the
international conference for drug liaison officers.
Iran has also expanded its cooperation with
members of the Economic Cooperation Organization
and contributed to establishing a unit to combat drugs
within that organization. We have also held several
workshops on drug supply and demand reduction.
Moreover, with a focus on the need for close
cooperation and coordination in the region, in
conjunction with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, the Islamic Republic of Iran regularly
convenes meetings and exchanges information with
relevant authorities and senior officials from anti-drug
forces of countries in our region.

In that regard, Iran held a trilateral meeting in
May 2008 as part of the Triangular Initiative. The
Secretary-General referred to it in paragraph 38 of his
report in document A/64/ 120, noting that "A first pilot
joint operation under this initiative was launched in
March 2009 and led to drug seizures and the
dismantling of criminal drug networks." Furthermore,
the report gives information on the first- ever joint
operation against drug trafficking networks, which was
carried out in March 2009 and led to seizure of drugs
and the arrest of drug traffickers. I should say that,
sadly, quite a remarkable number of drug traffickers
arrested in my country are from African countries. That
indicates that drug trafficking recognizes no borders or
regions.

With respect to international cooperation, the
Islamic Republic of Iran has signed a number of
cooperation documents in the field of combating
narcotics with more than 30 countries. We have
actively participated in various international meetings
and conferences, such as meetings of the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs and Paris Pact round tables.

We have also facilitated visits by international
authorities - including UNODC, Paris Pact and
Dublin Group representatives to Iranian borders.
Following all those visits, Iran's activities and efforts
in combating illicit drugs have been widely recognized
by the international community. Given the fact that this
menace serves as a breeding ground for terrorism,
Iran's efforts in this regard have undoubtedly made a
fundamental contribution to the global fight against
terrorism.

 

Drug trafficking in some regions undermines
efforts to achieve stability, prosperity and peace. That
is because narcotic drugs are a source of financing for
terrorism. They also fuel threats to the stability and
security of regions. We have faced that phenomenon in
our own region for many years. We have experienced
its devastating effects on the social and overall health
of our society. We have shouldered a great burden in
dealing with this threat, largely while receiving little
assistance from the international community, even
though we all know that no country can tackle this
scourge single-handedly.

On the eve of the international conference in
support of Afghanistan, which will be held next month
in London, we hope that that meeting will also
consider the international community's commitment as
well as, in a spirit of enhanced partnership, the issue of
combating drug production and trafficking originating
from that country. We also hope that the conference
will provide fresh political impetus to mobilize the
international community to support Afghanistan's
Government and its neighbours.

I would like to conclude by expressing the hope
that the Security Council's deliberations on
international and regional cooperation on the threat of
narcotic drugs will become a basis for a common and
shared responsibility to counter the world drug
problem and related criminal activities. I also hope it
will help to support relevant national, subregional and
regional activities and mechanisms.

