Mr. de La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
We are pleased to have the Secretary-General with us
this morning.

We would like to thank Mr. Guehenno and
Mr. Ngongi for the briefings they have just given us,
which have described the contrasting situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo since the last
Security Council mission. We have noted some very
positive developments, for which we should be glad
and which we should now seek to encourage. It should
nevertheless be borne in mind that, despite those
positive developments, some grounds for concern
continue to exist. For example, fighting has not come
to a definitive end in the Kivus. Moreover, in Ituri the
relative stability that now prevails in Bunia is still
fragile. I shall come back to this point later.

I fully associate myself with the statement made
today by Mr. Javier Solana. I very much concur with
his analysis and I thank him for the details he has given
us following his recent visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Through Operation Artemis, the Member States
of the European Union - including France as the lead
nation and the other countries that have joined the
Interim Emergency Multinational Force, whose
contribution I wish to recognize - it has been possible
to prevent a humanitarian tragedy by intervening at a
decisive moment. By embodying the resolve of the
Security Council and demonstrating the European
Union's interest in the Great Lakes region of Africa,
the deployment of the Force has also made it possible
to consolidate the political process under way in
Kinshasa. In that regard, as has already been said, we
can only be gratified at the launching of the transitional
period in the Democratic Republic of the Congo with
the swearing-in yesterday of the four Vice-Presidents
and tomorrow's first scheduled meeting of the
ministerial council of the Transitional Government of
National Unity.

By intervening resolutely on the ground the
Multinational Force made it possible to stabilize the
situation in Bunia. As Mr. Solana has said, those
displaced by violence are gradually returning to the
town; militia, which have been kept under control and
urged to no longer carry weapons, have found
themselves rendered relatively harmless; and interim
institutions have been strengthened and are gaining
confidence and trust. Bunia is once again becoming a
normal place in a Democratic Republic of the Congo
that is on the road to normalization. However, as I have
said, we must remain vigilant because the situation
remains fragile.

By mobilizing in that way, the European Union
and its member States have also helped to strengthen
the peace process by making additional resources
available and by providing support to the new
Congolese national institutions.

The need to effectively replace the Multinational
Force in Bunia on 1 September 2003 has no doubt
increased awareness about the importance of
strengthening the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).
The draft resolution that we will adopt shortly will give
the Mission a more robust mandate and will increase its
personnel, particularly in Ituri, where 3,800 men will
be deployed with appropriate equipment, pursuant to
the recommendations of the Secretary-General.

If we want the Congolese peace process to take
root permanently, we must ensure respect for the
principle of the unity and sovereignty of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo over the whole of
its territory. The holding of elections in two years'
time, at the end of the transitional period, will be
meaningful only if the elections involve the entire
country. We should also ensure respect for the security
and territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and all States of the region. Those countries
should be able to live in peace within their borders. In
that regard, the formulas already mentioned in the
Council - such as, for example, a declaration of good-
neighbourliness made within a regional context that
could eventually be endorsed by a future international
conference on peace in the Great Lakes region - merit
further development and encouragement.

I would add that combating impunity is also
essential. In that regard, we have noted with interest
the proposal made recently by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court.

I would like to underscore that the deployment of
Operation Artemis in Bunia is a particularly important
event in the relationship between the European Union
and the United Nations. That act represents a first step,
which will undoubtedly be decisive, towards
cooperation in the area of peacekeeping.

In conclusion, I would like to tell Mr. Ngongi
once again how much we appreciated his work at the
head of MONUC. The baton has now been very
successfully passed to Ambassador Swing, who
assumed his new duties with his well-known
competence. We assure him of our support.

