Mr. Eick (Germany): I would like to join others
in thanking Mr. Fedotov for his insightful briefing. We
recognize the important role and the work performed
by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) for the development of effective strategies
and measures to reduce the detrimental impact of illicit
drugs on the health, social well-being and safety of
people across the world. The briefing has clearly
shown that organized crime and drug trafficking can
have a major impact on regional and international
peace and security.

We share the global concern about the detrimental
impact that drug abuse and drug trafficking have on the
political, social and economic stability of societies,
particularly in West Africa, but also in parts of
America, Central Asia and Europe. Countering these
drug-related threats remains one of the main objectives
of UNODC. Many countries lack efficient capacities
for effectively countering and preventing the
trafficking and use of illicit drugs. The work of
UNODC in the field of institutional capacity-building
and assistance for States to improve the skills and
knowledge of national authorities in all areas of drug
control is essential and deserves our full support.

Germany is concerned about violent activities by
illegal armed groups and criminals involved in the drug
trade, in some cases linked to terrorist activities. These
threaten local populations as well as security forces;
they undermine State authority; they also threaten to
undermine some of our joint efforts in building peace,
such as in Afghanistan, Guinea-Bissau and Sierra
Leone.

Recognizing that post-conflict areas are the most
vulnerable, we are convinced that the fight against
organized crime and drug trafficking is also an
important factor in peacebuilding efforts. We
underscore the crucial role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in that context.

Germany welcomes recent initiatives in Central
America to combat organized crime and violence on a
regional and multinational level by staging the
International Conference of Support for the Central
American Integration System in Guatemala City a few
days ago. We hope that the implementation of the
newly presented security strategy for Central America
will successfully contribute to reducing the threats of
organized crime, corruption and impunity on all levels.

Together with our European Union partners, we
support this and other regional and international
mechanisms and frameworks for fighting drug
trafficking and organized crime, including Group of
Eight initiatives. Furthermore, Germany also welcomes
cooperation between United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes and other regional and international
organizations, such as UNODC cooperation with the
United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia.

