Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal welcomes the presence with us
this morning of His Excellency Minister Jean-Yves Le
Drian to personally preside over this open debate. We
also commend the French delegation for organizing
this high-level meeting on the very important issue
of the plight children in armed conflict. This debate
testifies to the dynamism of the French presidency and
also displays our common commitment to the cause of
protecting children.

Allow me also to thank the Secretary-General for
the detailed presentation of his report (S/2017/821) on
the issue at hand. The report shows the impact of armed
conflicts on children and also the scope ofthe violations
committed in 2016. This is also an opportunity to
remind everyone that the protection of children in
armed conflict should remain a priority in our work.

Senegal welcomes the work being done within the
United Nations for the protection of children and the
very active role played in that regard by the Security
Council. The decisive commitment of the Council to
this issue was marked in particular by the adoption of
resolution 1612 (2005), which was a historic milestone in
effectively tackling the issue of child protection. It also
has enabled us to put together provisions on protection
based on the following elements: first, the monitoring
and reporting mechanism on children in armed conflict;
secondly, national action plans adopted by the parties
to a conflict in order to stop the recruitment of child
soldiers or, if necessary, to expedite their release; and,
thirdly, a Security Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. Thanks to that mechanism, as well
as resolutions 2272 (2016), 2286 (2016), 2331 (2016)
and to the joint efforts of the Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General, Member States, international
and regional organizations, non-governmental
organizations and civil society, significant progress has
been made in the protection of children.

While that progress is welcome, it should never
obscure the persistence and scope of the violence
against children in armed conflict, especially in the
present environment characterized by new forms
of conflict and unconventional wars. That is all the
more so since the report we are considering indicates
that violations against children were carried out in
large numbers in 2016, with at least 4,000 violations
committed by Government forces and more than 11,500
by non-State armed groups.

Even more worrying is the tendency to disregard
international law, and the impact that has on children.
That should compel all the actors involved in this
struggle to safeguard the dignity of children, to
redouble their efforts to continue to move further
forward and to rise to the challenges that persist, in
particular protecting children against recruitment by
non-State armed groups, including terrorist groups.
In that connection, we should welcome the dialogue
the United Nations undertook with non-State armed
groups, which resulted in particular on the signing of a
new plan of action with the Coordination of Movements
of Azawad in Mali to stop and prevent serious violations
against children.

Ensuring effective emergency protection to all
children affected by armed conflict is the primary
responsibility of Governments. We believe it is
important that Member States stand together in
their efforts and actions, including scrupulously
implementing the international rules and norms on
the protection of children in armed conflict to which
they have committed. In that regard, in order to ensure
special protection for children in armed conflicts and
create the foundation for a peaceful world by promoting
the values of peace, tolerance, understanding and
dialogue, Senegal has put in place a national strategy
on the protection of children.

On the legal front, Senegal has acceded to the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
With regard to displaced populations, especially
children, Senegal has developed a humanitarian
programme that focuses on school canteens, the
rehabilitation of classrooms, hygiene and sanitation,
water supply, psychosocial care, mine awareness and the
beginning ofmine clearance. Education for peace is also
increasingly becoming part of our school curriculum,
and very often it is linked to civics education.

In support of the efforts of Member States, the
United Nations, and in particular the Security Council,
must strengthen its effort to promote all facets of
a culture of preventing violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, and the fight
against impunity, whoever the perpetrators are, by
making sure, inter alia, that United Nations resolutions
are implemented.

Bolstering the role played by United Nations
peacekeeping operations in this area is another important
tool that the Council has at its disposal in the area of
prevention. To better ensure protection for children in
armed conflict, Senegal would like to reiterate its plea
for better prevention, based on a reliable and rigorous
early-warning system and on the basis of genuine
cooperation with all the actors concerned, including
regional and subregional organizations.

We would like to underscore the importance of
regional partnerships and also to recall the contribution
of Africa to combating this phenomenon, including the
adoption, in 1996, of the Cape Town Principles and
Best Practices on the Prevention of Recruitment of
Children into the Armed Forces and on Demobilization
and Social Reintegration of Child Soldiers in Africa.
The Cape Town Principles were a source of inspiration
for the international community in its work to protect
children, especially through the adoption of the Paris
Principles, which are today a key tool in the area of
protecting children in conflict.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
importance of a global approach that encompasses
the political, economic, social and legal aspects of
the protection of children, as well as preventive and
proactive work.

