Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The United States of America and the United
Kingdom carried out their threats to initiate a war of
aggression against Iraq, circumventing international
legitimacy. The United Nations, international
legitimacy, international law and all institutions of
international cooperation that were specifically created
following the Second World War have engaged in an
intense debate on the real capacity to stop the strong
when they attack the weak and on the possibility of
imposing their resolutions on the strong when the
particular interests of the strong run counter to the
interests of the international community and to peace
and security in the world.

During the debates at the highest level,
particularly in the Security Council, Syria warned of
the danger of overlooking Council resolutions. We
have stressed that there is no legal or moral
justification for waging this war against the Iraqi
people. We have also cautioned that unilateral action
by the United States and its circumvention of the will
of the international community, as represented in the
Security Council, would lead to grave consequences,
particularly to division and chaos in international
relations. Such consequences would arise because of
the harm done to international legitimacy and to the
credibility and role of the Council in achieving
international peace and security, for which it was
created, and because the logic of military force,
hegemony and diktat are being imposed on
international relations, instead of democracy and
mutual respect.

What is most regrettable is not just that a State
with tremendous military power has attacked a country
weakened by sanctions and an embargo imposed on it
for more than 12 years. Rather, what is really
regrettable is the collapse of a system of values to
which the international community has agreed, whether
it concerns the use of military force or respect for
international humanitarian law. That system that began
to crystallise at the end of the nineteenth century and
evolved to a high degree, which we all see today. The
aggression that the United States of America has
introduced into the twenty-first century will be
recorded by history as a black page, because the United
States has turned its back and has closed its ears to the
appeals of international public opinion, which said no
to war.

The war is an act of defiance of the Security
Council itself, the great majority of whose members
refused to adopt another resolution. They all demanded
respect for Council resolutions, particularly resolution
1441 (2002). They called for the continued activities of
international inspectors based on the proactive
cooperation shown by Iraq, as reflected in the reports
of the inspectors submitted to the Security Council.

This war is not justifiable because it is not aimed
at the elimination of weapons of mass destruction in
Iraq. The inspectors have stressed that there is no
evidence of the existence of such weapons. The
objective is to occupy Iraq, to subject the region to
hegemony and exploitation, and to help Israel - which
does possess weapons of mass destruction
and perpetrates war crimes against the Palestinian
people - continue its occupation and defy the will of
international legitimacy.

At their meeting that concluded two days ago in
Cairo, Arab foreign ministers condemned the Anglo-
American attack against Iraq. They stressed the
solidarity of Arab States with Iraq and their support for
Iraq in facing up to aggression.

Syria wishes to underline the statement issued by
the Arab foreign ministers, particularly their call for an
immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Anglo-
American invading troops from Iraqi territory, and its
belief that those forces should bear the brunt of the
material, legal and moral aftermath of this aggression.

Could the world, which not that long ago
emerged from the quagmire of the cold war, have
imagined that the alternative would be the people of
Iraq, including the children, rushing to shelters, many
dying and others losing their homes in Umm Qasr,
Baghdad, Mosul, Nasiriyah and Najaf? Who could
have imagined that the values of democracy, on which
the American and other peoples have been schooled,
would translate into bombs and fires, burning innocent
civilians in various parts of Iraq?

Could the Syrian workers who were fleeing the
flames of battle in major Iraqi cities - 5 of whom
were killed and more than 10 wounded - have
imagined that American warplanes would come from
afar, without justification, to kill and wound them,
merely because they were seeking safety and security
for themselves and for their families?

Some have attempted to mislead the world,
claiming that the wars they will wage this century will
be "clean" wars. But when has killing and destruction
ever been clean? War is war, and has been since the
beginning of history. People have an increasing hatred
of such wars when they are waged without legal
document, in flagrant defiance of international law and
humanity.

Our fear is that the victory sought by the United
States of America will come at the expense of the
blood of thousands of Iraqi innocents, for whose
benefit, the United States claims, the war is being
waged, in order to rescue or liberate them. But who
gave the United States and others any such right?

The urgent humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people
are a pressing issue that must be taken up. Syria will
make every effort to do so. Nevertheless, humanitarian
aspects must not be exploited by some for narrow
political gain or for the purpose of misleading
international public opinion and diverting its attention
away from the central issue - an end to aggression
and an immediate withdrawal of the invading forces.

Syria urges the Security Council to make every
effort to put an end to this destructive war and to
prevent it from reaping the lives of more Iraqi and non-
Iraqi innocent citizens. We call on the Security Council
to take up this grave situation, because the Council is
the essential point of reference in such difficult
international circumstances. It must call on the
aggressor immediately to withdraw its forces from
Iraq, to respect international legitimacy and
international humanitarian law, and in particular the
Fourth Geneva Convention, and to put an end to the
policy of destroying the infrastructure that was built by
Iraqis with their sacrifice and sweat.

Syria calls for a return to international legitimacy
and for respect for international law under the auspices
of the United Nations and the Security Council. We
urge that international issues be dealt with in a just and
balanced manner. We must condemn the double
standards that are used in dealing with international
issues, in particular that of ending the Israeli
occupation of Arab land and the peaceful resolution of
the Iraqi issue.

The logic of force, unilateralism and hegemony
will certainly not lead humanity to the future to which
we all aspire.

