Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I join others in
welcoming Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Tadamichi Yamamoto for his first briefing to
the Security Council and thank him for his leadership at
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).

It is sadly apt that we are holding this debate
just a few days after the fifteenth anniversary of the
11 September attacks. It was those barbaric acts of
terrorism that brought the focus of the world and of
the Council on Afghanistan. Just 15 years later, that
focus has perhaps faded, but it is undeniable that the
country has been transformed. Yet it is also clear
that Afghanistan still faces enormous challenges to
its stability and security. That is why, 15 years on,
my Government remains committed to Afghanistan's
stability and development. It is why we announced
at the NATO Warsaw Summit in July that the United
Kingdom would increase its troop contribution to
NATO's Resolute Support Mission, and that is why we
have committed to provide ongoing financial support
to the Afghan National Security and Defence Forces
through 2020.

International support alone will not solve the
formidable challenges Afghanistan faces. Unity
of purpose and political cohesion are essential for
security and stability. Let us therefore all support and
encourage the National Unity Government as it pursues
its ambitious programme of reform. There is much to
do. Electoral reforms are critical to re-establish public
confidence in Afghan institutions. Anti-corruption
efforts are needed for future prosperit. And overcoming
internal differences will enable the Government to
deliver better services for the population at large. We
recognize that steps towards reform are being taken.

We welcome the Government's efforts to address
violence against women and girls, and the Special
Representative's reporting on the issue. The United
Kingdom will continue to support initiatives that
empower Afghan women. Together, we must ensure
that the historic, but fragile, gains on women's rights
are not lost.

The upcoming Brussels Conference on Afghanistan
in October will be a key moment for the Government to
demonstrate its own commitment to reform. It is also
the moment for the international community to renew
its ongoing commitment to a more stable, secure and
prosperous future for Afghanistan.

While we have seen progress in some areas in the
early years of the transformation decade, many things
still remain to be done. That is easy for me to say in
these comfortable surroundings. My Government is
well aware of the challenges posed by the conflict with
the Taliban and other insurgent and terrorist groups.
Therefore, we firmly believe that a political settlement
is the only viable, long-term solution, and the United
Kingdom strongly supports efforts towards such a
settlement. In that respect, we urge the Government
to make every effort to create a broad base of support
for constructive engagement with the Taliban. But
until that peace is secured, the Afghan security forces
must continue their vital work. I pay tribute to their
bravery today. They are standing up to the Taliban and
other groups across the country, staving off pressure
in Uruzgan, Helmand, Kunduz and elsewhere, often
at terrible cost. The United Kingdom is committed
to help develop their capability, and we welcome the
robust actions taken by Afghanistan to combat the
emerging threats posed by Da'esh affiliates in eastern
Afghanistan. The threats arising from those groups are
very real, and united international support is needed
in response.

Afghanistan's regional neighbours, as well as the
international community, will also have to play their
part to support peace. My Government believes that a
positive, balanced and equitable relationship between
Afghanistan and Pakistan is of particular importance.
It is vital that both sides engage constructively, while
recognizing each other's constraints and objectives.
Dialogue is important, especially at a time of
heightened tension. In that respect, I want to emphasize
the importance my Government attaches to an effective
response to the emerging refugee crisis. We have
witnessed a dramatic increase in refugee returns,
flowing from Pakistan into Afghanistan. As highlighted
by the Special Representative, the numbers of refugees
and internally displaced persons are unprecedented, and
the National Unity Government will require significant
support from the international community to address
the short-term requirements. It is critical, therefore,
that an agreed action plan be put in place as soon as
possible and that a longer-term approach be developed
to address push-and-pull factors in both countries.

Fifteen years on from the terrible events that led
to international intervention in Afghanistan, it is too
easy to focus on the problems the country still faces.
Yes, we are still some way from shifting gears from
consolidation and stability towards development and
economic growth. But we cannot lose sight of how much
has been achieved. With our continuing assistance
and support, we firmly believe that Afghanistan will
emerge from these challenging times to enjoy the peace
and prosperity that so many of us take for granted.

