Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): The adoption
of this draft resolution, of which the United Kingdom is
a sponsor, is the clearest possible signal that the Council
has not forgotten and will not forget what happened in
Srebrenica, Zepa, Banja Luka and Sanski Most. The
Secretary-General's report provides irrefutable evidence
of atrocities there and elsewhere. The British Government
unreservedly condemns the violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights that took place.
Furthermore, this draft resolution gives the lie to attempts
to downplay such violations, ignore them or even deny

 

that they took place, and those who do attempt to deny
such events only bring themselves into disrepute. The
evidence detailed in the Secretary-General's recent report is
chilling. It speaks for itself.

Given the scale on which such human rights abuses
occurred, it is right that the Council should focus in
particular on these events. But let there be no
misunderstanding: the Council's commitment is to human
rights, irrespective of ethnic background, nationality or
religion. By focusing in this draft resolution on crimes
committed against non-Serbs, we do not in any way
condone or ignore other human rights violations that have
been committed against members of the Serb population.
Nor does this draft resolution seek to condemn the Bosnian
Serb people. Such crimes are committed by individuals, and
it is as individuals that those involved will be held
responsible.

The British Government is also disturbed by continued
reports of house-burning, looting and destruction of
property in those areas that the parties agreed at Dayton
should be transferred to another entity. Such actions must
stop immediately.

What of the future? How do we ensure that what
happened at Srebrenica, or indeed anywhere else, does not
happen again? The immediate answer lies in the urgent and
full implementation of the Paris Peace Agreement. That
Agreement enshrines in Bosnia's Constitution the highest
respect for human rights. It allows for United Nations
civilian police to train local police forces and to monitor
their actions at the grass-roots level.

The United Nations will also play an important role in
international efforts to promote respect for human rights,
whether through the work of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) with
returning refugees, through the Centre for Human Rights
and its provision for training and specialist advice, or
through the Special Rapporteur for the former Yugoslavia.

The Paris Peace Agreement also allows for the holding
of elections in six months' time so that the Bosnian Serb
people can choose who should represent them in the future.

In short, the Agreement sets out a road map designed
to re-establish the rule of law throughout all the
communities in Bosnia. But implementation itself will be
hindered and will prove incomplete if those responsible for
the acts referred to in the Secretary-General's report are not
brought to justice. That is why it is essential that we all
support fully the work of the International criminal
Tribunal for Yugoslavia. The British Government
welcomes the progress made so far by the Tribunal,
including its issuing of indictments in relation to the
events that took place in Srebrenica.

It is essential that UNHCR and the International
Committee of the Red Cross be given full access to those
displaced or those detained or missing from Srebrenica
and elsewhere. If there is to be a lasting and durable
peace in Bosnia, then it must be based upon reconciliation
between the communities. And that reconciliation can be
complete only if it is accompanied by justice.

