Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like at the outset to thank Mr. Hasegawa,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste, for his briefing to the Council. I
commend him and the staff of the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) for their efforts
towards consolidating peace and democracy in that
nation, which gained its independence so recently.

Let me also welcome Mr. Ramos-Horta, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste,
who has so graciously joined us today. I would like to
thank him for his excellent briefing on the situation in
his country.

The journey taken to date by Timor-Leste
provides excellent proof that the resources and efforts
invested by the United Nations in that country are
beginning to bear fruit. That justifies our confidence in
the efforts of the various United Nations bodies present
in the country, particularly UNOTIL, which has helped
the country to make considerable progress in the areas
of governance, institution-building, capacity-building
and the strengthening of human rights.
We are carefully considering the proposals set out
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2006/251), which
we believe will assist the country in taking the final
step towards peace, understanding, democracy and
prosperity. The first general elections since
independence are expected to take place in 2007, and
Timor-Leste will clearly have great need of United
Nations expertise, acquired over recent years, in
preparing for elections. In addition, the Timorese
police force, which is still a nascent force, does not yet
have sufficient resources or expertise, particularly with
respect to command. Given the forthcoming
presidential and parliamentary elections, the
secondment of police advisers from the United Nations
to the country and their impartial presence will be a
key factor. From that perspective, we believe that the
Secretary-General's proposal is very constructive.

In the past we have heard Mr. Gusmao, President
of Timor-Leste, and today we heard Mr. Ramos-Horta,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, speak about the need for
the United Nations to help Timor-Leste prepare for
successful elections. Given the Secretary-General's
assessments, we believe that establishing an integrated
United Nations office to ensure follow-up would be in
keeping with that effort. We would like the
Government to set the dates for the elections as soon as
possible.

We must also have the support of bilateral and
multilateral donors and must strengthen our
coordination with them in terms of current and future
assistance to Timor-Leste in the area of peacebuilding.
We would like to see the demarcation of the land
border between Timor-Leste and Indonesia completed.
In that connection, we welcome the recent high-level
meeting between the President of Timor-Leste and the
President of Indonesia to consider the report of the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation.

In the next phase, we will be able to assess the
United Nations efforts in Timor-Leste. May the
example of Timor-Leste attest to the Organization's
success.

