Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first of all like to express our gratitude to the
Foreign Minister for being with us today. I also wish to
express my gratitude for the holding of this meeting of
the Security Council on the situation in Kosovo and
Serbia and Montenegro. We would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno for his
comprehensive briefing, which has adequately brought
us up to date on the situation on the ground during the
past few months. As on other occasions, we would also
like to reiterate our support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Harri
Holkeri, as well as all the staff of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We ask the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
in Kosovo and all interested parties to cooperate fully
with the Special Representative.

Without tangible progress on the eight standards,
UNMIK's mandate will not be fulfilled in accordance
with resolution 1244 (1999).

That is why, in our view, in November and
December, two significant events for Kosovo took
place. First, we saw fresh momentum in the
implementation of the "standards before status" policy
through the initiative of the review mechanism,
submitted on 5 November in Pristina and Belgrade on
the initiative of the Contact Group and under the
auspices of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. Independent of the circumstances that
surrounded its presentation on 10 December, the
document on standards for Kosovo led to a great deal
of hope in the practical value of that document.

Moreover, we trust that the implementation plan
to be submitted by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General will serve as an objective basis for
the assessment of the scope, the speed and the
sustainability of progress achieved by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in meeting the
standards.

We agree with the approach of carrying out future
reviews. That is why we await the results of the
periodic report, and subsequently those of a
comprehensive review of the progress achieved by the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in meeting
the standards. Trustworthy proof of positive results will
have a key impact on progress towards a process to
determine the future status of Kosovo, in accordance
with resolution 1244 (1999). We must bear in mind the
expectations that this will generate among the parties,
which must do everything possible to comply with the
standards.

Once again we reiterate that without a significant
and sustainable return of internally displaced people
and refugees it will be impossible to build a
democratic, multi-ethnic society that is capable of
integrating all inhabitants of Kosovo without
exception.

We support recent measures adopted by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Holkeri, on the investigation into the bombing of
the railway bridge on 12 December, and we hope that
explanations will be provided in the very near future.

To conclude, in addition to dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina, intensified dialogue between
UNMIK and the Kosovo Assembly will certainly
contribute to the achievement of positive results, which
will ultimately be reflected in the well-being of the
population of Kosovo.

