Judge Robinson: It is an honour for me to appear
before the Security Council today in my capacity as
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and to do so under the Presidency of His
Excellency Mr. Nelson Messone, the Ambassador of
Gabon. I would also like to take this opportunity to
express my sincere appreciation to Portugal as the
Chair of the Security Council's Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, as well as to the
Office of Legal Affairs, for their cooperation with the
Tribunal in respect of preparations for the
commencement of the Residual Mechanism and the
transfer of the residual functions of the Tribunal to the
Mechanism.

At the close of the reporting period, 16 persons
are in appeal proceedings, 14 persons are on trial, and
four are at the pre-trial stage. One accused - Goran
Hadzie - remains at large. To date, the Tribunal has
concluded proceedings against 126 of the 161 persons
indicted by the Prosecutor.

On 26 May, Ratko Mladie was arrested in Serbia,
having evaded justice for 16 years. He was indicted in
1995 by the Office of the Prosecutor for genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes allegedly
committed from 1992 to 1995 during the conflict in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. On 31 May, he was
transferred to The Hague, where he will face trial. The
arrest of Mr. Mladie was a milestone in the Tribunal's
history and brings us closer to the successful
completion of our mandate, with Goran Hadiie
remaining the sole fugitive.

As members of the Council know, the Tribunal
has spearheaded the fight against impunity through the
corpus of law it has developed in both the substantive
and the procedural areas of international humanitarian
law and international criminal law. With the trial of Mr.
Mladic', the Tribunal will be removing yet another
brick from the wall of impunity. Questions have been
asked as to the impact of the trial of Mr. Mladie on the
Tribunal's completion strategy. That there will be an
impact is clear, but it is too early to say with certainty
What the precise impact will be.

During the reporting period, the Tribunal not only
faced unprecedented challenges, but also achieved
unprecedented advancement in the implementation of
its completion strategy. The Tribunal conducted
proceedings in nine trials concurrently by doubling-up
judges and staff so that they were working on more
than one case at a time. The Bordevie trial and the
Gotovina et al. trial were brought to a close. The
Perisie trial is anticipated to be completed this year.
Six trials are anticipated to conclude in 2012, and the
Karadzic' trial should be completed in 2014.

Following the criticism of the progress of the
Tribunal's trials made by members of the Security
Council during my last visit to the United Nations in
December 2010 (see S/PV.6434), I wrote to the judges
and convened a plenary to discuss the matter. I stressed
the need for every measure to be taken to expedite the
work of the Tribunal and to ensure that there was no
slippage in the schedule. I am pleased to report that in
three cases - the Bordevie case, the Stanisie and
Simatovic' case, and the Stanisie and Zupljanin case -
the estimates from the last report (S/2010/413) have
been maintained. In the context of the challenges
facing the Tribunal, in particular those related to

staffing, the maintenance of the estimates in these three
trials is a remarkable achievement worth mentioning.
The detailed reasons for the delays in the other trials
are set out in the current report (S/2011/316, annex I).
During the reporting period, one judgement on
review was issued. Appeals from four trial judgements
are currently pending before the Appeals Chamber, and
the judges of the Appeals Chamber remained fully
engaged in appeals from the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, rendering two judgements and
hearing three cases in Arusha.

The Tribunal continues to take all measures
possible to expedite its trials, without sacrificing due
process. Over the years, the Tribunal has continually
kept its procedures under review and has introduced a
variety of reforms in order to improve its work. These
reforms are detailed in my report and include the use of
e-Court and e-Filing, amendments to the Rules of
Procedure and Evidence, and case management
techniques.

We face a particular problem with staffing in the
Appeals Chamber, which is ultimately responsible -
as members of the Council know - for writing the law
of the Tribunal. For some time now, staff have been
diverted to the Trial Chambers in an effort to complete
the Tribunal's trial proceedings. This was and is
entirely reasonable in light of the pressure to complete
all trials, but it has necessarily resulted in the Appeals
Chamber being extremely understaffed. The appeal
schedule presented in my report has been revised in the
light of a number of factors relevant to the pace of the
Tribunal's appeal proceedings. Most significantly, the
staffing crisis - which persists at the Tribunal - has
led to revisions in the estimated times for the
completion of all appeal proceedings.

In response, a new and more empirical
methodology has been applied to appeal projections.
Although this approach has led to the revised estimates
in the current report, the long-term aim of the revisions
is to present the Security Council with timelines that it
is hoped will largely remain the same until the end of
the work of the Tribunal. In order to counterbalance
these revised estimates, the Appeals Chamber has been
employing and will continue to employ a variety of
efficiency measures to expedite its proceedings,
including the limitation of amendments to grounds of
appeal, the organization of judgement drafting, and the
prioritization of work.
Having summarized the present status of our
cases, I would now like to discuss three areas in which
the Tribunal needs the support of its parent body, the
Security Council.
The first area in which we need the support of the
Security Council is the retention of our highly qualified
staff. The most serious challenge to the completion of
the work of the Tribunal is the perpetual departures of
our uniquely experienced staff for more secure
employment elsewhere. It would be irresponsible of
me, as the President of the Tribunal, not to raise this
issue with our parent body, the Security Council. I
must tell the Council frankly that the staffing problem
is so bad that it can now be described as chronic,
systemic and endemic. We are in a staffing crisis. The
stark reality is that, because the Tribunal is closing
down, staff members are leaving. In a five-week period
in April and May, eight members of the Chambers staff
alone tendered their resignations. In the space of three
days, three staff tendered their resignations. Those who
are left behind witness their colleagues leaving for
secure employment in other United Nations organs and
institutions.

To make matters worse, those who are left behind
have to pick up the extra work of those who have left
and must train replacement staff members, which only
increases their workload and exacerbates the problem.
Moreover, when staff members leave, it often takes
many weeks until a new staff member can be recruited
in order to fill the remaining gap.

The staffing crisis has required me to become
personally involved, in an unprecedented way, in
specific staffing decisions on a weekly basis. Judges
bring their Chambers' staffing problems to my
attention. As a result, I have obtained an immense
knowledge that might equip me some day for a career
in human resources. But it may be questioned whether
this is my proper role at the Tribunal.

The Security Council responded to the pleas of
the Tribunal for assistance in stemming the alarming
rate of departures by passing resolution 1931 (2010) in
June 2010 and resolution 1954 (2010) in December
2010, which noted the importance of the Tribunal
being adequately staffed to complete its work
expeditiously and called upon the Secretariat and other
relevant United Nations bodies to continue to work
with the Registrar of the Tribunal in order to find
practicable solutions to address this issue as the
Tribunal approaches the completion of its work. But,
following those two resolutions, although there has
been improvement in some areas, more robust action is
required.
I realize that the Security Council does not deal
directly with staffing issues, but it must be
acknowledged that the Council is composed of
influential Member States that are also members of the
General Assembly and its Fifth Committee. With that
in mind, I implore the Member States of the Council to
use that influence in order to support three specific
measures for the Tribunal.

The first measure is a limited payment to staff
members with more than five years of continuous
service who remain until the abolition of their posts.
Recognizing the economic benefit that a measure of
this kind would be to the institution, the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
recommended a similar proposal in 2008. In the long
run, the retention of experienced staff is clearly the
most efficient and cost-effective approach for the
Tribunal, because the cost of replacing staff who leave
is greater than that associated with providing the
proposed retention incentive. This measure for the
Tribunal to retain staff in an example of where we are
actually spending to save.

The second measure is the endorsement of the
Tribunal's stand that the Office of Human Resources
Management should reverse its position and approve
our recommended list of staff members who should be
converted to permanent contracts. The Tribunal could
then proceed with the issuance of permanent contracts
immediately, which would have a direct and dramatic
impact on our staff retention. It has been almost a year
since the Registrar submitted a list of personnel to be
converted to permanent contracts. To date, no decision
has been taken on the matter. In the meantime, staff
members who are on that list have left. The delay in
dealing with this matter may affect the rights of
individuals concerned. The Central Review Panel, to
which the requests have been referred, must issue a
decision as soon as possible.

Thirdly, the Tribunal has been fortunate to be able
to attract a number of highly qualified interns. It would
be a great benefit to our work if we were able to hire
such interns in circumstances where they have become
integral members of a trial or appeal team.
Unfortunately, under the current regulations, interns
cannot be hired within six months of the completion of
their internships. We would therefore ask Member
States to endorse the position that the Tribunal should
be granted a waiver so that it can tap this resource and
expand the pool of qualified and experienced
candidates. In making this request, I hasten to add that
there would be absolutely no financial consequences to
waiving the six-month rule, and former interns would
have to apply through the regular Inspira staff-selection
process.

I raised the details of these matters with Member
States last week, and so only mention them now very
briefly. The Security Council, the Tribunal's parent
body, must heed the call for action. We need the
Council's influence and support if we are to complete
the work with which it has tasked us. I must be blunt:
if something is not done to alleviate the staffing crisis,
the Tribunal will be forever reporting slippages in its
work schedule. The schedule will continue to have to
be revised, and international criminal justice will be
compromised.

The second area in which we need the support of
the Security Council involves the establishment of a
victims' trust fund. In my previous reports to the
Council, I raised the need for the compensation of
victims and witnesses. More than 6,900 witnesses and
accompanying persons from all over the world have
been called to appear before the Tribunal. Without the
courage of those witnesses to step forward and give
evidence, there would be no trials, and impunity would
reign. These victims of the conflict in the former
Yugoslavia have a right to compensation under
international law for the crimes committed against
them. I have previously called upon the Security
Council to establish a trust fund for victims of crimes
falling within the Tribunal's jurisdiction, and thus to
breathe life into the General Assembly's Declaration of
Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of Crime and
Abuse of Power, which was adopted in November
1985.

The Tribunal has been taking initiatives to have
established some system for providing assistance and
support to victims. I stress that those initiatives will not
impose any obligations upon States to provide funding;
rather, they contemplate voluntary contributions. This
would go some way towards bringing the position of
the Tribunal - which, after all, is the first international
criminal judicial institution established by the United
Nations - somewhat closer to the International

Criminal Court, which has a trust fund for its victims.
The Tribunal cannot, through the rendering of its
judgments alone, bring peace and reconciliation to the
region. Other remedies should complement the
criminal trials if lasting peace is to be achieved, and
one such remedy should be adequate assistance to the
victims for their suffering. I therefore call upon the
Security Council to lend its support to those initiatives.

The third area in which we need the support of
the States members of the Council is the enforcement
of sentences. The Tribunal has signed enforcement-of-
sentence agreements with 17 States, most of which
have been enforcing our sentences for years. We are
very grateful for that. However, some of those States
have become hesitant to enforce further sentences and
have called for more equal burden-sharing among
Member States. Other States have signalled that they
would enforce only a fixed number of sentences at any
one time and have declined the Tribunal's requests to
receive additional convicted persons. Considering that
up to 40 additional sentences may have to be enforced
over the next few years, depending upon the outcome
of trials and appeals, it has become evident that the
Tribunal's current enforcement capacity is rapidly
approaching its limit.

The enforcement of sentences is an integral part
of the criminal justice system administered by the
Tribunal and as envisaged by the Security Council. If
sentences pronounced by the Tribunal remain
unenforced, the Tribunal cannot be said to have
completed its mission. It is my duty to inform the
Council that, at present, there is a significant risk that
the Tribunal will not have the capacity required to
enforce all its future sentences. Despite the Tribunal's
persistent efforts to secure additional enforcement
agreements, States have been reluctant to enter into
such agreements. The completion of the Tribunal's
mandate requires that the enforcement of all sentences
be secured before the Tribunal closes. I therefore
appeal to the international community to urgently work
with the Tribunal in finding a viable solution to the
enforcement-capacity issue.

In conclusion, I want to emphasize the Tribunal's
steadfast commitment to the expeditious conduct of its
proceedings in full compliance with due-process
standards. Everyone at the Tribunal is working as hard
as he or she can to complete the mandate entrusted to
us by the Security Council.

The Tribunal is nearing the end of its mandate,

but we still require the support of our parent body in
the three areas that I have outlined here today: staff
retention, the establishment of a victims' trust fund,
and the enforcement of our sentences.

We at the Tribunal have kept faith with the vision
of the Security Council, and now we need the Council
to reciprocate that faith and to give us the support that
we desperately need to complete the work that the
Council started.

