Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
First, I want to thank Ambassador Denisov, Chairman
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), for his
report to the Council and to tell him how greatly we
appreciate his action as Chairman of the Committee. In
addition, I join in support of the statement to be made
during our debate by the representative of the
Netherlands on behalf of the European Union.

Less than two weeks after the unanimous
adoption of resolution 1566 (2004), we are meeting
once again to discuss our action against one of the
most serious threats to international peace and
security-terrorism.

France fully associates itself with the report
presented by Ambassador Denisov as Chairman of the
Committee. He has submitted an ambitious work
programme for the coming months and we believe that
its priorities are well defined. We are also pleased to
have heard the Committee's Executive Director for the
first time. His presentation reinforces the usefulness of
these public meetings, intended to inform all Member
States of the progress in our work.

Mr. Ruperez referred to the contacts he has made
to enhance coordination with other United Nations
programmes and agencies, in particular the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in Vienna, as well
as with regional and financial institutions. We thank
him for taking those steps. He described the various
stages covered in providing the Executive Directorate
with the necessary resources for its action pursuant to
resolution 1535 (2004).

As the Council requested in resolution
1566 (2004), we hope that the Executive Directorate
will rapidly become fully operational. To that end, we
the Member States, must quickly give it the necessary
resources. We are then counting on the Executive
Director to recruit highly qualified experts as soon as
possible. We note with satisfaction that the
organization of services proposed by Mr. Ruperez for
the CTC will enable its effective work based on good
knowledge of all regions and on expertise in all areas
of fighting terrorism, including respect for human
rights.

Among the new tasks for the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, my country considers that preparations for
the initial visits to the field are a top priority. We
believe that such visits will lead to a better assessment
of the situation and make the dialogue between the
CTC and States more operational and more useful. The
initial visits should take place in those countries where
the needs for complying with resolution 1373 (2001)
appear to be the greatest. The visits should lead to
recommendations, including technical assistance, if
necessary.

Resolution 1566 (2004) has enhanced the role of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee. With the support of
the Executive Directorate, next year it should commit
itself to even more concrete work in monitoring and
guiding implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by
all States. In that way, it will contribute to the
effectiveness of our collective action against terrorism.

