Ms. Davis (United Kingdom): I join others in
thanking Ambassador De La Sabliere and his
delegation for the very able manner in which France
presided over the Council during the month of June;
my delegation looks forward to an equally successful
presidency under your leadership, Sir, this month.

I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Turk for his briefing. I would also like to join others in
paying tribute to all those involved in achieving the
successful fulfilment of the mandate of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Bougainville (UNOMB).
UNOMB may have been one of the smallest United
Nations peace-related missions, but it has also been
one of the most successful, and Bougainville represents
an example of successful conflict resolution through a
deliberate and well-guided process.

We take this opportunity to commend Tor
Stenbock and his predecessor as Head of Mission, Noel
Sinclair, for their efforts in fulfilling the founding
objectives of the United Nations Mission and
delivering this successful outcome.

We also recognize the central role of the
Government of Papua New Guinea and the
Bougainville parties, the important contribution of
neighbouring States and donor countries, and the
positive role of the Bougainville people, culminating in
their participation in last month's elections. While the
closure of UNOMB and the establishment of the
Autonomous Bougainville Government signal the end
of the United Nations political role in Bougainville,
there remains a sizeable role for the international
community in consolidating what has been achieved
and facing up to the challenges ahead. In this regard,
we welcome the continued activities of United Nations
development and humanitarian agencies and the
sustained engagement and support of neighbouring
States and the donor community.

The challenges facing Bougainville remain
considerable. As the Autonomous Bougainville
Government has acknowledged, reconstruction and
development need now to be given high priority. We
also welcome President Kabui's commitment to tackle
the growing problem of HIV/AIDS, which, if not
contained, has the potential to undermine
Bougainville's future prosperity.

