Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to express its appreciation to you and your
delegation for organizing this open debate,
Mr. President. We also wish to thank Ms. Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Alain
Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Mr. Ivan Simonovic', Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights, for their
briefings.

South Africa is fully committed to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict and continues to support
a strengthened normative and legal framework for
enhancing such protection measures. We welcome the
concerted efforts of the international community to
protect civilians in armed conflict. Despite such
positive efforts and the progressive steps that are being
taken, scores of civilians in many regions of the world
are still harmed or maimed during armed conflicts,
from Afghanistan to Somalia to Libya to Cote d'Ivoire.
In this regard, we regret deeply that civilians, in
particular women and children, continue to account for
the vast majority of casualties in armed conflicts.

The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians (S/2010/579) made three
important additions to the five core protection
challenges identified in his 2009 report (S/2009/277).

Advances in all of those core areas will contribute to
the international community's fight against impunity,
improve humanitarian access and ensure consistency in
mandates for the protection of civilians. The Council
has made commitments concerning the protection of
civilians, particularly in the areas of peacekeeping,
humanitarian access, monitoring, information-sharing
and reporting.

In spite of a number of well-meaning Security
Council resolutions, presidential statements and
thematic mechanisms, the grim reality is that parties
engaged in conflict still have a long way to go in
fulfilling their responsibilities concerning civilian
protection. It is clear that the lack of political will and
complete disregard for the lives of civilians remains a
major obstacle to protecting civilians during armed
conflict. The Secretary-General observed in his report
presented to the Council in November 2010 that any
progress in the protection of civilians has been the
result of increased focus by international agencies on
the issue, not because armed groups are observing
international law.

We therefore call upon all relevant parties to
conflicts to put an end to such practices and recognize
that States bear the primary responsibility of protecting
civilians within their borders. That does not exonerate
non-State armed groups to conflicts. Non-State actors
have responsibility under international humanitarian
law to protect civilians and they must be held
accountable for violations. Accordingly, it is always
important to note that, while United Nations
peacekeeping operations should always adopt a robust
posture in implementing the mandates of the Council,
including the protection of civilian elements, they must
do so in an impartial manner. United Nations
peacekeeping operations should never be seen to be
siding with one party to a conflict, as that would
undermine the integrity of United Nations efforts.

The plight of women and children, in particular,
remains perilous and requires urgent attention. South
Africa appreciates the efforts of many Governments,
including those of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Chad, to combat sexual violence, as
demonstrated by the arrest of senior military officers
involved in crimes of conflict-related sexual violence.
The increased momentum in the implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000), 1612 (2005) and 1960 (2010),
including on monitoring, information-sharing and
reporting, needs to be further accelerated.
In February, at the initiative of the Brazilian
presidency, the Council held informal consultations to
discuss protection-related items on its agenda, namely,
protection of civilians, children and armed conflict,
and women and peace and security. South Africa
supports this holistic approach, whereby these issues
are dealt with in a coherent manner. In that regard,
actions undertaken by the Secretariat should be
mutually reinforcing.

Over the past three months, we have witnessed
some important advances as the Security Council
adopted resolutions giving practical expression to our
collective desire to ensure civilian protection. These
resolutions have at their core the protection of
civilians, and South Africa supported these additional
measures for Libya and C6te d'Ivoire, respectively.
These resolutions have noble intentions focused on our
common desire to protect civilian lives.

However, we are concerned that the
implementation of these resolutions appears to go
beyond their letter and spirit. It is important that, as
international actors and external organizations provide
constructive assistance, they should nonetheless
comply with the provisions of the United Nations
Charter, fully respect the will, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the country concerned, and
refrain from advancing political agendas that go
beyond the protection of civilian mandates, including
regime change.

In our view, such actions will undermine the
gains made in this discourse and provide ammunition
to those who have always been sceptical of the
concept. In the final analysis, the implementation of
these resolutions will determine whether our actions
have yielded the intended result of protecting civilians.

Our efforts in protecting civilians will also be
undermined if our approach to conflict resolution is
limited only to addressing symptoms while ignoring
root causes. Such an approach will not help to find a
fundamental solution to the protection of civilians,
which, in the final analysis, can be guaranteed only by
capable States with strong democratic institutions. In
this regard, more focus should be directed to rule of
law reforms; democratization reforms; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; security sector
reforms; and post-conflict reconstruction and
development underpinned by early peacebuilding
programmes, inter alia. We must stress the need for the
international community to prevent armed conflict and
to support actions aimed at addressing the underlying
causes in an effective and sustainable manner, thereby
making the renewal of hostilities less likely.

In conclusion, progress in advancing the
protection of civilians will also depend on the
consistency with which the Council pursues this goal.
Selectivity gravely limits the credibility of the Council
in advancing protection of civilian mandates. This
Council cannot be seen to place the value of some
civilians above that of others. Proactive actions that we
have witnessed in Libya and Cote d'Ivoire have also to
be applied in cases such as Somalia.

