Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom is honoured to present the draft annual report
of the Security Council to the General Assembly today.
I hope the Council members will support its adoption.

As the President of the Security Council for
the month of August 2018, the United Kingdom
was responsible for coordinating the drafting of the
introduction to the report. The draft report provides a
summary of the actions that the Security Council took
in 2018 to maintain international peace and security.
The Council carries out that responsibility on behalf
of all States Members of the United Nations, as set
out in Article 24 of the Charter, and the annual report
is an important mechanism for keeping the wider
membership informed of our activities. We look
forward to hearing the reflections of Member States
on the annual report during the forthcoming General
Assembly debate. We encourage future presidencies
to report to Council members on relevant suggestions
and observations raised during the debate, in line with
paragraph 138 of the note by the President of 30 August
2017 (S/2017/507).

In drafting the introduction, the United Kingdom
aimed to provide a brief description of the key activities
and trends in the Council during the reporting period.
I hope that the draft report offers a clear and readable
account of the Council's work in 2018 that will serve as
a useful reference for Member States and other readers,
such as academics, civil society and the general public.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to thank
everyone who made a contribution to the draft report. In
particular, I would like to thank those delegations that
were members of the Council in 2018 for their valuable
input into successive drafts of the introduction. I would
also like to thank the Secretariat for its support during
the drafting process, in particular staff in the Security
Council Affairs Division ofthe Department for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs, who prepared the bulk of
the report and offered useful guidance and suggestions
during the drafting of the introduction.

