Mr. Srivihok (Thailand): At the outset, I would like
to align my statement with that to be delivered by the
representative of Viet Nam on behalf of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations.

Let me alsojoin others in expressing my appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his latest report
(S/2019/509), to Poland for convening this open debate,
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict for her dedication,
and to the briefers for their insightful perspectives.

The Secretary-General's annual report plays an
important role in guiding Member States on how
to strengthen child protection. For that reason, we
welcome the enhanced engagement between Member
States and the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict in the preparation of the report. We also
welcome further possible regional engagement on that
issue. Allow me to highlight a few elements, drawing
from our experiences that we feel are relevant to the
discussion today.

First, stronger partnership is key. All stakeholders
must work closely to address the evolving tactics used
to recruit children, including through online and social
media platforms. In addition to law enforcement, strong
community advocacy and education can provide the
best defence for children falling prey to recruitment.

Secondly, mainstreaming child protection into
relevant United Nations peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and political missions is vital. In armed conflict
situations, peacekeepers are often at the forefront in
protecting children. We underscore the importance of
having clear mandates and guidelines for their effective
operation. Peacekeepers and peacebuilders also need
specific predeployment and in-mission training on
issues concerning children affected by armed conflict.
On our part, as a standard procedure Thai
peacekeepers are trained to assist the local population
in its efforts to prevent the relapse into armed conflict
and to ensure sustainable development. Those elements
include international law, child protection, gender-
based issues, the protection of civilians, conflict-
related sexual violence and cultural sensitivity. We
have also recently endorsed the Vancouver Principles
on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use ofChild Soldiers. Our military personnel 4 one
trainer and one officer who is going to be deployed in
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan - will
also attend the upcoming United Nations Military
Specialized Training on Child Protection, to be held in
October in Sweden.

We also firmly believe in the importance of
knowledge-sharing and implementing best practices
and lessons learned. We are therefore pleased to
announce that Thailand is working towards becoming
a first-ever regional centre of excellence on the issue of
children and armed conflict, bringing our experiences
and commitments with respect to the country that
will be removed from the report this year, to further
strengthening collaboration on the child protection.

We have been working closely with the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. In fact, we are pleased to
learn that the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and her team will be travelling to Bangkok at
the end of this month, where we will further enhance our
collaboration, especially on the regional training course
on the issue of children and armed conflict, which is
tentatively to be held in Bangkok early September.

The international community must continue its
work in all possible ways to put an end to the suffering
of children in conflict. Thailand endeavours to do
its part and looks forward to working with others to
amplify our efforts.

