Mr. Ndiaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): We are
gathered here again to express our commitment to
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty 20 years
after it was opened for signature here in New York on
24 September 1996. The adoption of the Treaty was the
result of grave concerns over an alarming nuclear arms
race and an attempt to save the world from the terror that
loomed over it. Over 2,000 nuclear tests were carried
out between 1945 and 1996. Twenty years after the
signing of that instrument, that number has drastically
decreased to nine, which is still disconcerting, but
promising, in our efforts to achieve the desired goal.

According to the Treaty, States parties pledged to
refrain from all tests and nuclear explosions, whether for
peaceful or military purposes and regardless of Where
they were conducted - in the atmosphe, underground,
in outer space or under. Nonetheless, in spite of its
scope and, in particular, its importance, the Treaty has
not yet entered into force because of an insufficient
number of ratifications by the annex 2 States. To date,
166 States are parties to the Treaty, including 36 of the
44 listed in the annex, whose ratifications are required
for the Treaty to be enter into force. That shows the
importance of resolution 2310 (2016), which the
Council just dopted, with the support of the Senegalese
delegation, to celebrate the twentieth anniversary of
such an important instrument. I thank the American
delegation for having submitted the present resolution
and for leading the consultations that led to its adoption.

Because of its commitment to the ideal of a world
free of nuclear weapons, Senegal has committed to
the goal of making this historic moment the start
of a new era, marked by a renewal of the pledge to
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation. That is why
the Senegalese delegation commends the importance
given to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) as the cornerstone of the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and the crucial foundation for
the pursuit of nuclear disarmament. The United Nations
can never state it enough: the main objective is not just
non-proliferation but nuclear disarmament, pursuant to
article VI of the NPT. Until that goal is achieved, it
is crucial, if not necessary, to continue to strengthen,
on theo ne hand, the commitment of the non-nuclear
States to non-proliferation and, on the other hand, the
determination of those who possess such weapons
to adhere to negative security assurances. Senegal
therefore implores all of the countries that have not
yet expressed their consent to be bound by the Treaty,
in particular annex 2 States, to take the appropriate
measures in that regard to build a safer world.

Resolution 2310 (2016) takes notes of the joint
ministerial statement on the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty drafted by the permanent members
of the Security Council, which highlights their
commitment to nuclear disarmament and the entry into
force of the Treaty and reaffirms the moratorium on
nuclear-weapon tests and explosions, while awaiting
the entry into force of this instrument.

I wish to reaffirm Senegal's commitment to
disarmament and to the nuclear non-proliferation
regime, and by extension to the NPT, the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the Treaty of Pelindaba,
which established a nuclear-free-weapon zone in
Africa. I would like to take this opportunity to invite
the States Parties to the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty to honour their obligations, and the States
that are not yet party to the Treaty, namely, the annex 2
States, to step up their ratification efforts for the good
of the entire international community.

