I would like to commend the Russian Federation presidency of the Security Council for its successful stewardship of the work of the Council in October. I would also like to thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his comprehensive briefing on, and continued commitment, to peace in the Middle East, including Palestine. My delegation aligns itself with the statement submitted by the United Arab Emirates on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (annex 48). While the entire world is overburdened with the challenges of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the people of Palestine under occupation face not only the challenge of the virus but an even bigger crisis due to the ongoing and escalating illegal policies and practices of Israel, the occupying Power. Israel continues to exploit the pandemic, aggressively advancing its settlement colonization and annexation schemes, entrenching its 53-year military occupation of the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. Just a few days ago, on 14 and 15 October, the Israeli Government approved the construction of another 5,000 settlement units in the occupied territory, primarily in areas deep inside the West Bank. We remain deeply troubled by the continuation of such illegal practices by Israel, which are tantamount to grave violations of human rights of the Palestinian people. We call upon the international community to impress upon Israel the necessity of halting its systematic violation of international humanitarian law and human rights principles. Deplorable humanitarian and socioeconomic conditions in Gaza resulting from Israel's 13-year blockade, which has inflicted severe deprivation and hunger on Gaza's 2 million inhabitants, have been worsened by hyperunemployment and dismal basic services, particularly in the context of the pandemic. Added to this misery, there have been increased incidents of demolition of Palestinian structures, settlement expansion and settler violence in West Bank, including in East Jerusalem. These will further exacerbate the economic and humanitarian impact of the spread of COVID-19 in Gaza and the West Bank. All the foregoing actions by Israel constitute egregious violations of international law, including the United Nations Charter and the Fourth Geneva Convention. They directly contravene all relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). Israel must cease demolitions and seizures of Palestinian property and should allow Palestinians in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, to develop their communities, in line with this resolution. Our own struggle for independence and the painful experience of enduring the worst form of genocide in 1971 has inspired us to always advocate in favour of the oppressed people of the world. This has been the very premise of Bangladesh's unwavering support for the cause of Palestine. As aclear manifestation of our unwavering support for the people of Palestine, we fully endorse the calls to ensure the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including the rights of self-determination, and the achievement of a two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. The international community must turn the culture of inaction around and stop allowing impunity. It must prevail upon Israel to end its occupation of Palestinian territory. Bangladesh reiterates that the lack of accountability for Israel's ongoing violations has only encouraged such impunity, which is undermining any potential to achieve a just and peaceful solution in accordance with the relevant resolutions and other peace initiatives. We join the international community in condemning these acts and asking Israel to refrain from such actions. We also ask for maintaining the sanctity of Islamic and Christian holy places, particularly the Al-Aqsa Mosque, at all costs. In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, we expect the Security Council to fulfil its Charter obligations by enforcing its resolutions, in particular resolution 2334 (2016). As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, we must strive to resolve the Palestinian crisis in order to preserve the trust of current and future generations in multilateralism and the Organization.
