Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to congratulate you,
Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the first
month of this year. We congratulate you also on the
skill and wisdom that you are demonstrating and on the
outstanding manner in which you are conducting our
deliberations.

I should like also to congratulate the new
members of the Council - Colombia, Ireland,
Mauritius, Norway and Singapore. We wish them every
success in carrying out their new and heavy
responsibilities.
The Panel of Experts set up by Security Council
resolution 1306 (2000) has submitted its final report,
on which the Council will subsequently be delivering
its conclusions. As everyone knows, this report
concerns us, and I should therefore like, on behalf of
my Government, to make a brief statement in this
respect.

Since the very beginning, Burkina Faso's position
has been well-known, having been set forth in detail -
first, during the initial hearings on Sierra Leone
diamonds last July at the United Nations; then during
the various discussions with members of the Panel
during their investigative missions in our country; and
again in London last December, where, during the
intergovernmental meeting on conflict diamonds, we
had an opportunity once again to make our position
clear.

Finally, in the broader context of the General
Assembly, we recently participated in a debate on the
role of conflict diamonds, which resulted in the
adoption of resolution 55/56, which we co-sponsored.
Accordingly, we deem it, to put it mildly, inappropriate
to try to argue the case once again and to put us on the
defensive. Wisdom and the determination to try to find
a solution to the question incline us merely to take note
ofthe final report ofthe Panel of Experts.

One of the objectives of the Security Council,
when it assigned the investigation mission to the Panel
of Experts, was to encourage incriminated countries to
attest to their good faith and their total willingness to
cooperate with the United Nations. That is how we
understood the message, and that is how we translated
it in the various steps taken by my Government to show
our full willingness and firm resolve to work with the
United Nations transparently and honestly.

The first step was to set up an inter-ministerial
committee on 22 March 2000 to follow up sanctions
against UNITA. Article 1 of the enabling legislation
stipulates "the general authority for the follow-up and
implementation of Security Council resolutions". The
immediate consequence of this regulation was that
nationals of Angola and Sierra Leone, with the
exception of those on official mission from the legal
Governments of these countries, would be prohibited
from entering, transiting or residing in Burkina Faso.

Subsequently, the Government prohibited,
according to a decree issued on 27 October 2000, any
transactions involving precious stones and metals
coming from conflict areas throughout the whole ofthe
national territory of Burkina Faso. Shortly after, we
welcomed three successive investigative missions to
Ouagadougou from the United Nations, the first two
concerning Angola and the latter Sierra Leone, to
which our Government gave total freedom and full
facilities for conducting their work. They were allowed
to visit and even to photograph military warehouses.
They were allowed to question whomever they wanted,
and, of course, they were allowed to have working
meetings with the inter-ministerial committee. In a
word, Burkina Faso, a nation which respects freedom
and is now open to democratic values and
requirements, gave every leeway to your missi dominici
freely to accomplish their duty.

But the most important and decisive step by far
was the one that followed from the decision taken by
Burkina Faso to establish a mechanism to monitor the
importing and utilization of weapons, a mechanism
which will be established for a period of three years
under United Nations supervision. Furthermore, I can
announce to this Council that the decree that
established this mechanism and which defined its
juridical nature and regime, as well as the modalities
for its functioning, has just been adopted by the
governmental council at its meeting of 24 January
2001. A letter addressed to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations proposes that both sides, Burkina
Faso and the United Nations, get together to determine
the political and technical structure under which this
mechanism could be formalized.

Under the terms of the decree, the mechanism is
governed by a high authority consisting of members of
the Government and the Parliament - that is, the
National Assembly and the Chamber of
Representatives - which is authorized, under United
Nations supervision, to

"monitor any import of weapons by the
Government of Burkina Faso, in strict conformity
with the relevant provisions of the ECOWAS
Moratorium on the Importation, Exportation and
Manufacture of Small Arms and Light Weapons,
also in strict conformity with the rules governing
public contracts, as well as procedures for the
issuance of final destination certificates and the
drafting of the import manifest. The High
Authority is also authorized to prevent any illicit
trafficking in weapons in the territory of Burkina
Faso".

It is understood, furthermore, that the United
Nations would be informed of how weapons acquired
by Burkina Faso would be used under our national
budget and that any movement of weapons would be
the subject of prior communication to the United
Nations Secretariat.

So, in brief, this is the substance of this measure
that we hope will remove, once and for all, any
ambiguity and will allay any suspicion about us. Very
few States would be prepared to subject themselves to
this action, which is tantamount to infringement of
sovereignty. Burkina Faso did so to prove its staunch
resolve to contribute to the implementation of Security
Council resolutions and any other measures that seek to
guarantee peace and security in Africa and in the
world.

It is precisely in the light of all ofthese efforts by
my country that it is really difficult for us to
understand the recommendations contained in
paragraph 35 of the report. According to these
recommendations, the Panel of Experts recommends
new investigations into the import of weapons by
Burkina Faso over the last five years - that is to say,
well before the Council's seizure of the question of
Sierra Leone, because the first resolution on Sierra
Leone dates back to 1997. Frankly, we do not
understand the reasons behind this recommendation,
which does not offer any encouragement to the steps
taken by my country, but what is more, it does not
contribute at all to trying to find a solution to the Sierra
Leonean crisis. To put it mildly, my Government thinks
that the best reward for our total commitment to
cooperate with the United Nations would be to close
the past chapter in order to give the present and the
future a chance.

In conclusion, Mr. President, and without
prejudice to decisions that your Council will be taking
in due course following its deliberations on the report
of the Panel of Experts, we wish to convey thanks to
those who have understood us and even supported us
and to those who have not spared us when it came to
criticizing us. You are all entitled to our respect,
because all of you, in your own way and according to
your view of the objective facts and of fairness, have
done your duty.

