Ms. Amos: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council on the humanitarian
situation in Somalia.

Since the establishment of the Federal Government
of Somalia in 2012, optimism over the expected
progress in State- and peacebuilding and political
and security improvements have not translated into
an improvement in the humanitarian situation. The
adoption of resolution 2124 (2013), in support of the
joint the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
and Somali National Army military offensive, which
resulted in military gains, has not led to a substantial
improvement in the daily lives of the people of Somalia.

Development indicators in Somalia remain among
the worst in the world. One in seven children dies before
his or her first birthday; one in eighteen women dies in
childbirth, and only one in three people has access to
safe drinking water. Global acute malnutrition levels
among internally displaced persons are above global
emergency levels of 15 per cent. Approximately 857,000
people in Somalia require urgent and life-saving
assistance. An additional 2 million people are on
the margin of food insecurity and require continued
livelihoods support.

Decades of conflict have displaced over one
million people inside Somalia. They are particularly
vulnerable to food insecurity and susceptible to human
rights violations, such as rape. An additional 1 million
Somalis continue to seek refuge and protection in
neighbouring countries. On Monday, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations issued
another alert that a below-average harvest is expected in
July and August, partly due to two poor rainy seasons.

The situation is further compounded by the ongoing
military offensive and the new Al-Shabaab tactic of
blocking major supply routes and encircling newly
recovered areas. Al-Shabaab's tactic of encirclement
has prevented commercial activity and humanitarian
assistance from reaching newly recovered areas.
Access to basic commodities is limited and food prices
have increased. For instance, the average price of basic
items in Waajid, Xuddur and Maxaas in the Bay, Bakool
and Hiraan regions have more than doubled. More
than 70,000 people have been temporarily displaced
as a result of the conflict, significantly disrupting the
planting season.

We have carried out assessments in four of the
newly recovered towns, as well as in Afgooye and
Baidoa. Tens of thousands of people have sought refuge
as a result of the offensive in those two locations. The
assessments confirm that people have limited access
to food, water, primary health care and nutrition
supplies. Insecurity has prevented us from assessing
the remaining towns.

Humanitarian partners are steadfast in their
commitment to assisting the people of Somalia.
Funding received so far this year helped us reach over
1 million people with food and livelihoods assistance
and 97,000 children were treated for malnutrition.
Water and sanitation interventions supported 400,000
people, and 500,000 people benefited from basic
health-care services. A massive and well-coordinated
vaccination campaign targeting 4 million people in
2013 managed to contain the polio outbreak of May that
year. Unfortunately, one case was confirmed today in
Puntland.

Humanitarian workers in Somalia continue to face
tremendous challenges in carrying out their work. Large
parts of southern and central Somalia, mainly rural
areas and the outskirts of the main towns, remain under
the control or influence of Al-Shabaab. Al-Shabaab's
ability to disrupt and infiltrate areas under the control
of the Somali Federal Government continues to hamper
aid delivery, and in some instances has forced agencies
to resort to costly air operations. Al-Shabaab has
carried out bold and targeted attacks on Government
officials, international organizations and humanitarian
workers. That is of grave concern, and we are working
to enhance measures to mitigate threats against aid
workers.

Unpredictable bureaucratic impediments imposed
by local and regional administrations, including
arbitrary taxation, the payment of registration fees
and the need for aid agencies to seek approval for the
recruitment of staff, the renting of premises and the
choice of national partners often inhibit the ability of
agencies to access people in need.

Despite the commitment of the international
community to averting another humanitarian disaster
in Somalia, financial support is especially low this
year. Only 19 per cent ofthe $933-million humanitarian
appeal is funded. Some donors have announced a
decrease of their contribution this year, and we expect
this will continue into 2015. Remittances, another
lifeline for millions of Somalis, are at risk as banks
continue to threaten to close Somali money transfer
organizations, which are seen as being at high risk for
illegal activities.

This limited funding has forced the humanitarian
community to cut back on all but the most basic of
interventions. There is a great risk that the gains
made in the past years will be reversed. For instance,
if funding is not secured immediately, UNICEF may
suspend primary health-care activities that provide
medical services to more than 3 million people.
UNICEF has also warned that 50,000 children under
the age of five could die from severe malnutrition if
funding is not received. Water and sanitation supplies
to some settlements for internally displaced persons
in Mogadishu have ceased because of lack of funding,
and we are receiving reports of increased acute watery
diarrhea in these areas.

Somalia remains one of the most complex
environments in which to deliver assistance. However,
to the extent possible, humanitarian partners are
managing rather than avoiding risk in order to be able
to continue to deliver critical life-saving programmes.
Assistance continues to be delivered through local
partners in many parts of Somalia where agencies
are not able to operate directly. In limited instances,
there have been cases of diversion. However, thanks to
the United Nations Risk Management Unit and other
monitoring systems, we are now better able to detect
risks, evaluate the capacity of our local partners and
track programmes with stronger reporting and auditing
tools.

Urgent action must be taken to prevent the country
from slipping back into a major humanitarian crisis.
Early warnings must trigger early action so that Somalia
moves towards and not away from food security, that it
remains polio-free, and that the resilience of the people
is reinforced. We are asking for an immediate injection
of $60 million for the next three months to address
urgent food, nutrition and health-care needs.

I also ask Security Council members to continue
hosting Somali asylum seekers, refugees and migrants,
and to ensure their protection and safety; to ensure
that refugee returns are voluntary and conducted in a
safe and dignified manner; to help us secure additional
funding; to work with banks and Somali money transfer
operators to put in place a transitional mechanism until
a proper financial system is established; and to support
ongoing humanitarian initiatives that contribute to
predictable, safe and sustained access to affected
people.

We need to work together to manage and share the
risks involved in continued humanitarian operations.
Failure to address humanitarian needs today will not
only undermine the peace and State-building gains of
the past two years, but will also lead to further crises.
We do not want to see a repeat of 2011, when parts of
Somalia faced a famine. Somalia must remain a priority
for us all.

