Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I am grateful for the statements made by the Deputy
Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson; by Ambassador
Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission; and by Ms. Helen Clark,
Administration of the United Nations Development
Programme.

As the Secretary-General pointed out in his report
of October 2010 (S/2010/466), an effective response on
the part of the Organization requires developing a broad-
based and coordinated strategy for peacebuilding, one
that is based on identifying priorities on the part oflocal
and authorities and that sets goals and concrete and
achievable time frames. The report also points out that
such work requires developing efforts at humanitarian
assistance, establishing or re-establishing the rule of
law, drafting and implementing security and justice
policies, promoting sustainable development and a
rigorous, democratic policy for protecting, promoting
and ensuring human rights. No doubt, that continues to
be an existing challenge.

Having had an opportunity to serve as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council and to
actively participate in the Peacebuilding Commission
makes it possible for us to reflect upon profound
and valuable experiences. The first that I would like
to share with you, Madam, President, and with my
colleagues has to do with the value of peace, which can
be evaluated on the basis of its relationship with the
persistence ofinequality, violence and oppression. I say
that because, as we have seen from our field visits with
the Security Council, at the time peacebuilding work
begins after a conflict, we have noted the existence of
certain myths and fictions at the point of departure.

We believe that post-conflict peacebuilding has to
do with communities and "doing" - that is to say, that
it must take place in a concrete context that involves
power and social relations, where peace is no longer
clear-cut or indisputable. Although we could begin our
peacebuilding undertaking with uniform, universal
approaches, we would be doing so in the dark and while
ignoring the underlying causes and specific reasons
that led a given society to conflict. That has been a
lesson that we have learned.

There are no universal approaches for working on
a coordinated plan for peacebuilding, since a set of
uniform practices might not adequately reflect, include
or express the reality in a specific society. We all know
of examples where post-conflict assistance policies
have become, or been experienced as, an imposition, or
have worked on the basis of a "remote control" approach
in which certain generic programmes or actions are
applicable, in the abstract, to any country in the world.

We know that from experience; it is one of the
lessons we have learned. Such cooperation is not really
transformational, but rather is profoundly inefficient,
as it is not sensitive to the concrete social, economic
and cultural conditions in which it seeks to achieve
lasting peace and sustainable development.

We have learned that, in our post-conflict
peacebuilding efforts, it is our responsibility to begin
any process of change with questions, and with the
ability to listen and to watch. That will lead us to an
understanding of who and what causes or motives led
that specific society, at a specific point in time, to
actually choose to destroy its prospects for the future.
That has enabled us to understand that peacebuilding
is a process that cannot be imposed or administered
from the outside, but rather one that must arise from
the capacities and hopes and interests of each society.
National ownership of that process must take place in a
progressive manner. That is not only the most respectful
way of achieving our goals, but also a precondition for
achieving true peace.

Being a member of the Security Council has enabled
us to grasp, on the ground, the need to move away from
the myths and fictions that could lead us down dead-
end streets or into ineffective actions to achieve peace
in post-conflict situations.

One example of that, which Council members
have certainly heard of, is the myth of a lost paradise.
In a refugee camp in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, one often hears women say that in the past
they were happy, but they lived well and were never
victims of violence, and there were no problems in their
communities. I think that is an idealization of a past
that never existed. It can be understood as a way of
grieving, and that is the way that we should understand
it. But in our Organization, we cannot work in post-
conflict societies by looking in the rear-view mirror at a
past that never existed. It is precisely the empowerment
of members of society that enables them to remember
the past, even painfully, in order to be able to face
the difficulties of the present moment and meet its
challenges, in order to build the future that they needed
and deserve.

Another myth that we encountered - again in
a refugee camp, but in the Sudan - and that causes
ethical tension for us, is when the presence of the
United Nations or other international organizations on
the ground gives rise to or permits a growing belief that
the future of that community will be resolved through
that presence and thanks to it, and that the possibility
for those people to live in a happy society is in the
hands of those saviours. To allow that kind of belief to
grow is not only illegitimate, ethically speaking, but it
institutionally reproduces a mentality of dependence,
which defines people and countries as beneficiaries
of aid and at the same time prevents people and
communities from becoming subjects of change, with
rights and responsibilities that they have freely taken
on in order to build or rebuild a social compact and
lasting peace.

In another refugee camp, a woman told us that for
her, peace was a fleeting moment between two wars.
That is the myth of eternal return. For her, it will
always be that way - a fleeting instant between two
wars. Our responsibility must be to overcome such a
defeatist attitude, such a fatalistic stance. That is our
responsibilty.

I would like to note the important reports that
we have received and read. We in the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Council need to ask ourselves
which States need which kind of democracy, and which
kind of democracy is needed for peace.

We have also learned that building or rebuilding
a State in the post-conflict stage cannot be based on
a logic of power, on the idea that "man is a wolf to
his fellow man" or on enduring conflict or dissent.
We have also learned that, in a post-conflict society,
authoritarianism, uniformity and a hegemonic belief
that there is only one right way are not the path to lasting
peace. We have learned that the path to lasting peace is
through a democracy that is founded on deliberation,
equality and liberty and a just and inclusive society,
with full respect for human rights. The paradox is that
we have learned that and know it clearly, but the belief
that man is a wolf to his fellow man and the hegemonic
insistence that there is only one way forward persist,
even in post-conflict societies, like a trap that we must
seek to remove.

I have allowed myself to reflect on those abstract
ideas because this kind of meeting allows us to reflect
on things. Often we make decisions as if we were
firemen putting out fires. I think the Peacebuilding
Commission has an enormous preventive role. The idea
is to consolidate peace in order to prevent violence
from resuming, hate from becoming entrenched and
war from destroying.

I would recall Mr. Brahimi's concept of the three
circles when he told us how he saw the situation in Syria.
In the Council and in the Peacebuilding Commission,
the United Nations Development Programme shows
us that the local level and the national level have to be
incorporated into the regional level, and the regional
level into the international level. It is no longer possible
to think in any other way, not simply because of the
Internet, but because the world is interdependent. We
are interconnected, and human rights have become
universal.

This is another area of tension that we are discussing
today in the Council, and also in the Assembly. How
can we ensure that universal human rights, which
must be included in the very essence of building and
rebuilding the rule of law in post-conflict societies,
are not subject to opinion? How can we ensure that
cultural, ethnic, gender-based, racial and religious
diversity is not crushed and does not become a victim of
uniformity? I think that, in our efforts for post-conflict
peacebuilding, we need to work and provide assistance
and cooperation to ensure that the social compacts that
arise from the multifaceted identities of the various
countries include, woven into their very structure, that
which is non-negotiable, namely, respect for human
rights. There should be a democratic debate on what is
actually negotiable, that is, the diverse and pluralistic
identity of a country.

I am very grateful to you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to hold this debate. We continue to
support the principles that other colleagues have
highlighted. We thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for his assessment of the implementation of the
priorities identified by the Council in 2012. I also
thank Ms. Clark. She is aware of how much I respect
her not only on a personal level but also owing to the
fact that the United Nations Development Programme
introduced the aspect of human development on the basis
of lasting and sustainable economic, social, cultural
and environmental development. The work of UNDP in
post-conflict situations provides a time-based, cultural
and strategic bridge for the alleviation of the urgent
needs of hunger and poverty through humanitarian
development assistance from a situation of desperation
to the hope of building or rebuilding a country, from the
fragmentation ofa country to its social cohesion. Those
are of course enormous challenges.

Turning to the issue of women, children and young
people, my philosophy professor used to say that it is
not enough simply to include women in the electoral
process in order to build a democracy. Democratic
elections in which women participate are not sufficient.
Women should have the right to vote. However, there
must also be economic, social and political gender-
empowerment and ownership among women for them to
truly participate freely and equally in decision-making
processes. They can then once again raise Children who
have seen their future destroyed, not without hope but
as equal human beings.

