Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank Mr. John Holmes, the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, for his report on his recent trip to
Somalia and Uganda. His frank and clear presentation
reflects the tragedy and insecurity suffered by millions
who are victims of the humanitarian crises in Africa
and elsewhere. I wish to express the unwavering
support of Peru for the selfless work and strong efforts
of his office to care for civilians, including internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees affected by this
kind of crisis.

I wish to make a few comments on the report of
Mr. Holmes.

In Somalia we condemn the attacks on African
Union troops in Mogadishu, which caused the deaths of
four soldiers and injured several persons, including

children. We are concerned by the deteriorating
humanitarian situation and attacks on the civilian
population, as well as by cases of intimidation and
human rights violations perpetrated by the various
parties. Those facts lead us to believe that the
Government and political groups are squandering an
opportunity to find a solution to the lengthy crisis in
Somalia. Therefore we call upon the transitional
federal institutions and all the parties to the conflict to
commit to securing full access for humanitarian
workers and to authorize the necessary transit
permission in order for food aid to reach its recipients.

The international community and the Security
Council must urgently examine how to address the
humanitarian crisis in Somalia. Without security and
without access to humanitarian assistance, all of the
political efforts to stabilize the country may come
undone. We agree that an inclusive dialogue and a
genuine political process are the only means to bring
about sustainable peace in Somalia.

We are grateful to Mr. Holmes for having visited
Uganda and are pleased that the humanitarian situation
has improved, although it must be noted that a great
deal remains to be done and we must continue to
encourage the parties in their efforts to put an end to
the long-running conflict. For that reason we praise the
parties for extending the ceasefire, and we hope the
Juba peace talks will provide an opportunity to create a
context in which to rebuild a democratic society.

We wish to join those who have urged the
Ugandan Government and the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA) to reject impunity and to respect human rights
and international law. We believe that national
capacities in Uganda will have to be further
strengthened in order to carry out the processes of
pacification and reconciliation. In that context,
financial and logistic support is crucial. Peru also
believes that the international community should
continue to support the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process, which must be implemented.
We must demand that the LRA free women, children
and non-combatants who are still being held hostage.

Finally, I wish to express our gratitude for the
work of President Joaquim Alvaro Chissano in his
capacity as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General in
relaunching the peace talks, as well as the Government
of Southern Sudan for its mediation.
