Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russia insisted that today's meeting be held
as an open briefing, because we want everybody to hear
the truth. On 31 August Mr. Alexander Zakharchenko,
the leader of the Donetsk People's Republic, died
in a terrorist attack. His signature was on the Minsk
agreements and his death has had a negative impact on
the settlement of the crisis. It is clear that his murder
was designed to destabilize the situation in the region.
There is strong evidence to suggest that the Ukrainians
were involved in his murder, and that is fully consistent
with Kyiv's confessed logic of dealing with its internal
crisis by force. Our Western colleagues have not
expressed any views on the crime and today were too
afraid to give the floor to the republics' representatives,
who could have informed the Council about the progress
of the investigation.

On 11 November, elections are due to be held to

elect the Republics' leaders and deputies to the people's
councils, owing to the need to fill the power vacuum left
by Mr. Zakharchenko's murder. As far as the elections'
legitimacy is concerned, they have nothing to do with
the Minsk package ofmeasures, which covers municipal
elections. It is simply that people need to live and make
their region habitable in the current circumstances,
with a blockade by Kyiv and the Ukrainian leadership's
constant threats of the use of force.

The situation in south-eastern Ukraine remains
volatile. Kyiv is not adhering to the ceasefire
agreements and has moved at least 15 kilometres farther
into the so-called grey zone. It is obstinately refusing to
fulfil its political commitments, trying to marginalize
the mechanisms of the Trilateral Contact Group and
launch a second round of discussions on matters that
have already been agreed. Its Western partners are
encouraging that, declaring, like Kurt Volker, that
there is no place under the Minsk agreements for the
proclaimed Donbas republics and that they should
not exist. And President Poroshenko declares that there
is no Minsk format. What sort of reaction are we to
expect from Donbas to such rhetoric?

Today we witnessed yet another round of hypocrisy.
Kyiv's total, shameless and prolonged sabotage of the
Minsk agreements practically from day one has been
completely ignored. Instead of admitting that fact, the
discussion in the Security Council is about the elections
coming up in November, which represent an essential
measure considering the circumstances of Kyiv's
sabotage of its political obligations, when the people of
Donbas-who are Ukrainian citizens, by the way-have
been abandoned by the Ukrainian authorities.

We discussed the situation in Ukraine in the Security

Council at the end of May (see S/PV.8270). At the time,
in this Chamber, we laid out the details, point by point,
of the content of the Minsk agreements, which some
people here never tire of calling on Russia to implement.
Every item in the package of measures is about Ukraine
and the militias, and none ofthem has to do with Russia.
And Ukraine has not implemented a single one of them.
For two years now Kyiv has refused to consolidate the
Steinmeier formula that the Ukrainian President signed
on to, specifying the procedure for implementing the
package of measures, including the holding of elections.
And yet we are constantly being told that Kyiv is
allegedly implementing the agreements. References are
made to the Verkhovna Rada's enactment and recent
extension of a law on Donbas's special status. But has
anyone here read further down the law than its title?
We have repeatedly appealed to the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to conduct
a comparative analysis of the Minsk package and this
law, since it is completely obvious that it contradicts
it. Unlike the Minsk package, the law was developed
without the consent of the Donetsk and Luhansk
People's Republics and the special status it creates is
only temporary. Its entry into force is conditional on the
implementation of other steps that violate the carefully
established sequence in the Minsk agreements. The
amendments to the Constitution on decentralization
have been indefinitely postponed, and the amnesty law
has not entered into force.

It is the European Union and the United States that
are to blame for the Kyiv authorities' non-compliance
with the Minsk agreements. They keep telling us that
the anti-Russian sanctions will be lifted when the
Minsk agreements are implemented. And as long as
those currently in power in Kyiv are not implementing
them, that position represents an invitation to Ukraine
to continue sabotaging the Minsk agreements, since
it is Russia that will have to pay for it. And Kyiv is
happy to take advantage of that. The same goes for
the elections. Kyiv has done nothing to implement the
political parts of the Minsk package, including the
election provisions, but it protests when the people of
Donetsk start preparing to fill the vacuum created by
Zakharchenko's murder.

A feature of our Western colleagues is that they
prefer not to hear anything that does not suit them
or that they do not like. That also applies to the
package of measures for implementing the Minsk
agreements. We urge everyone once again to read the
actual document, which is an aid to understanding.
Our Western colleagues were political and financial
sponsors of the so-called revolution of honour, or
rather, the coup d'etat, something they do not like to
hear. They were the guarantors of the agreement signed
between Yanukovych and the opposition, which the
opposition immediately violated when it seized power.
They do not like to hear about that either. They prefer
to go on about Russian aggression and the Russian
military presence, which Alexander Hug, the Principal
Deputy Chief Monitor of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, did not observe. True, he was
immediately disavowed and that part of his interview
was simply deleted.

The problem is that they have given the Ukrainian
authorities carte blanche. They close their eyes to
everything that goes on there. They let them do and
say whatever they please, and the Kyiv authorities do
just that. Look at Ukraine's foreign policy or, more
precisely, the lack of it. Everything that the Kyiv
authorities' mouthpieces do and say in the international
arena, their entire foreign policy agenda, comes down
to one thing, invective and philippics directed at Russia
and anti-Russian initiatives. That is it. The Roman
senator Cato, with his endless call for Carthage to be
destroyed, pales by comparison. But unlike us, our
Western colleagues are deprived of the rare pleasure of
hearing, without interruptions or translations, Ukraine's
internal political discourse or, as they pompously term
it, the dialogue in their politicum. To take just one
quote from Verkhovna Rada deputy Oleh Barna on the
leading Ukrainian TV channel:

"Russians are not a people. They are a
population without a history. They are bastards,
Tatar-Mongolian mongrels. People who have
always stolen from everyone."

That is word for word, and I could cite a bunch more
like it.

Why am I doing this? Because everyone in Ukraine
knows Russian. Approximately half of the population
speaks it as if it were their first language. And in fact
the ratio in favour of the Russian language is greater
than that. For the Council's information, the Ukrainian
authorities, including President Poroshenko, speak
Russian among themselves and in their everyday
life. Only on television do they speak Ukrainian.
Not to mention the fact that a significant part of the
population of Ukraine is Russian. Ukraine enacted a
discriminatory language law that in effect has left
no room for the Russian language in the educational
arena. The same goes for Hungarian, by the way. Ask
the Hungarians. But the scale of the damage to the
Russian language is greater. That was what the Venice
Commission concluded about the discriminatory
nature of the law. But the Kyiv authorities are not about
to change anything, they just keep stepping on the
same rake. After all, the language issue was one of the
main reasons for the start of the conflict in Donbas.
But it is not just about that. Our Western colleagues
do not want to understand, or cannot, that for the
people of Donbas - and not only Donbas, believe
me - living in a country where politicians like Barna
are mainstream - and they are mainstream - the issue
is not merely political or economic, it is existential. The
people in the Crimea breathed a sigh ofrelief when they
chose to join Russia through a voluntary referendum.
If they had not, things would be worse there now than
they are in Donbas.

During the so-called revolution of honour in
Kyiv, the following one-word hashtag appeared:
#theyarejustchildren. It meant "Why take this away
from them? Just indulge them and it will pass." We have a
saying similar to "Don't play with matches" - "Matches
are not children's toys". Now those children are walking
around Kyiv with torchlight processions and Nazi
slogans and fighting in Donbas with the nationalist
volunteer battalions. That is something else our Western
colleagues prefer not to notice. They have let the genie
out of the bottle, but now it is not that they do not want
to put it back. They cannot.

The great Russian poet Alexander Pushkin wrote
the following lines: "Oh, it isn't hard to deceive me. / I
am happy to deceive myself."

That is about these gentlemen in the Council.
