At the outset, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines commends you, Sir, for convening this important discussion, and we thank the briefers for their pointed and sobering remarks. The scale of human suffering wrought by climate change and its attendant hazards demand firm political will and decisive collective action in order to urgently and comprehensively address this crisis. Millions have been displaced as a result of drought, desertification, floods, coastal and river erosion and other environmental hazards. Millions more suffer due to acute food and health insecurity, fractured social contracts and painful cycles of violence initiated by competition over increasingly scarce resources. With the livelihoods of approximately 2.5 billion people worldwide depending on agriculture, the secondary effects of environmental degradation, such as reduced land fertility and biodiversity loss, threaten further suffering. Across the Sahel region, the Lake Chad basin and numerous countries, including Haiti and Afghanistan, environmental degradation has significant humanitarian, socioeconomic, political and security implications. Inequalities are heightened, development is undermined and scarce financial resources are diverted towards adaptation and mitigation, with significant opportunity costs for affected populations. Moreover, the increased presence of risk multipliers, such as hate speech and disinformation, serves to further compound the already challenging situation as intercommunal tensions rise, political polarization increases and trust in public institutions erodes, thereby impairing governance capacities. In order to effectively address these multidimensional challenges, we need an integrated and coherent approach that leverages the technical capacities of all United Nations organs and specialized agencies, within their respective mandates. The three international conventions concerning biodiversity, desertification, land degradation and climate change are a composite and integrated whole for which Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reiterates its unwavering support. Climate change and environmental degradation are inextricably linked, and both have dire consequences for peace and security in many contexts. We therefore reiterate the importance of incorporating the humanitarian and security concerns of climate change and environmental degradation in all mandated reports for situations on the Security Council's agenda. Additionally, we call for the delivery of capacity-building initiatives to improve land tenure and strengthen environmental governance as a means of building resilience in environmentally vulnerable and conflict-affected countries. Developed countries must also honour finance pledges for climate adaptation and mitigation, ata minimum. Moreover, we reiterate that all States must commit to the terms of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and take all necessary actions to keep temperature rise at 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels. If they fail to do so, global environmental degradation and ecological destruction will continue. We also reiterate our concerns over the FSO SAFER oil tanker, which represents a looming environmental disaster that would exacerbate the humanitarian suffering of the Yemeni people. An explosion of the tanker could cost lives and an oil spill would destroy the marine environment and the livelihoods that depend on it. Urgent action on this issue is therefore needed. Conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities must be informed by a holistic, longer-term approach in order to be effective. We must therefore work diligently, as an international community, to integrate environmentally sensitive strategies across the peace-security-development-humanitarian nexus. That is the surest way to better protect the most vulnerable to environmental degradation and to safeguard the biophysical environment on which all life depends.
