Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of New Zealand for coming and to congratulate
New Zealand on its presidency of the Council for July. I
would also like to thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.

In the Middle East, since last summer, and even
more since the recent visit of French Foreign Minister
Laurent Fabius to the region, France has been noting
with concern that a two-State solution is becoming
unrealizable. Day after day the continuance of the
illegal settlements threatens the possibility of a two-
State solution. The political void fuels the risk of an
explosion, as illustrated by the proliferation of acts
of violence. The Security Council's Arria Formula
meeting on July 20 recalled that in Gaza the blockade
perpetuates misery and despair, which strengthen
extremism and expose the territory to a regular
renewal of violence. If we want to end that negative
and dangerous cycle 4 dangerous for the people of the
region but also to international peace and security- it is
urgent to reconstitue political prospects for the creation
of a viable and independent Palestinian State, living in
peace and security alongside the State of Israel.

How to make progress? First, by recognizing
that the peace process as we have practised it for
more than 20 years is insufficient. It is illusory to
hope that the Israelis and the Palestinians can resume
negotiations and, above all, conclude them without
broad international support. France is determined to act
to promote a credible resumption of the peace process.
It concerns our security as well as the stability of the
Middle East.

For my country, determined action to promote
peace must be based on two pillars: the collective action
and mobilization of the international community, on
the one hand, and the definition of a framework for
negotiations, on the other hand. This is something to
which the Council should contribute. The international
community must act collectively. That does not call
into question either the historical role of the United
States nor the existence of the Quartet. Rather, it has
to do with involving more partners, beginning with
the European Union, the League of Arab States and,
especially, the permanent members of the Security
Council, in order to assist the parties to make, but also
to implement, the difficult compromises that will be
necessary for peace. That is the essence of the proposal
to create an international support group, which has
received backing from most of our partners.

Nearly 50 years after the adoption of resolution
242 (1967), it is essential to put the Council back at
the heart of the conflict resolution 4 not to impose a
solution on the parties, but to establish the framework
for negotiations. When the time comes, it will be the
Council's responsibility to adopt a consensual and
balanced draft resolution that will set the parameters of
the final status and define a timetable for negotiations.
We are currently working to assemble the conditions
for such an initiative, which will be meaningless
if we do not receive the guarantees that it will be
both widely supported and implemented. Without a
political perspective, there is a risk that the parties
will strengthen their unilateral strategies, which would
be in nobody's interest. It is therefore time for the
international community to renew its efforts for peace.

In Syria, four years after the start of the uprising,
the human toll of the conflict is terrible, with more than
220,000 people killed, more than half of the population
refugees or displaced persons, 12.2 million people in
need of emergency humanitarian assistance, including
5.6 million children, and 440,000 persons besieged.
Indiscriminate attacks by the Syrian regime through
the daily use of barrel bombs are the main cause
of civilian casualties. Following the Arria Formula
meeting organized by France and Spain on the issue of
barrel bombs, it is essential that the Security Council
remains mobilized to put an end to the utilization of
that inhumane weapon. As Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura often reminds us, there is no possible solution
to the conflict as along as Bashar Al-Assad remains in
power. There is no future with an ultra-minority clan
that drowns the country in blood and continues to play
a disturbing and dangerous game with Daesh.

To arrive at a solution, France for a number of
months has been advocating a relaunch of the political
process in Syria. On 29 July Mr. De Mistura will
present to the Council the findings of consultations
carried out over the past two months. We hope that
those consultations will enable concrete proposals to
operationalize the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex)with a View to a genuine political transition.

Finally, the situation in Lebanon is a source of
concern on all fronts. The country is threatened by
the Syrian crisis. It is infiltrated by terrorist groups,
there is a massive presence of refugees, and Hizbullah
is involved in Syria. It is also threatened by tensions
between Hizbullah and Israel that could potentially
lead to an escalation, with the risk of a new war in the
Middle East that it cannot afford. It is also threatened by
the presidential vacancy, which is all the more harmful
since the country faces huge domestic challenges.

In that context, it is important for the international
community to strengthen its support of Lebanon by
helping it to take on the humanitarian challenge posed
by the presence of Syrian refugees, by suppoting the
Lebanese armed forces, by maintaining the capacity
of United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon to prevent
tensions in the south of Lebanon, by renewing the
Force's mandate in August and, lastly, by urging
Members of Parliament to rapidly elect a President,
as the Council called for under France's presidency in
March.

As a way to contribute in all of those areas, France
believes that it would be useful to convene a meeting of
the international support group at the ministerial level in
New York, during the upcoming meeting ofthe General
Assembly in September. The international community
must not, and cannot, lose interest in Lebanon at a time
when the challenges are greater than ever.

