Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Many
African States and their leaders sincerely believe that
despite all that has been said about Africa in the Security
Council and the General Assembly, these forums do not
accord the same attention to Africa and its problems as
they do to other international issues.

The Security Council must therefore always take
action promptly when a situation arises that threatens
international peace and security and requires United
Nations intervention. Such action must be timely,
effective and capable of achieving the Council's goals and
its mandate.

Allow me in this context to touch on three points.
With respect to the maintenance of peace, we do not
agree with the concept of African peacekeeping, but we
support the concept of United Nations peacekeeping
missions in Africa. We also support the strengthening of
the United Nations role in that respect as we believe in
the importance of providing the financial and human
resources required for these operations, in a manner
commensurate with the mandates and goals determined by
the Security Council.

In those cases where the Security Council establishes
a peacekeeping operation in the continent to be deployed
alongside an ongoing operation by a subregional
organization, the cooperation between the two
organizations must be based on the comparative
advantages of each one, so that their activities and
functions are integrated, not duplicated. Of course, the
mandate granted to each organization should be clear and
specific so as to achieve this goal.

In any case, activities aimed at improving or
upgrading the capabilities of African countries in
peacekeeping operations should not lead or contribute to
placing the burden of responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security in the continent of
Africa on African States alone. The United Nations
should shoulder its primary responsibility in this area.

On this basis, Egypt reiterates its position that
establishing an African standing force to maintain peace
in Africa is not feasible. The main reason for
strengthening African capabilities - those of individual
countries or of subregional organizations, or even those of
the Organization of African Unity - must be to upgrade
African capabilities so they can participate in United
Nations peacekeeping operations on the African continent
or beyond, particularly through what are called "standby
arrangements".

Despite the fact that we welcomed the Security
Council resolution establishing the United Nations

 

Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), we believe, as many
speakers have already mentioned today, that the way the
Council deals with the ongoing conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and peacekeeping there will be the
real test of the Council's credibility vis-a-vis Africa. The
Council's commitment to bringing about peace and stability
in the Great Lakes region will serve as the true measure of
its success.

As regards strengthening coordination and cooperation
between the Security Council and the Organization of
African Unity as well as other subregional organizations,
we must first stress a key principle: the Council should deal
only with those aspects of cooperation and coordination that
fall within its competence and its mandate, since the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and
other implementing agencies and bodies have a significant
and unique role in this context.

We also stress the importance of reaching an
agreement on a framework for cooperation between the
parties concerned and the international, regional or
subregional organizations before proceeding to establish any
operation, mission or task. This framework should clearly
and explicitly determine the role and responsibility of each
party or organization. What is more important is that each
organization implement the parts that it has agreed to. For
example, the United Nations, with the cooperation of the
Organization of African Unity, contributed to the
preparation of the Lusaka Agreement to bring about a
ceasefire in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
Organization of African Unity, for its part, established a
Joint Military Commission and appointed a mediator to
conduct an internal political dialogue. We expect the United
Nations to implement its part of the Agreement by
establishing and sending a substantial peacekeeping mission
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Finally, with regard to the mechanisms for the
prevention and settlement of conflicts, the Security Council
might consider sending joint fact-finding missions, in
cooperation with the Organization of African Unity, to find
out what measures need to be taken to settle a conflict or
to hear the points of view of the parties to a conflict or the
African countries undertaking mediation efforts. More
importantly, as a first step in preparation for undertaking a
leading role in efforts to resolve a conflict, we believe that
the Council must be more effective in coordinating African
initiatives, whether national or regional. The crisis in
Somalia, which has been continuing since 1991, is clear
proof of the need to activate the role of the Council, rather
than merely to support African efforts aimed at resolving
the situation.

We should also consider establishing a permanent
mechanism to coordinate the efforts of the Council and
the Organization of African Unity - an idea that you,
Mr. President, have put forward. This might take into
account the side effects that could be caused by imposing
sanctions on a State or a party in Africa as well as the
ways to implement sanctions that are already in effect.
Here, I must mention the positive role played by the
Ambassador of Canada, Mr. Robert Fowler, in his
capacity as Chairman of the Angola sanctions Committee.

In conclusion, I should like to express the deepest
gratitude of my country to you, Sir, for presiding over the
work of this meeting, and for the initiative that you have
taken in this regard.

