Mr. Motoc (Romania): I join other members of
the Council in welcoming the latest report of the
Secretary- General on the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) and in thanking
Special Representative Hasegawa for his briefing.

As Romania aligns itself with the statement to be
made shortly by the Permanent Representative of the
Netherlands on behalf of the European Union, I would
like to make only a few brief comments.

I take this opportunity to congratulate the
authorities of Timor-Leste for the steady progress made
towards developing the country and transforming it
into a stable and democratic nation, and strongly to
encourage them to continue their stabilization and
institution-building efforts.

I would like also to express Romania's
satisfaction with the continued strengthening of
relations between Timor- Leste and Indonesia. We hope
that the strong political commitment displayed will
generate, without further delay, concrete progress on
the pending issue of their border demarcation.

Romania wishes to express its appreciation for
the remarkable role played by UNMISET in supporting
the capacity-building efforts of Timor-Leste. We
congratulate UNMISET on the way that its overall
activities have been carried out under the inspiring
leadership of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Hasegawa, and we commend him on the
effective discharge of its mandate.

We have followed closely the findings of the
United Nations assessment mission which visited
Timor-Leste pursuant to resolution 1543 (2004). We
concur with its conclusion that, despite important
progress in developing key State institutions,
enhancing the legislative framework and advancing
security sector reform, major challenges remain and
further international assistance is required.

Accordingly, Romania supports the extension of
the mandate of UNMISET for a final period of six
months while maintaining UNMISET's current tasks,
configuration and size, as provided for in resolution
1543 (2004).

We are confident that, during the remaining six
months of its presence in Timor-Leste, UNMISET will
make a difference in the process of strengthening
Timor-Leste's self-sufficiency, thus paving the way for
the United Nations to leave behind a genuine success
as its legacy there.

In the meantime, we wish to stress once again the
need for sustained support from bilateral and
multilateral partners to complement the current efforts
of UNMISET, and, following the eventual departure of
UNMISET, to continue to provide the necessary
assistance to the Timorese.

It is in that context that the call has been made for
UNMISET to focus increasingly on preparing its exit
strategy in order to ensure greater ownership by the
Timorese and a smooth transition from peace-building
operation to institution-building and sustainable
development assistance by the United Nations system
and other bilateral and multilateral partners.

The issue of fighting impunity remains of
particular importance to my country. Accordingly, we
encourage the Secretary-General to further explore
adequate ways of bringing to justice perpetrators of
serious crimes committed in 1999. The cooperation of
Member States remains essential in that regard.

