Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela abstained in the voting on resolution
2303 (2016), on the deployment of an police officers
component in Burundi for a year for substantive reasons
that blocked the consensus that is needed for a subject
as vital as the principle of obtaining the consent for
such action from the concerned State. It is clear to us
that there has been a lack of flexibility in this process,
which has made it difficult to find a consensus position.
Today's voting reflects the prevalance of divergent
positions in the Council with regard to managing the
United Nations relationship with the State of Burundi.

The resolution does not address one essential factor
for the deployment of the police component - the
consent of the Government of Burundi, the country's
principal institutional actor. It is not possible to
implement the mandate of a document of the Security
Council and the United Nations that does not reflect
this principle. It is a text that will violate the country's
sovereignty, international law and the Charter of
United Nations, and it sets a negative precedent for the
international community. This is even more true because
the resolution reaffirms the Council's commitment to
the political independence of Burundi. By not including
a specific and clear reference to the consultations that
should be held with the Burundian Government for the
deployment of the police component, the resolution
undermines its own provisions. Instead of specifically
mentioning that element, it contains ambiguous
language that sets a dangerous precedent for the future
negotiations of other resolutions, which has in fact
happened in previous situations.

Our country notes that there are inconsistencies
in the Security Council's actions in relation to the
concerned States and the relevant resolutions. In some
cases, the Security Council has shown great weakness
and laxity in taking unilateral actions against some
States with regard to the deployment of peacekeeping
missions. In other cases, including this one, the
Security Council imposes its resolutions and disregards
the opinion of the Government of Burundi, in violation
of the principle of State consent.

Venezuela recognizes the efforts of the African
Union and other subregional and Burundian
organizations to resolve the political crisis affecting
that nation. Our country also shares the concerns
that have been expressed by other States membes of
the Council with regard to the potential deterioration
of the situation in the country, which could lead to
even greater conflict. That is why we reiterate our
firm commitment to a peaceful settlement of the
conflict - one of inclusive understanding reached
through dialogue and in accordance with the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement and the country's
Constitution. We also support the dialogue and
mediation process that is being led by former President
of Tanzania, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, and by President of
Uganda, Mr. Yoweri Museveni, in the framework of an
African and inter-Burundian dialogue.

Finally, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
regrets that the opportunity was missed to reaffirm
the Security Council's responsibility to work in
coordination with Burundi and to safeguard, together
with the Member States of this Organization, the
principles of the rule of law.

