Mr. G6mez-Robled0 (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank your delegation, Mr. President, for convening
this debate, and I thank the Secretary-General and
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights for their statements. I would like to pay tribute
to Ms. Pillay for the significant work she has carried
out and the support she has given to Mexico during her
tenure.

Conflict prevention is a fundamental obligation that
extends to others beyond the members of the Council. It
is a joint responsibility that we all share, as permanent
members of the United Nations. Rebuilding the social
fabric of a country and re-establishing other conditions
for governance after armed conflict takes many years.
When those conditions are not restored, fertile grounds
are laid for renewed conflict or for new conflict to
emerge. Preventive diplomacy is then the only tool with
which to break the vicious cycle.

The Organization has been accused of only
reacting to crises. We do not believe that that is an
accurate assessment. We must recognize the role of the
Secretary-General in fulfilling his mandate. However,
it is also true that we face increasing challenges. Every
conflict is different, and there is no one-size-fits-all
formula to prevent them. In the light of that reality,
Mexico proposes three courses of action.

First, Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations should be approached from an evolving
perspective. The implementation of its preventive
measures must address the asymmetries of armed
conflict in the twenty-first century. In addition,
assistance must be provided to States that do not have
the necessary human or financial resources so that
they can be better acquainted with the various options
offered by mechanisms for the peaceful settlement of
disputes. That is crucial work that must be entrusted to
the Secretariat.

Secondly, prevention should also focus on avoiding

the commission of any grave crimes of an international
nature. Peace cannot be built if perpetrators, regardless
of their status, position or rank, are not brought to
justice for their crimes. It is therefore essential that the
permanent members of the Security Council refrain
from resorting to the use of veto in situations where
war crimes or crimes against humanity could be or have
been committed. Therefore, the Security Council reform
process cannot continue to be hijacked by the definition
of a single issue. Mexico will continue to support all
initiatives that promotes the reform of the Council's
working methods. Consequently, along with France, we
will co-chair, in September, a ministerial-level meeting
to address the urgency of limiting the use of veto in
such situations.
Thirdly, effective prevention requires collective
efforts to strengthen the rule of law at the national
and international levels, which is indispensable to
ensuring development and just and inclusive societies.
Development and the rule of law are two sides of the
same coin.

As a country from the region that has recourse the
most often to the International Court of Justice, Mexico
recognizes the critical role that both the International
Court of Justice and the International Criminal Court
have in strengthening the rule of law and preventing
armed conflict.

EngagementbytheSecretary-General,eitherdirectly
or through his special envoys and representatives, is of
paramount importance in that task. Intervention by the
Secretariat is therefore key to prevention efforts. In that
regard, as we have done many times before, we call on
all Member States to jointly explore the possibility of
empowering the Secretary-General to request advisory
opinions from the International Court of Justice. In
general, all conflicts have legal expression or purport
to be justified by a violation of an obligation under
international law. Recourse to an advisory opinion by
the Court would be a tool of preventive diplomacy that
would further strengthen the work of the Secretary-
General in terms of his mandate.

It is essential to improve the coherence and
effectiveness of the activities of the Security Council
through the use of flexible early-warning mechanisms,
such as in situ missions, and informal interactive
dialogues with the disputing parties and to address
emerging crises.

Moreover, the Council should of course continue
to make use of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions. In terms of the latter, it is essential
to design a mechanism for true accountability that
allows for appropriate structures, mandates and human,
financial and political resources. Only then will such
missions be efficient, effective, timely and endowed
with the legitimacy that is needed for their work.

At the 2005 World Summit, Member States committed
themselves to building a culture of prevention. Those
efforts have obviously not been sufficient. Let us not
allow indifference to be globalized, as Pope Francis has
said. Guaranteeing peace is a collective obligation.

