Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I wish to thank you, Sir,
for convening this open debate on children and armed
conflict. I also would like to commend Germany's
leadership role as Chair of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. Let
me express my deep appreciation to the Secretary-
General, to his Special Representative, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, and to the Executive Director of
UNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake, for their commitment to
defending and promoting the rights of children who
fall victim to armed conflicts.

In taking the floor, Italy endorses the statement to
be delivered by the European Union. We also support
the comments made by Canada on behalf the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, of which Italy
is a member.

The protection of children's rights during armed
conflicts is one of Italy's foreign policy priorities. We
have consistently advocated greater commitment by the
Security Council to address this scourge. We welcome
the steady progress achieved in strengthening the
protection framework. Resolution 1998 (2011),
adopted today - which Italy is proud to have
co-sponsored - confirms this trend. The decision to
include attacks against schools and hospitals and
attacks or threats of attacks against protected persons
in relation to schools and hospitals as new listing
criteria for the annexes of the Secretary General's
reports is indeed a Vital step towards comprehensive
protection of children from all grave violations.

Italy welcomes the Secretary-General's report
(S/2011/250) and strongly endorses its
recommendations. We join other delegations in calling
on the Security Council to adopt more vigorous
measures against persistent violators. Impunity can
seriously undermine the credibility of the protection
system we have created. Relevant sanctions
committees must address this issue within their
respective mandates. In cases where sanctions
committees are not established, the Council should
consider how to tackle the accountability gap.

Cooperation with the International Criminal
Court is also key. Monitoring and ensuring adequate
follow-up to the conclusions of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict is another important
aspect.

We attach great importance to action plans. We
welcome the recent signing of plans in Afghanistan, for
example, and urge Governments to give concrete
follow-up to their commitments.

The Child Protection Advisers of United Nations
missions also perform essential duties. Adequate
training in child protection is one of the core
recommendations expressed in the Secretary General's
report. Italy is supporting an initiative by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, in
cooperation with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, UNICEF and Save the Children,
to develop a comprehensive and systematic training
programme on child protection and child rights for all
peacekeeping personnel. We hope that other donors
will join us in supporting this strategic project.

I conclude by expressing our strong support for
the United Nations campaign for the universal
ratification of the Optional Protocols to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child. Important results have been
achieved since its launching in 2010. We believe that
universal ratification is an ambitious but realistic goal.
It would reflect our determination to put an end to the
worst violations of the rights of the child, which
violations are also a major threat to the stability and
welfare of our societies.

