The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Israel and Lebanon, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gillerman
(Israel) and Mr. Salarn (Lebanon) took seats at
the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/506, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Belgium, France, Italy,
Peru, Slovakia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America.

Members of the Council also have before them
documents S/2007/392 and S/2007/470, which contain,
respectively, the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and the text
of a letter dated 2 August 2007 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2007/396, which contains the
text of a letter dated 29 June 2007 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting a letter from the Prime Minister
of Lebanon.
2

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/2007/506) before it. Unless I hear any objection, I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall first give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the
voting.


