Mr. Serrano (spoke in Spanish): Allow me first
to thank the Colombian presidency for having
organized this open debate of the Security Council.
With President Santo and you, Madame, presiding over
this meeting, the very impressive participation of
senior ministers and other dignitaries, and the
important messages that we have heard today underline
the importance of maintaining sustained and solid
support for the Government and the people of Haiti
with a view to helping them overcome the major
challenges before them. Consequently, I would like to
reiterate to President Preval of Haiti, who is with us
here today and whom I welcome, the commitment of
the European Union to these objectives.

I shall read out an abridged version of the
statement of the European Union. The official version
is being distributed as I speak.

The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Iceland and
Montenegro; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate countries
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia; as well
as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.

The year 2010 was a very difficult and tragic one
for Haiti and its population. It was also a year in which
the international community, including the European
Union, demonstrated its solidarity and stood beside this
15
Caribbean country. Our presence today is also a
demonstration of our firm commitment to restoring the
political and social stability of Haiti. In this context, I
would like to focus my statement on three main
themes.

I will first discuss political stability. The ideas of
political stability, peaceful transition, reconstruction
and growth are tightly interlinked. The second round of
elections that took place three weeks ago and the
preliminary results announced on Monday are decisive
steps towards the objective of achieving the long-
awaited political stability in Haiti.

The European Union urges the national
authorities and political stakeholders to step up their
efforts so that the electoral process can rapidly reach a
successful conclusion. The establishment of a new and
legitimate political leadership capable of responding to
the aspirations of the Haitian people is a crucial
element in the reconstruction and development of the
country.

The second aspect I would like to stress is
security. As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/183*) points out, despite the fact that the
statistics can sometimes be somewhat unreliable, the
country has been shaken by a large number of violent
episodes, including crime related to drug trafficking.
The most vulnerable populations, including women and
children, have been the hardest hit and the main
victims of the climate of insecurity.

In this context, the European Union supports the
crucial role played by the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti. We welcome the extraordinary work
of its personnel, beginning with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Edmond
Mulet. In the same way, we firmly support efforts to
strengthen the capacity of the Haitian National Police
in order to guarantee law and order and the rule of law
throughout the national territory.

The European Union awaits the next report of the
Secretary-General, which will look very closely at the
challenges that remain.

Lastly, I would like to refer to development
assistance. In March 2010, the European Union, in a
joint effort with its member States, pledged more than
$1.6 billion in aid to Haiti, along with $350 million
that it had already contributed in humanitarian
assistance. The European Union's cooperation
16
contributed significantly to renewing the basic
activities of State administration and to ensuring the
coverage of priority needs, in particular through direct
budget aid to the social sectors.

We are ready to do more. The European Union
and its member States are currently working on a joint
programming exercise on a strategic approach to
cooperation with the Europe in Haiti until 2013. We
continue to focus on direct budget support for
decentralization, infrastructure development, rural
development and the health and education sectors.

We also acknowledge that, in terms of
coordinating international assistance, despite the
progress that has been made, we can do more and we
can do better. Although the establishment of the
Interim Haiti Recovery Commission was a step in the
right direction and ensured progress in terms of
coordination, we must not forget that the main
objective is to strengthen the capacities of the Haitian
Administration so that Haitians themselves can assume
full responsibility for reconstruction efforts as soon as
possible. Without national leadership in those efforts,
there will be no sustainable development in Haiti. The
European Union is ready to step up its assistance along
those lines.

Let me conclude by reaffirming the urgent need
for a national consensus among the political actors in
Haiti that clearly identifies reconstruction and
development priorities. It remains up to the Haitians
themselves to lead the way beyond this difficult period.
The European Union looks forward to working closely
with the newly elected national authorities, as it has
done with the current administration. At the same time,
we will continue to support the Haitian people in their
efforts to build a stable and prosperous future.

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of Canada.

