President Sarkozy (spoke in French): France
fully supports your initiative to hold this meeting,
Mr. President, as well as the efforts you have made
with Russia to reduce nuclear arsenals. However, let us
speak frankly. We are here to guarantee peace. We are
right to talk about the future. But the present comes
before the future, and the present includes two major
nuclear crises. The peoples of the entire world are
listening to what we are saying, including our
promises, commitments and speeches. But we live in
the real world, not in a virtual one.

We say that we must reduce. President Obama
himself has said that he dreams of a world without
nuclear weapons. Before our very eyes, two countries
are doing exactly the opposite at this very moment.
Since 2005, Iran has violated flve Security Council
resolutions. Since 2005, the international community
has called on Iran to engage in dialogue. A proposal for
dialogue was made in 2005. A proposal for dialogue
was made in 2006. A proposal for dialogue was made
in 2007. A proposal for dialogue was made in 2008.
And another was made in April 2009. President
Obama, I support America's extended hand. But what
have those proposals for dialogue produced for the
international community? Nothing but more enriched
uranium and more centrifuges. And last but not least, it
has resulted in a statement by Iranian leaders calling
for wiping off the map a Member of the United
Nations. What are we to do? What conclusion are we to
draw? At a certain moment, hard facts will force us to
take decisions. If we want a world without nuclear
weapons in the future, we must not accept violations of
international rules. I completely understand the
differing positions of others. But all of us may one day
be threatened by a neighbour that has acquired nuclear
weapons.

Secondly, there is North Korea - and there it is
even more striking. It has violated every Security
Council decision since 1993. It pays absolutely no
attention to what the international community says.
Even more, it continues ballistic testing. How can we
accept that? What conclusions should we draw? I say
that also in this case, whatever the opposition, at a
certain moment we will all have to unite to adopt
sanctions and to ensure that Security Council and
United Nations decisions are complied with.

Lastly, I share the views of the Presidents of
Uganda and China with regard to access to nuclear
energy for civilian purposes. We the nuclear Powers
must accept the transfer of technology in order that
everyone can have access to this clean energy. I should
add that this should prevent those claiming to be
carrying out nuclear research for civilian purposes
from conflating their activities with military research.

We support the totality of what is contained in the
resolution. We also fully support President Obama's
initiative. I hope that we will have the courage together
to declare sanctions against countries that violate
Security Council resolutions. In doing so, we will
confer credibility on our commitment to a future world
with fewer nuclear weapons and, perhaps one day, a
world free of nuclear weapons.

