The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Pakistan.

I thank Assistant Secretary-General Danilo Turk
for his briefing. I also warmly welcome the
participation in today's meeting of the Permanent
Representative of Papua New Guinea.

Pakistan appreciates the facilitating role that the
United Nations, first through its Political Office and
now through its Observer Mission in Bougainville, has
played over the past few years. We acknowledge the
work of Mr. Noel Sinclair and his successor. We also
commend the efforts of all parties which have sought
to implement a peaceful solution to the conflict in that
territory. We appreciate in particular the courageous
decisions and strong commitment to peace of the
Government of Papua New Guinea. That has been
crucial in the implementation of the Bougainville
Peace Agreement. Pakistan urges the parties to keep up
the momentum to complete the constitutional and
electoral processes in a timely manner.

It is indeed heartening to hear Assistant
Secretary-General Turk describe this as a success story
for the international community. We urge the donor
community to contribute generously, not only to the
financing of the peace process but also to promoting
long-term economic and social development to sustain
peace.

The United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville, prior to the expiry of its mandate, had
overseen completion of stage II of the weapons
disposal plan in July 2003. That was a crucial step in
triggering the constitutional process which is currently
under way. This also prepares the ground for holding
elections for an autonomous government in
Bougainville by the end of 2004, as well as for the
eventual holding of a referendum in accordance with
the provisions of the Lincoln and Arawa agreements.

The present mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Bougainville (UNOMB) provides
for the completion of its outstanding tasks. Those tasks
include the destruction of weapons under stage III of
the weapons disposal plan, the monitoring of the
constitutional process and facilitating talks between the
parties and building confidence between them. There is
also need to bring the faction of Francis Ona into the
peace process. Completion of those important tasks
needs to be supported by the international community
and the Security Council.

Given the critical stage of the implementation of
the peace process that lies ahead, Pakistan fully
supports the extension of UNOMB's mandate for
another year. We are confident that this will enhance
the realization of the objectives of peace, to which both
the parties in Bougainville and the Government of
Papua New Guinea have committed themselves.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker is the representative of Papua
New Guinea, on whom I now call.

