Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela has supported and will continue to support
the efforts of the parties to the conflict in the Republic
of South Sudan to end the fratricidal war that has led
to the suffering in the youngest nation in the world.
We also reiterate our support for the work done by the
regional authorities, such as the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the African
Union, as well as the brotherly countries of the continent
seeking African solutions to African problems. It was
thanks to this desire for peace that the Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan was signed in August, and which our country
welcomed with hope. Everyone in this Council should
support the Agreement.

Furthermore, we wish to express our gratitude and
ongoing support for the work being done by UNMISS,
whose personnel have delivered a valuable service in
protecting civilians, particularly the most vulnerable,
such as women and children, and in providing
humanitarian assistance.

Nonetheless, our country decided to abstain in the
voting on resolution 2241 (2015) because we believe
that it contains elements that unnecessarily divert the
focus of attention from its main objective, which is to
adapt the work of UNMISS to the terms established in
the Agreement and to contribute through the Mission
to creating conditions that will allow the Government
and the South Sudanese opposition to take part in the
process of negotiations.

In the case of South Sudan, a resolution that will
help make UNMISS an instrument to promote the
implementation of the Agreement should not include
provisions that could be counterproductive to achieving
peace. That is why we abstained. Other reasons are the
references to targeted sanctions and a definition of the
protection of civilians that is not generally found in
contemporary peacekeeping mandates. The inclusion
of equipment, such as unmanned aerial vehicles, has
generated opposition within the South Sudanese State
with respect to safeguarding its sovereignty. The
mention of the hybrid court for South Sudan could
create confusion over the provisions of the Agreement
promoted by IGAD and the African Union. We believe
that no peacekeeping operation should act without the
consent of the host Government to all aspects of its
action, in this case of the Government of South Sudan.

We regret the fact that the spirit and unity that should
characterize the work of the Security Council was not
achieved in this case, and that many ofthe observations
and comments that were made in the discussion of
the resolution did not receive proper attention. The
sponsors instead preferred a controversial text.

