Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, permit me, Sir, to congratulate you on having
convened this wrap-up session in line with the note by
the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507) and
for having distributed a concept note with proposals
addressed to the members of the Security Council to
guide their statements. As I have said before, Uruguay
values these formal wrap-up sessions because they offer
the possibility of placing on the record the positions
of the 15 members on the month's work, thereby
contributing to giving the Security Council's action
greater transparency and accountability.

Notwithstanding, Uruguay also attaches particular
importance to interaction with the membership because
we believe that it is always relevant to hold such
wrap-up sessions in the Toledo format or any other
informal format. Having said that, I also believe that
the formal format is very appropriate this month, when
the Security Council has the duty to share with all
Members of the United Nations various topics of the
greatest importance.

I will attempt to not be repetitive in saying what
our Mission has already stated publicly in the Chamber.
I therefore want to begin by highlighting the positive
aspects of what we have this month.

First, for the second consecutive month, we have
seen the lifting of a sanctions regime - the past month
in the Cote d'Ivoire and this month in Liberia. That
aspect of the Council's work must not be undermined,
because the imposition of sanctions is one of the tools
available to the Security Council, but its use must be
limited to the time until the situation that called for
its use has reverted to normal. In that regard, I was
pleased to witness this process from the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572
(2004) concerning Cote d'Ivoire, which was dissolved
on 28 April. I also take this opportunity to congratulate
my colleague from Ukraine, who chaired the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1521 (2003)
concerning Liberia, and who said in his statement in
the meeting (S/PV.7695) at which we adopted resolution
2288 (2016), which dissolved the Committee, that it has
now been inscribed in the annals of history.

Another positive aspect was the adoption of
resolution 2286 (2016) on 3 May. That was a positive
response to an extremely negative reality, which
concerns us greatly, especially when we observe that
there is a systematic pattern of attacks and destruction
of medical facilities, their staff and means of transport;
attacks on health-care workers and patients; and a
systematic disruption of the supply of medications
and the convoys that are sent to provide those
medical supplies. Those violations of international
humanitarian law are nothing but war crimes, and
the Security Council should therefore address the
issue in a resolution. I understand that not just the
outcome - resolution 2286 (2016) - was a positive,
but the process was also positive because it involved
five non-permanent members as penholderswho worked
to address a particularly relevant and urgent issue.

Allow me to briefly address a couple of issues that,
from the point of view of working methods, could be
improved. On 23 May, Security Council members met
with African Union members informally in the morning
and formally in the afternoon in order to address the
programme of work agreed on between the parties.
The issues to be addressed were African issues. In that
regard, my delegation understands that the Security
Council is acting appropriately by attaching priority
to the issues that the African Union wants to include
on the agenda. That should be the approach to working
with a partner who wishes to transfer to the Security
Council issues that are priorities for its organization
and region. My delegation supported the request of the
African Union to include the topic of Western Sahara
on the agenda, but unfortunately that was not possible
owing to the obstruction by some members of the
Security Council who refuse to consider the issue.

With regard to the selection process of the Secretary-
General, my delegation recognizes the leadership Egypt
has provided during its presidency on this matter, in
particular by holding the coordinators' meeting on
18 May and on other issues that were considered by

members of the Security Council on 26 May. While
there are some differences among members of the
Security Council about different aspects of the process,
I understand that it is very important to begin as
quickly as possible holding Security Council meetings
with candidates who are interested in the position to see
if the consensus achieved during our consultations last
week holds up.

Finally, I want to underscore Uruguay's concern
about the two terrorist attacks perpetrated in May
against the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), which
led to the death of Blue Helmets. MINUSMA is the
peacekeeping operation that has had the most casualties
from direct attacks. We have repeatedly called it the most
dangerous of all the deployed missions. Unfortunately,
the Security Council is accustomed to expressing itself
about terrorist attacks through press communiques, but
in this case it was a terrorist attack against a United
Nations peacekeeping mission.

During its mission to Mali in March, the Security
Council was able to see the precarious conditions under
which this peacekeeping Mission carries out its work.
For the reasons already mentioned and for having been
the direct target of terrorist attacks in May, I propose
that we not run out the deadlines that we proposed
for June, but rather that we speed up the timetable to
adopt a new resolution on MINUSMA's mandate, in
particular everything that enables it to increase its
defence capability in order to prevent more loss of lives
among our peacekeepers.

