Mr. Motufaga (Fiji): First, let me thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to address the
Security Council on the important topic of protection
of civilians in armed conflict.

The Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations
states that:

"We the peoples of the United Nations, determined
to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of ware to reaffirm faith in fundamental human
rights, in the dignity and worth of the human
person ..."

Therefore people, and the protection of people all over
the world, irrespective of creed, ethnicity or affiliation,
are at the heart of the United Nations and of the Council.

A ceremony was held in the General Assembly
Hall last month to commemorate the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi
in Rwanda, which is a stark and painful reminder of
the failure to protect civilians in armed conflict. This
year, as mentioned by previous speakers, it will be 20
years since the adoption of Security Council resolution
1265 (1999), which placed the protection of civilians
in armed conflict on the Council's agenda. However,
statistics show that civilians continue to be hugely
and disproportionately as victims of conflicts. That
was also reflected in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2019/373).

As we meet today in this Chamber, thousands and
thousands of civilians around the world are suffering
as a result of conflicts. They have suffered directly
from deliberate and indiscriminate attacks, loss of
livelihoods, being forced to flee their homes and sexual
abuse, and they have been denied access to humanitarian
aid and proper medical care. In some cases, these
acts have done by those who are also responsible for
their protection.

Fiji supports the Secretary-General's efforts to
reform and strengthen the Security Council and the
peacebuilding architecture through peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. The United Nations and its Security
Council remain the most uniquely placed multilateral
entities for resolving conflicts and building and
sustaining peace in this integrated world. We need to
remind ourselves of the enormous responsibility that
the Charter of the United Nations places on the Council
to maintain international peace and security.

The Council has the platform to minimize the effect
of conflicts, end impunity and ensure accountability
for genocide, crimes against humanity and serious
violations of international humanitarian law and related
conventions. The past 70 years have shown that, when
the Council agrees, the chances of conflicts occurring
are reduced and thousands of lives are saved. But when
the Council fails to agree, conflicts are prolonged and
civilians ultimately become the victims.

Respect for international conventions, awareness
and accountability should be the foundation for
protecting civilians in armed conflicts. Member States
and others should be constantly made aware of their
obligations under international conventions. Member
States should always respect their obligations under
international conventions relating to the protection of
civilians during armed conflict. Ultimately, Member
States are responsible for protecting their civilian
populations, irrespective of affiliation, ethnicity and
creed. The Council and the international community
should compel Member States, groups and individuals
to be accountable for their actions. We must send
a message that violations of these international
conventions will not be condoned.

We urge the Council to use all tools at its disposal
to protect civilians in armed conflicts. In the past,
the United Nations and the Council have established
mechanisms to address violations in the form of
tribunals, sanctions, embargoes, commissions ofinquiry
and investigations. The Council should not be selective
in its actions. All major violations of international
conventions relating to the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts should be addressed equally by the
Council. The Council's response should equally fit the
act. If no drastic action is taken, civilians will continue
to be victims of conflict at a disproportionate level.

Fiji welcomes the United Nations Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, which aims to strengthen
the role of peacekeepers in protecting civilians in
armed conflicts. Peacekeepers are being asked to do
more and more. To address this huge challenge, high
performance and standards, inter alia, are expected
from peacekeepers.

United Nations peacekeepers protect United
Nations and international staff involved in development
and humanitarian work. They keep armed groups away
from communities. They operate in communities,
giving them comfort and protection. They protect
humanitarian missions and allow medicine, food and
warmth to reach communities and families, especially
women and girls. Crucially, peacekeeping is about
the soft skills that men and women bring to United
Nations missions. These soft skills are about the
ability to understand cultures and values; the ability to
see how women and children become extraordinarily
disadvantaged in conflict; and the ability to interpret
signs of individual and group stress early on.

When the United Nations does peacekeeping
well, we save lives. When we do peacekeeping poorly,
civilian lives are lost. Better performance and standards
by peacekeepers mean better protection of civilians.

Fiji would like to thank and pay tribute to all
those peacekeepers and others involved in all areas
of protecting civilians in armed conflicts around
the world.

