Mr. Badji (spoke in French): After having
congratulated you, Mr. President for the effective way
in which you are discharging your duties as President
this month, let me pay tribute to your predecessor, and
to cordially commend Mr. Alvaro de Soto.

I also wish to express my deep gratitude to you,
Sir, and to all members of the Council for providing
the opportunity to the Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People to take part in this important debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, particularly the situation today, with the
difficult problems stemming from the settlement
activity and the ongoing construction of the wall.

The issues before the Council are extremely
important and call for urgent solutions. While recently
the world's attention has focused on the withdrawal
from the Gaza Strip and certain northern portions of
the West Bank announced by Israel, the Israeli
Government actively pursues a programme that
consists of developing major settlements on the West
Bank and extending the boundaries of Jerusalem and
favouring the increase of the Israeli population in the
city. The settlements in Greater Jerusalem are being
built in contradiction to Israel's obligations set out in
the Quarter's road map. The Israeli Minister for
Construction and Housing has issued new tenders for
the construction of hundreds of houses in those
settlements, while building permits are denied to
Palestinians and while houses belonging to Palestinians
are destroyed and requests for family reunification are
ignored.

The Israeli plan that causes the greatest concern
is the E1 plan, which is designed to link East
Jerusalem with the major settlement on the West Bank,
Maale Adumim, by building approximately 3,500
houses between the two. That project would amount to
cutting off East Jerusalem from the rest of the West
Bank, thus preventing the Palestinians from attaining
their ultimate objective: to establish the capital of a
future Palestinian State in the city.
At the beginning of this month, we celebrated the
first anniversary of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the construction of a wall in the
occupied Palestinian territory. The Court clearly stated
that the construction of the wall in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including in and around
Jerusalem, and its associated regime are contrary to
international law. Despite the concerted efforts of the
international community, the Israeli Government has
not put an end to the construction. To the contrary, it
has approved the building of new sections that will
eventually encompass the vast settlements around East
Jerusalem on the Israeli side.

Those developments in the situation on the
ground do not promote an end to the conflict between
Israelis and Palestinians. The construction of the wall
and the new losses of land caused by the expansion of
the settlements worsen the economic and social
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory. They
prevent the Palestinian people from exercising its
inalienable rights and vitiate the prospects for a viable,
contiguous Palestinian State existing side by side with
Israel. Palestinians have known frustration, humiliation
and difficulties of all kinds for decades and are losing
hope of someday seeing political negotiations lead to
solutions.

Nonetheless, there are certain grounds for hope,
particularly since the Sharm el-Sheikh summit was
held earlier this year. However, with regard to the road
map, the implementation of the decisions taken at that
time is extremely slow. In recent days, the violence -
which had declined since the summit - has again
intensified. The Committee has always firmly
condemned all acts of violence, including suicide
attacks and extrajudicial executions, because they
mainly hit innocent Palestinians and Israeli civilians
and only harm the peace efforts. Although we do
indeed believe that Israel is responsible for the security
of its citizens, the disproportionate use of force against
Palestinians cannot be justified.

The Committee takes note of the report published
recently by Switzerland (A/ES-10/304, annex), as
depositary of the Geneva Conventions, following
consultations with the various actors concerned and all
of the High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention. We hope that the proposals set out in the
report will facilitate the search for means to guarantee
compliance with international humanitarian law.

The Committee urges Israel, as the occupying
Power, to fulfil its obligations and immediately put an
end to the construction of the wall in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including in and around East
Jerusalem, and to dismantle the sections already built.
Israel has the obligation to make reparation for all
damage caused by the construction of the wall It
should also put an end to the expansion of the
settlements and to the transfer of population towards
the West Bank. Moreover, the Committee hopes that
the Secretary-General will swiftly establish a register
of damage caused by the wall's construction.

We appeal to the international community,
including the States Members of the United Nations
and the High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention, to do everything possible to ensure that
Israel complies with international humanitarian law
and that it plans new measures to put an end to the
illegal situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. The international community
should have acted long ago to put an end to the wall's
construction and to the creation of new settlements
throughout the Palestinian lands. Decades ago, Israelis
and Palestinians should have embarked on the most
promising path - that of dialogue and cooperation -
with a view to achieving a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace for themselves and for all the peoples of
the Middle East region.

