Mr. Lavald (Norway): Norway supports the
Security Council in its efforts to promote closer and
more comprehensive cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in the maintenance
of international peace and security. We are actively
engaged in such efforts through the United Nations, as
well as through many regional and subregional
organizations. Particular mention should be made of
the African Union (AU), which has taken on increasing
responsibility for peace and security on the African
continent.

To encourage more comprehensive engagement
on the part of regional organizations, we must replace
old habits and institutional protectionism with an open
and flexible approach adapted to the particular
situation at hand. Our experience with the African
Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) in Darfur, where
the European Union (EU) and NATO provide crucial
support to the AU, shows just how important that is.

One lesson learned from AMIS is that
cooperation in the field paves the way for strengthened
mutual engagement. The EU is on its way to Chad and
the Central African Republic to provide military
support to the United Nations operation there. NATO
has signalled its willingness to provide strategic airlift
capabilities in support of the AU mission in Somalia.
NATO will also favourably consider a request to assist
the AU in building peacekeeping capacity. Such
cooperation builds confidence and makes more
comprehensive engagement possible.

Right now, the United Nations and the AU are
engaged in a joint endeavour to establish one of the
largest United Nations peace operations ever: the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). The political process led to the
establishment of the Hybrid Operation, thus ensuring
its predominantly African character. The hybrid model
of UNAMID provides a new model for cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
Much is expected of the hybrid model. Its success will
be measured by its impact on the ground and by its
ability to make efficient cooperation possible between
the United Nations and the AU. While it is too early to
assess the hybrid model, our experiences with
UNAMID will enable us to develop and improve
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations.

UNAMID's success will depend not only on the
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU
within the mission, but also on UNAMID's relations
with the United Nations Mission in the Sudan and with
the new mission that is to be established in Chad and
the Central African Republic.

UNAMID is more than just a joint peacekeeping
operation; it joins the efforts and experiences of two
organizations under Mr. Rodolphe Adada, Joint United
Nations-African Union Special Representative for
Darfur. For both organizations, that may prove to be a
strength as well as a challenge. The United Nations has
institutional experience with peacekeeping operations,
while the AU has regional anchoring and is still in the
process of establishing its peace-operation capacities.

I would like to commend the AU for its efforts to
develop peacekeeping capacity, while at the same time
taking on very demanding operational responsibilities
both in Darfur and in Somalia. Norway will continue to
assist the AU in developing the civilian dimension of
the African standby force through the Training for
Peace programme, which trains African police and
civilian experts for African peace-support missions.

If any operation is to succeed, there must be a
clear chain of command. The United Nations and the
AU must work together. The United Nations-African
Union joint coordination and support mechanism in
Addis Ababa will have a key function in that regard.
These organizational complexities are just part of the
setting. Ultimately, UNAMID's success will hinge
upon the outcome of the peace talks between the
Government of the Sudan and the rebel groups. In that
regard, it is probably an advantage that those talks are
being led jointly by the United Nations and the AU.

Norway stands ready to support both the United
Nations and the AU in their important endeavour. We
are prepared to contribute both military and police
personnel to UNAMID. We are already contributing
financial and human resources to the Darfur peace
talks. UNAMID's ability to fulfil its mandate - and to
provide security for civilians and to protect
humanitarian operations - will shape future
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union.

