Mr. Williamson (United States of America): I
would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Jean-Marie Guehenno, for
his briefing.

The ongoing violence and tensions in Ituri are
reasons for grave concern. The dangerous and violent
situation in the east and north-eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is a threat to the
fragile peace process. The promise of political progress
in recent months unfortunately has not been fully
translated into reality on the ground. The United States
appreciates the good work of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and the continuing attention of
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

I would also like to thank the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, for his
briefing. What we have heard today about the
catastrophic human rights situation in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, and the atrocities committed by
various armed factions, tragically reaffirms that we
must keep human rights at the centre of our efforts to
foster a lasting peace and a new transitional
Government in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In its statements and resolutions, the Security
Council has repeatedly pressed the Congolese parties
and foreign Governments involved in the conflict to
respect international human rights norms and the
relevant provisions of international humanitarian law.
The United States Government has affirmed those
statements in bilateral messages to the parties.

But there are no quick answers. It is too easy for
individuals in the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to evade personal responsibility
when Government institutions themselves are corrupt
and dismissive of human rights concerns. Leaders of
the armed groups and Congolese military can too easily
blame the fog of war for the atrocities that do come to
light.

The Security Council must work to ensure that
the Congolese parties make human rights protections a
priority as they build a new transitional Government.
Equally important, the Council must work to ensure
that the implementation of peace agreements is not
bought at the price of letting those responsible for
atrocities - such as those in Kisangani, Kindu and
Ituri province last year - escape real justice.

To help the Congolese parties as they create a
new Government structure for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, my delegation would welcome the
thoughts of the High Commissioner on Human Rights
on how the international community and the High
Commissioner's Office can assist the Congolese parties
to build stronger human rights institutions as part of a
future transitional Government. Has the High
Commissioner's office in Kinshasa been asked to
provide technical advice to the parties as they form
new Government institutions?

Related to these questions is the issue of whether
there are measurable benchmarks the Security Council
and the international community can reasonably expect
from a new transitional Government in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Are there specific institutions
to be created or governmental actions taken that the
Council should expect to see from a transitional
Government that wants the Security Council's blessing
and active support?

The view of the United States delegation is that
MONUC's human rights office is effectively carrying
out its monitoring and reporting functions. My
delegation would welcome the High Commissioner's
thoughts on how effective MONUC's human rights
office has been up to now. Should MONUC have a
more proactive role on human rights issues? What role
should MONUC have, for example, in working with
the parties to a transitional Government on human
rights issues?

The United States delegation listened with shock
and revulsion to the High Commissioner's comments
on the atrocities committed in Ituri province last fall by
troops of the Mouvement national de liberation du
Congo (MLC) and its ally, the Rassemblement
congolais pour la democratic (RDC) - National -
shock at the continuing suffering inflicted on the
people of the Congo by those who claim to want to
protect the country, and revulsion that members of an
armed faction which intends to take power in a future
Government could engage in such acts of torture, rape,
killing and cannibalism.

The United States Government and the Security
Council condemned those atrocities. The Council has
held Jean-Pierre Bemba, as the head of the MLC,
personally responsible for taking action against those
who carried out those horrific acts. There can be no
impunity.

The United States Government will follow
closely the trials that Mr. Bemba has promised to hold
of those he has alleged are responsible for these
atrocities. Anything less than a full, transparent legal
proceeding that leads to serious consequences for those
responsible will call into question Mr. Bemba's
commitment to upholding human rights and will make
it difficult for the United States Government to work
with him in a future Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

We would welcome the High Commissioner's
views on ways in which his Office can work with
MONUC to ensure that the trials conducted by Mr.
Bemba are thorough and fair. We are disappointed to
learn that the High Commissioner for Human Rights
does not intend to have his Office monitor or attend the
trials. Is there any technical assistance that MONUC
and/or the High Commissioner's Office could provide?
Are there steps that the international community and
the Security Council can take?

We are also deeply concerned about the lack of
follow-up by the Rassemblement congolais pour la
democratie (RCD)-Goma to the mass killings in
Kisangani last May. After then High Commissioner
Mary Robinson reported to the Security Council last
summer, the Security Council condemned those
responsible and demanded that RCD-Goma take
measures to bring the perpetrators to justice. The
Commission on Human Rights adopted its own
resolution requesting the Special Rapporteur on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Special
Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions to carry out a joint mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The High
Commissioner's Office was asked to provide technical
expertise to the mission. RCD-Goma representatives
have stated that they are solely responsible for
arresting and bringing to trial fellow members who
took part in the killings in Kisangani. But the United
States Government has seen no further action from
RCD-Goma. That is unacceptable behaviour from an
entity that wants to be part of a future Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The United States would appreciate any
information the High Commissioner could provide on
follow-up actions by RCD-Goma and on the status of
any investigations by the Special Rapporteur on
extrajudicial executions.

Responsibility for investigating these crimes and
violations of international humanitarian law lies with
the leadership of the factions responsible, just as the
responsibility for guaranteeing the human rights of the
Congolese people lies now with the political and
military leaders claiming a role in a new Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We must
remain vigilant that none of them evade their
responsibility. That is critical if transitional justice is to
be achieved, and transitional justice in turn is necessary
for building a new, sustainable, peaceful society in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The United States can support the elements of a
press statement as outlined by the High Commissioner
for Human Rights. The Security Council must lend its
voice and its support to the human rights standards we
embrace. It must not allow an environment of impunity
to continue, and it must support the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and MONUC in their
efforts to change this devastating situation.

