Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
We alsojoin colleagues today in expressing condolences
to the Government of Tunisia on the passing of its
President, as well as to the victims' families for the
senseless attacks in Kabul yesterday.

It is good to see Deputy Secretary-General
Mohammed here in the Council. I thank her for her
briefing and for the continued hard work that the
United Nations undertakes to support peace, human
rights and economic development in Afghanistan. As
she noted in her remarks, women have a critical role to
play in supporting the development of a comprehensive
and sustainable peace agreement in Afghanistan. We
also appreciate the updates provided by Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, and the statement by Ms. Jamila
Afghani highlighting critical issues.

This week, President Trump reiterated that there
was no military solution to the decades-long war in
Afghanistan. Now is the time to seize the opportunity
to end the war. The United States efforts are focused
on achieving an inclusive political settlement that
ends the war in Afghanistan. As we seek a negotiated
political settlement to the Afghan conflict, the United
States continues to support bringing Afghans together
at the negotiating table to decide the future of their
own country - one that is inclusive of women,
representatives of opposition parties, civil society and
minority groups.

Let me reaffirm that the United States does not seek

a withdrawal agreement. Rather, we are committed to
pursuing a comprehensive peace agreement that would
guarantee that Afghanistan never again becomes a
platform for transnational terrorism.

The United States and the Taliban reached
an agreement, in principle, in January that any
comprehensive peace agreement must address four
interconnected issues: counter-terrorism, foreign-troop
presence, intra-Afghan dialogue leading to intra-Afghan
negotiations, and a permanent and comprehensive
ceasefire. We have continued to talk in more detail
about those issues with the Taliban, most recently in
Doha last month. We have been clear that we are not
negotiating, nor will we negotiate, with the Taliban on
behalf of the Government or the people of Afghanistan.
While the negotiations with the Taliban continue,
we have been conducting parallel talks with the Afghan
Government. Our goal is to facilitate an intra-Afghan
negotiation so that the Afghans themselves can
reach a political settlement and chart a peaceful and
prosperous path for their country. In June, during his
visit to Kabul, Secretary Pompeo set an ambitious
target date of 1 September for the Taliban and the
Afghan Government to reach a framework agreement
through negotiations.

Peace is our priority and it must not wait for
the Afghan presidential election scheduled for
28 September. At the same time, we continue to press
the Afghan Government and electoral institutions
to take all steps necessary to be prepared to hold a
credible election.

Special Representative Khalilzad is currently in
Kabul for consultations with the Afghan Government
on next steps in the peace process, including identifying
a national negotiating team that can participate in
intra-Afghan negotiations. Special Representative
Khalilzad has continuously advocated for Afghan
women to be included in those negotiations.

Not only should Afghan women have a seat at
the negotiating table, they should have meaningful
participation and a role in decision-making, as has
been said by others this morning and reiterated by
Ms. Afghani. Special Representative Khalilzad is also
continuing his engagement with representatives of civil
society, including peace advocates and women's rights
groups, to further encourage broad participation in the
peace process.

Afghans - men and women - are already
coming together in support of peace. The Intra-Afghan
Conference for Peace, hosted in Doha, Qatar, from 7 to
8 July with the critical support of Germany, marked
a positive step forward towards an inclusive dialogue
among all Afghan national stakeholders. We were
encouraged that women made up nearly 25 per cent of
non-Taliban participants at that crucial conference.

The strong presence and engagement of Afghan
women at the recent talks reflect the gains that
Afghanistan has made in the past 18 years. In 2001,
conditions for women in Afghanistan were dire. Access
to education was limited, with fewer than 900,000
children in school and almost no girls registered.

Today 9 million children, including more than
3.5 million girls, attend primary and secondary school.
An additional 100,000 women also study at public and
private universities. Today women make up 27 per cent
of civil service employees in Afghanistan. They have
served in key Cabinet positions, including as Ministers
of Public Health, Women's Affairs, Counter-narcotics
and Mining, and now here in New York as Permanent
Representative to the United Nations.

The United States shares the desire of Afghans
and the international community to protect those gains
and our shared investment. We remain committed to
all Afghans who support human rights, including the
rights of women, girls and ethnic minorities.

As Afghans continue to pursue peace, planning for
a timely and credible presidential election continues.
Preparation for the presidential elections, including
the publication of the final voter list, the printing of
ballots and the recruitment and training of poll workers
is continuing apace. Donors are also contributing
$59 million of the $149 million election budget,
including approximately $29 million from the United
States. We continue to urge the Afghan Government,
the Independent Election Commission and all political
stakeholders to take all necessary steps to ensure that
the elections are credible.

In closing, allow me to note that, in line with the
United States strategy on women, peace and security,
we will continue efforts to put women at the centre of
our diplomacy and development efforts in Afghanistan,
protecting women in conflict and supporting women's
meaningful participation in the peace process. We
will do that because it has been proven that women's
participation in peace processes result in more
sustainable and long-lasting agreements. That effort is
supported by the historic legislation on women, peace
and security signed by President Trump in October
2017, making the United States the first country in the
world with a comprehensive law on this issue.

Let me again express our appreciation to the
United Nations and other international partners
for their support in strengthening the legitimacy
of Afghanistan's electoral process and supporting
Afghanistan's peace process.

