Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
Thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
important meeting. It is entirely appropriate that
members of the Security Council are meeting today
with all Members of the United Nations. It is difficult
to exaggerate the stakes that today's Council
deliberations represent for all the States gathered in
this Chamber. Peace and war hang in the balance.

The peoples that we represent have invested their
hopes in the integrity and the usefulness of this
institution. They are counting on its wisdom, its
experience, its resolve and, above all, its willingness to
decide - humanely, in their names - on a response to

the challenge posed by the Iraqi situation. It is
therefore in their names that we call upon the Council
to acquit its solemn obligations to them, to examine
every compromise and every possibility, and to spare
no effort to solve this problem together.

(spoke in English)

The first step to regaining the unity that is
indispensable to success is to recognize that positions
on both sides are held with deep conviction and that
both sides have valid arguments.

An open-ended inspection process would relieve
the pressure on Iraq to disarm. The record leaves no
doubt that the Iraqi authorities have begun to cooperate
only because they face heavy outside pressure,
including the indispensable build-up of military force
by the United States, the United Kingdom, Australia
and others, and the willingness of the international
community to back diplomacy with force if necessary.

On the other hand, a foreshortened inspections
process would create worrying doubt as to whether war
were indeed the last resort. And military action without
a Security Council mandate in this case would risk
undermining respect for international law and would
raise questions about the future viability of this crucial
body, its authority and its efficacy.

The division of the Council has, regrettably,
drawn the focus of the world away from the crucial
issue of disarming Iraq and has shifted it, instead, onto
diplomatic competition. That serves no one's interests
but Saddam Hussain's.

On 18 February, the Government of Canada
proposed a set of ideas to bridge this very destructive
divide. We suggested that the key remaining
disarmament tasks be established and prioritized by the
weapons inspectors and that a deadline be established
for Iraq to implement them. We agree with Mr. Blix
that, while cooperation by Iraq must be immediate and
proactive, disarmament and verification cannot be
instantaneous. More time is needed for the inspectors
to do the job that this body has given them to do so that
we can all judge whether Iraqi cooperation goes
beyond process to substance. More time for
inspections, however, will be useful only if Iraq
implements resolution 1441 (2002) and preceding
resolutions, and that means a deadline.

Since the Council last met with the general
membership to discuss the situation in Iraq, there has
undeniably been some progress, including on the
nuclear file. We have seen encouraging instances of
actual disarmament, particularly with respect to missile
stocks. United Nations inspectors continue to verify the
destruction of proscribed missiles, munitions are being
unearthed, interviews on the inspectors' terms are
beginning to take place, unimpeded and immediate
access to any and all sites is now a matter of course, no
nuclear materials have been found, and apparently no
nuclear weapons programme has been reconstituted.

But we have also seen signs of Iraqi business as
usual, and we have been disturbed that Iraq has not
done much more, much sooner. If Iraq has nothing to
hide, it has nothing to fear from facilitating private
meetings of its scientists and officials with weapons
inspectors outside Iraq. We still do not have the
answers we must have to crucial questions about Iraq's
past chemical and biological weapons production and
destruction and about its residual capabilities and
possible current programmes. We have yet to see the
evidence that would convince us that Iraq no longer
possesses or intends to reacquire weapons of mass
destruction, and we still fear that the opposite may be
true.

The Government of Canada believes that a
message of absolute clarity and urgency needs to be
sent from the Security Council to the Government of
Iraq as to what is required of it, and when.

First, we believe that Iraq's leadership should be
asked to publicly direct all levels of the Iraqi
Government to take all necessary disarmament
decisions in the interests of the Iraqi people and of the
region. Saddam Hussain has seemed to stand apart
from the disarmament process, in apparent disdain of
Council decisions. That cannot continue if Iraqi
protestations of cooperation are to be believed.

Secondly, the Council should ask Mr. Blix to
bring forward the programme of work urgently, within
the week, including the list of key remaining
disarmament tasks that the Government of Iraq must
perform. Mr. Blix should establish the priorities among
those tasks, particularly the biological and chemical
weapons priorities, especially concerning bulk
quantities of anthrax, the disposition of the chemical
agent VX and evidence regarding chemical weapons
shells and bombs and other biological and chemical
munitions. He should also stipulate the urgent and
imperative steps required of the Government of Iraq to
implement those tasks.

Thirdly, at the same time, it is obvious that
disarmament and verification cannot be instantaneous.
We believe, therefore, that the Council should set a
deadline of three weeks for Iraq to demonstrate
conclusively that it is implementing these tasks and is
cooperating actively and effectively on substance, on
real disarmament, and not only on process.

Fourthly, to keep the pressure on Iraq, the
Council should consider authorizing Member States
now to eventually use all necessary means to force
compliance, unless, on the basis of ongoing inspectors'
reports, it concludes that the Government of Iraq is
complying.

We are convinced that Iraq is substantially
contained and that, if it cooperates, the disarmament of
Iraq can be had without a shot being fired.

If, by the deadline, the Government of Iraq were
found by the Security Council to be cooperating fully
and actively with the inspectors and disarming or
otherwise complying with United Nations resolutions,
a further deadline could be set. These deadlines could
be repeated until the disarmament goals of resolutions
1441 (2002) and 1284 (1999) were met and we were all
confident that enhanced, ongoing verification and
monitoring were likely to be effective.

Finally, a sustained inspection and monitoring
system would need to be put in place after verified
disarmament in order to give the international
community confidence and to alert it immediately if
the Government of Iraq were to seek to re-establish
proscribed weapons programmes.

The United Nations and the Security Council are
at a watershed.

The Council's decision on Iraq will not only
affect the lives and well-being of the Iraqi people and
of their neighbours, but also have an impact on
regional stability and the security of all of us.

The Government and the people of Canada want a
peaceful resolution to this crisis. Like the vast majority
of the United Nations membership, we oppose military
intervention, except as a last resort.

We understand the challenge the Council faces.
We ask only that it spare no effort to unite to meet this
crucial challenge and to ensure that the Government of
Iraq is no longer a threat to its neighbours and to
international peace and security.

The Council's decision will determine whether
the peoples of the countries represented in this
Chamber will have been justified in putting their faith
in the promise of the founding ideas of the United
Nations.

May the Council find the wisdom and the will to
ensure, as well, that the United Nations emerges from
this crisis enhanced, not diminished, so that it can, to
quote the opening line of the Charter, "save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war", which is its most
solemn purpose.

For our part, the people and the Government of
Canada will support the judgments of the weapons
inspectors, and we will respect the decisions of the
Council.

