I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Central Africa, Mr. Fall, for his briefing, based on which, together with the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1154), I would like to make the following comments. First, we must continue to support the efforts by countries in the region to prioritize the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Since the outbreak of the pandemic, countries in Central Africa have adopted strict measures and implemented the COVID-19 regional response strategy, coordinated by Central Africa, of the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS), which has alleviated the pandemic. Nonetheless, the pandemic continues to spread throughout the world, and the momentum of regional cooperation must be maintained. The United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) should support regional countries in strengthening joint prevention and control, and promote cooperation in information-sharing, testing methods and clinical treatment. China has provided countries in the region with multiple shipments of anti-pandemic supplies and has dispatched medical experts to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Congo, Sao Tome and Principe and Angola. We remain committed to providing further assistance in that regard. Secondly, we must continue to support the economic recovery and development of countries in the region, which have been severely affected by the pandemic and are facing an increasing risk of an economic downturn. The international community has the responsibility to help countries in the region maintain macroeconomic stability, expand employment opportunities and ensure a secure and smooth industrial and supply chain. China has actively implemented the Debt Service Suspension Initiative of the Group of 20 (G-20) and is the country that has fulfilled the largest amount in that regard among G-20 members. Through concrete efforts, we have helped Cameroon, the Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Angola and other countries in the region overcome difficulties. It is China's hope that UNOCA will urge developed countries and multilateral financial institutions to accelerate their actions and honour their commitments as soon as possible to genuinely reduce the debt burden of the region. Thirdly, we must continue to support countries in the region in maintaining peace independently. The situation in Central Africa is generally stable, thanks to the concerted efforts of the countries of the region. However, Boko Haram and the Lord's Resistance Army are still active in the region, and piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is rampant. The international community must take action to support regional countries in combating terrorism and organized crime. In doing so, it is imperative to always respect the sovereignty and national ownership of countries in the region. With many elections to be held this year and next year, UNOCA may provide, upon the request of the countries concerned, technical and material assistance for their elections. The issue of South-West and North-West Cameroon is part of the country's internal affairs by the nature of the issue. We believe that the Government of Cameroon is able to handle it properly and maintain national stability. The Government of the Central African Republic is faced with the arduous task of security capacity-building. China continues to call on the Security Council to lift the arms embargo on the Central African Republic at an early date. Fourthly, we must continue to support the regional integration process in Central Africa. ECCAS has actively promoted institutional reform, established the ECCAS Commission and launched the regional peace and security architecture, thereby taking solid steps towards regional integration. UNOCA should facilitate good-neighbourly relations and deepen economic integration in the region, and the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development should be integrated into regional and national development strategies. We hope that UNOCA will strengthen communication and coordination with other relevant United Nations agencies, subregional organizations in Africa and the African Union, leverage respective advantages and form synergies with a view to promoting regional stability and prosperity.
