Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): I have the
honour to make the following statement on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union - Bulgaria,
the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania and Slovakia - and the associated
country Cyprus, as well as the European Free Trade
Association (EFTA) country member of the European
Economic Area Iceland, align themselves with this
statement.

The European Union expresses its concern at recurrent
violence in Rwanda which is contributing to the persistent
instability in the Great Lakes region as a whole. We
unequivocally condemn the continued armed insurgency by
elements with a genocidal motive, and in particular the acts
of brutal violence perpetrated by such groups against
unarmed civilians, including women and children.

In this regard, the European Union welcomes the
action of the Security Council to reactivate the
International Commission of Inquiry on illegal arms flows
to Rwanda. In its new common position on Rwanda,
adopted on 30 March, the European Union affirmed its
support for the work of the Commission as an important
means to help bring an end to the continuing destabilizing
conflict. The member States of the European Union
pledge their full cooperation in the work of the
Commission in its new phase.

The European Union is committed to working
together with the Government of Rwanda to secure an
end to conflict and recovery from genocide, to promote
national reconciliation and the democratic process, to
protect human rights and fundamental freedoms and to
foster economic prosperity in the country.

That concludes my statement on behalf of the
European Union. I wish now to make a very short
statement in my capacity as Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom.

I am pleased to announced today that the British
Government will make a financial contribution of 100,000
pounds sterling to the Trust Fund supporting the
International Commission of Inquiry for the next phase of
its work.

