Mr. Jeremic' (Serbia): I am going to be very
brief. I just want to reflect on a few thoughts that I
heard this afternoon.

I cannot agree with some of the speakers'
assessments that Serbia is exercising irresponsible
interference in other countries' regional affairs. When
it comes to Serbia's regional outlook and the way that
it deals with the region, I think that the Government
has demonstrated clearly that reconciliation and peace
are at the forefront of how we see the future of the
Balkans: a future in the European Union.

I am glad that a few speakers today noted that the
Serbian parliament has passed the resolution on
Srebrenica. But I would like to underline that that is
the first decision of a parliament in the history of
Europe to extend an apology for something that took
place in history. As we all know, the history of Europe
is full of occurrences that would necessitate an apology
of one sort or another. But Serbia was the first in
history to extend an apology.

My Government is very proud of what we are
doing in order to make sure that there is peace and
stability throughout the region - in Bosnia, in Croatia,
in the disputed parts of Serbia and elsewhere.

Serbia places no preconditions on the reopening
of a dialogue. We do not attach - as I heard that
Pristina does - conditions that someone is to be
treated in this way or that way. We are ready to talk
about everything. We are ready to talk about all the
outstanding issues, including the one that is at the very
heart of all outstanding issues, that is, the future status
of the province.

I believe that borders anywhere in the world can
be settled only upon agreement by all interested
parties, and not by announcements of any unilateral
action, no matter how mighty the supporters of such
unilateral action may be. That goes for the borders of
Serbia and the borders of any other country of the
world. Serbia stands ready to engage in a dialogue that
would settle all the outstanding issues once and for all
in a peaceful manner, and Serbia asks for the support
of this Council and of the United Nations in this
peaceful approach.

This is the first time in the history of the Balkans
that an issue of this sort is not being resolved by
conflict. Nobody is trying to go to war with anybody,
and I think this is a great, positive development,
because we are talking about 600 or 700 years of
Balkan history. This is the first time that somebody is
trying to do to settle such issues peacefully, including
the issue of the border. That is what we propose. We
stand ready to engage, in the best possible faith, to
resolve it.

I want to draw attention to one thing. Somebody
said that, during this reporting period, five times more
internally displaced persons returned than in the
previous period. In the previous period, there were 50
people, and this time 259, but that is out of 200,000.
Yes, the math is correct, but if we look at the absolute
numbers, I think they represent our common failure,
and we need to address it in the best possible faith. As
we have engaged on all outstanding regional issues in
the best possible faith and in full sincerity, the
Government of Serbia stands ready to engage with all
interested parties in resolving this issue once and for
all. But it is only through dialogue - peaceful
dialogue - that we believe we can solve it. That is all
I wanted to say.

