Mr. Okamura (Japan) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. A'ichatou Mindaoudou,
for her update on the situation in Cote d'Ivoire, Where
peace and democracy have been restored. I would also
like to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cote
d'Ivoire, Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh, for being here today.

(spoke in English)

Allow me to make a statement as we mark the final
progress report (S/2017/89) of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI).
After 14 years, UNOCI is finally drawing to a close. It
is as though we are reading the final chapter in a long
saga, with a happy ending after a very dramatic story.
UNOCI is a particularly unique tale. Whereas most
peacekeeping operations are deployed in the aftermath
of a crisis, UNOCI experienced escalated violence on
the ground and faced the risk of relapse into civil war
during its deployment.

UNOCI has faced and overcome many challenges,
such as implementing the peace agreement; supporting
the electoral process, including generating a voters
list and issuing identity cards; a sitting President
who refused to accept his electoral loss; undertaking
a protection-of-civilians mandate when there are two
opposing military forces; and even becoming caught
up in the extreme situation itself. Nowadays, such
situations are not unfamiliar to us.

UNOCI constitutes a handbook for many extreme
scenarios that peacekeeping might face. UNOCI has
seen them all, and it offers us many lessons for the
future. It also pioneered many innovations, including
inter-mission cooperation with the United Nations
in Liberia and Sierra Leone. The Quick Reaction
Force concept was also developed over the course of
UNOCI's deployment.

I recall the day when the Constitutional Council
announced that Laurent Gbagbo had won. At that time,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Choi
Young-jin asked the Ambassadors of major countries
to gather in his office. I was among them. He told us
that he could not certify that announcement and that
he could certify only the outcome that the Independent
Electoral Commission had issued the day before,
proclaiming Alassane Ouattara as the winner. He
made his determination clear and asked for our unified
support. An unusual situation followed. There were
two Presidents, two Prime Ministers, two Foreign
Ministers and two military forces. UNOCI worked to
protect Alassane Ouattara, who was under siege inside
a hotel. Foreign Minister Marcel Amon-Tanoh was also
among those under siege. The incumbent President,
Mr. Gbagbo, then declared that the United Nations
must leave. The United Nations refused, but then
faced great difficulties with Mr. Gbagbo's supporters.
And indeed, a number of stray bullets did fly into
UNOCI headquarters.

I would like to testify to the profound dedication of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Choi
Young-jin and of UNOCI staff. Despite the risks, they
overcame the extreme difficulties the mission faced.
Without their bravery, the conflict might not have
been resolved and we would not have peace today. I
personally owe a great deal to UNOCI's role to protect
civilians. When months of tension escalated into street
violence, a number of diplomatic colleagues and I were
rescued thanks to the heroic efforts and professionalism
of the French Operation Licorne and UNOCI.

(Spoke in French)

I cannot conclude my intervention without
underscoring the bold and resolute efforts of the
Ivoirian people, average citizens fighting for peace and
democracy. When the armed conflict broke out, citizens
took to the streets to demand a peaceful resolution
to the conflict. The security forces then opened fire,
and many people lost their lives. I remember the day
when women took to the streets to demand peace. They
were armed only with pots and pans, which they were
beating. Even after being attacked and dispersed by
security forces, they continued to beat their pots and
pans throughout the night in their homes. The vital role
that women play in promoting peace and security could
not have been more visible.

Following the crisis, the story continued with
international mobilization. We commend UNOCI's
dedication during the transition period and to date.
UNOCI, the United Nations country team and Ivoirian
authorities strove to meet the difficult post-conflict
challenges, including the reform of the security sector
and national reconciliation. We can all be welcome
the conclusion of the UNOCI mission, six years after
the civil war. I am convinced that the purpose of the
United Nations is to support the determination and
courage of ordinary people who pursue peace and
democracy. UNOCI has fulfilled that mission and
will forever remain in the history of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

