Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to welcome your decision, Mr. President, to
include this open debate on the Council's programme
of work. I would also like to join other delegations in
welcoming the Minister for External Relations of
Angola, Mr. Joao Bernardo de Miranda. I would also
like to thank Ambassador Richard Ryan of Ireland for
presenting the report of the Experts of the Monitoring
Mechanism, whose Chairman, Ambassador Juan
Larrain, along with three other members of the
Mechanism, honour us today with their presence.

An open dialogue on this issue is extremely
useful to the Security Council because it gives us a
chance to follow up the implementation of sanctions
and to hear the views of countries accused in the
report, while making all States aware of their
responsibility to abide strictly by the sanctions regime
under discussion.

The report of the Monitoring Mechanism suggests
that the sanctions imposed on UNITA have reduced its
capacity to wage war, but it warns us that we must
remain alert due to that organization's great
regenerative capacity. The sanctions regime against
UNITA has some very unique characteristics: it is eight
years old, involves six types of sanctions, is directed
against a non-State actor and requires technical and
professional monitoring. In the light of the
recommendations made by the report of the Monitoring
Mechanism, allow me now to make a few comments on
each ofthese characteristics.

First, the fact that the sanctions have been in
place for eight years is a telling sign of the rebel
group's ability to survive, of the relative degree of
commitment to the regime demonstrated by States, and
of Angola's porous borders. It is sufficient to mention
here that the network of arms traffickers and aircraft
operators employed by UNITA is a legacy bequeathed
by the protagonists of the cold war. Furthermore, a
regional economy prospering in the shadow of the
conflict has developed in areas bordering the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia.

Secondly, the report gives us broad
recommendations on the six types of sanctions, namely,
those covering arms, oil, travel by leaders, flights,
diamonds and finances. Although we support most of
the recommendations, we would like to state explicitly
our support for the following recommendations in
particular.
Arms-exporting countries should be requested to
institute effective controls on their exports to conflict
areas, especially those under import moratoriums or
Council sanctions.

An international certificate-of-origin system
should be established for rough diamonds in order to
keep conflict diamonds off the market.

National standards should be developed to impose
sanctions on aircraft operators and pilots linked to the
illicit transport of arms. This should be based on a list
drawn up by the United Nations of firms, people and
aircraft involved in that type of activity.

Thirdly, with regard to Angola, sanctions are
directed against UNITA, a non-State actor, and not
against the Government of Angola. In other words, the
threat to international peace and security comes from
an armed organization, not a State, that has not
complied with the peace agreement it had promised to
respect. This sort of situation requires well-oriented
working methods within the Council, as well as firm
action by States against structures providing political,
military, economic and propaganda support to the
organization.

With regard to violations, for example, some
success has been achieved by the method of publicly
"naming and shaming" the perpetrators of violations.
The Monitoring Mechanism suggests to the Council the
possibility of imposing sanctions on Governments that
violate sanctions. We believe that doing so would run
the risk of proliferating such measures, operating
selectively and politicizing the sanctions regime -
something that could affect the credibility of the
system itself. However, we would like to hear
alternative ideas from other delegations on this matter.

Fourthly and lastly, I would like to make a
comment on the technical knowledge required to
improve the monitoring of sanctions against UNITA.
We believe that the Council took a great step forward
with the establishment in 1999 of the Panel of Experts,
whose recommendations have supported the work of
the sanctions Committee and of the Monitoring
Mechanism. We are now considering the need to
commission an investigation of UNITA's financial
assets so as to reduce its ability to acquire arms. It is
clear that a study of that nature requires technical
knowledge, a great deal of experience and advanced
technology.

We have two concerns, however. First, such a
study runs the risk of leading the Council to gradually
depend on outside bodies to monitor the sanctions
regime. Secondly, it might reduce States' responsibility
to carry out their own financial investigations and
apply penal or administrative sanctions, as necessary.
In particular, it could reduce the responsibility of States
that are able to provide know-how, experience and
advanced technology.

As a result, my delegation supports the proposal
to set up a permanent monitoring mechanism for
sanctions within the Organization. That would reduce
the number of expert groups and increase the pressure
to adopt national legislation against the violation of
sanctions imposed by the Council.

I should like conclude by saying that it is crucial
for States to firmly assume their responsibility for
implementing sanctions. Without such cooperation,
Council action would be ineffective, and the system
would lose its credibility, in Angola as well as in other
conflict areas in the world.

We would like to encourage the members of the
Monitoring Mechanism to continue their work to
promote international peace and help the people of
Angola, the main victim of this long conflict. We
would like to offer the Chairman of the sanctions
Committee, Ambassador Ryan of Ireland, our best
wishes for the success of his activities during his
forthcoming visit to various African countries.

