Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would first like to thank the delegation
of Sweden for its leadership of the presidency of the
Security Council in July. I also want to wish you,
Madam President, and your delegation all the best for
success during your presidency, and to assure you of my
delegation's support. We thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, for his briefing,
and support his proposal for consultations between
the parties in Geneva. We also thank Mr. John Ging,
Director of the Coordination and Response Division
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), for his comprehensive
briefing, which provided a very timely explanation of
the real and difficult situation that Yemen is facing.

My delegation has followed with concern the
developments in Yemen since the beginning of the
conflict, which has claimed many human lives and
displaced thousands, leading to an unprecedented
humanitarian crisis that has jeopardized the
sustainability of the lives of the 22 million people in
need of humanitarian assistance, of whom more than
8.4 million, including children and women, are in
a very serious situation and in urgent need of food
supplies. We share the concerns expressed by other
Council members about today's attacks on a market and
a nearby hospital that have claimed human lives.

Humanitarian organizations have been warning
us about the tragic humanitarian situation in Yemen.
After more than three years of war, and particularly
now, in the wake of the latest offensives against the
key city of Al-Hudaydah, the entire country is closer
to famine than ever before. All of this is happening
as cholera is striking with greater force. The World
Health Organization (WHO) says that Al-Hudaydah
has recorded the highest numbers of suspected
cholera cases since the original outbreak began in
April 2017. In this regard, we welcome the admirable
contributions of OCHA and the WHO, particularly
in view of the fact that they have had to provide even
more medical supplies and vital services. In the face
of this critical situation, we are concerned about the
3 million internally displaced persons who have been
forced to flee their homes by the conflict. In that
regard, we urge the Security Council and the relevant
parties to make concerted efforts to provide safe and
unhindered humanitarian access in order to help create
the conditions necessary to alleviate the humanitarian
situation in Yemen.

The stalemate of the political situation in Yemen is
a cause for concern for Equatorial Guinea. The military
conflict rages on, the steps taken in the political process
have been inadequate and the humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate, so it is important that the
parties involved in the crisis understand that a political
process, conducted through direct, frank and inclusive
dialogue, is the only way to find a lasting solution to
this grave situation.

My delegation therefore continues to welcome the
approach that Mr. Griffiths outlined to the Council on
18 June, which not only updated us on Al-Hudaydah but
also set out a framework for the resumption of political
negotiations, to be guided by a set of principles based
on the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative, the results
of the National Dialogue Conference and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, particularly resolution
2216 (2015), which should include groups from the
South, civil society and women, as well as discussions
aimed at addressing political and security issues as part
of a package.

Finally, we call for the conflict to be resolved with
negotiations, not weapons. We applaud and appreciate
the work of the Security Council, which, despite the
difficulties, continues to devise strategies to restore
peace and stability in Yemen.

