The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Sierra Leone, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kamara
(Sierra Leone), took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/200l/1195 and Add.l, which contains the
text of the twelfth report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone. Members
of the Council also have before them document
S/2002/68, which contains the text of a draft resolution
prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

It is my understanding that the Security Council
is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/2002/68) before it. IfI hear no objection, I shall
now put the draft resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Bulgaria, Cameroon, China, Colombia, France,
Guinea, Ireland, Mauritius, Mexico, Norway,
Russian Federation, Singapore, Syrian Arab
Republic, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1389 (2002).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.20 pm,

