Ms. Al-Mulla (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I want
to thank you, Mr. President, for having responded so
promptly to our request for convening this meeting.

I want to take up where I left off a few weeks
ago, when I spoke before the Security Council
following the assassination of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin.
Israel's policy prompts us to wonder what are the
results of the international community's fight against
terrorism when Israeli State terrorism continues
unabated before the very eyes of the whole world and
no end is put to this fierce escalation. The Security
Council is meeting today to examine yet another Israeli
assassination, another extrajudicial execution of one of
the emblematic figures of the Palestinian people, the
head of Hamas, Mr. Abdel Aziz Al-Rantisi.
Kuwait once again condemns this assassination,
this act of terrorism committed by the Israeli
Government, and emphasizes that it condemns
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. This
abominable crime is part of Israel's criminal practices
that run counter to international law and the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949. It is also an attempt to
torpedo all efforts at peace in the Middle East.

We appeal to the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities and to act expeditiously, soundly and
strictly to put an end to Israel's arrogant policy of
disregarding international conventions and treaties. We
appeal to the Council to give immediate protection to
the Palestinian people, a people who are, on a daily
basis, the targets and victims of acts of terrorism. The
fact that the Security Council was unable to adopt a
clear position after Israel's assassination of Sheikh
Yassin only encouraged Israel to continue its immoral
policy. There is no doubt that the fact that Israel is
continuing these practices, these actions of terror that
are in fact war crimes, will thwart all efforts at peace in
the Middle East. This can only exacerbate the cycle of
violence, which in turn will have a negative impact on
the entire region.

The international community must urge all parties
to comply with Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), the principle of land
for peace and the road map adopted by the Quartet.
That is the only way of building peace, a peace that in
turn will make it possible for the Palestinian people to
enjoy their right to self-determination and to build an
independent State on their territory with Jerusalem as
their capital.

