Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I would like to take this
opportunity to explain Uganda's vote before the voting
on this important draft resolution on the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) (8/2010/216).

Western Sahara has been a full-fledged member
of the African Union since 1982. It is the only country
in Africa still awaiting the completion of its process of
decolonization. It is important to recall and reaffirm
the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara, as stipulated in
Security Council resolution 690 (1991). MINURSO's
core mandate is to monitor the ceasefire and organize
and conduct a referendum to enable the Saharawi
people to choose between integration with Morocco
and independence. Uganda would like to emphasize
that any attempt to deviate from that core guiding
principle of MINURSO's mandate will only be
counterproductive. It is essential to take a balanced and
impartial approach in dealing with the question of
Western Sahara.

We are deeply concerned about the allegations of
widespread violations of human rights in the territory
10-33760
of Western Sahara and in the refugee camps near
Tindouf. Uganda shares the Secretary-General's view,
stated in his report, that

"The United Nations and the international
community as a whole have an interest in
advancing respect for international human rights
standards and in ensuring that each party to the
conflict understands its responsibilities in this
regard". (5/2010/175, para. 76)

We also concur with the Secretary-General that "the
United Nations recognizes its duty to uphold human
rights standards in all its operations, including those
relating to Western Sahara" (ibid., para. 59).

We therefore note with concern that the
Secretary-General clearly states that MINURSO has no
staff on the ground to address human rights issues. We
are convinced that the setting up of a mechanism for
human rights monitoring is an essential confidence-
building measure that would contribute to advancing
the peaceful resolution of the question of Western
Sahara.

The process of negotiating this draft resolution
left a lot to be desired. It is our view that, in future, the
process should be more inclusive and should be
conducted in a timely manner.

Uganda supports MINURSO, and consequently
Uganda will vote in support of the draft resolution.

