Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased that this additional Security
Council meeting on the Iraqi question is open to all
Members of the Organization. This welcome initiative
offers the international community an opportunity to be
directly associated with recent developments in the
Iraqi situation, which is so worrisome.

We listened with interest to the instructive
assessment of the state of inspections just made by
Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei, whom my delegation
thanks. In the light of that assessment, we note that
progress has certainly been made since their progress
report in late January, but that many pending issues
remain. One element of the progress is that inspectors
have been able to interview five Iraqi scientists without
minders. The restrictions that had been imposed until
now on reconnaissance flights by U-2 aircraft have
been lifted. Legislation banning the production of
weapons of mass destruction has, I believe, just been
approved.

My delegation appreciates those facts, which we
consider a beginning of active cooperation by Iraq.
However, the discovery of significant quantities of
anthrax and mustard gas, albeit destroyed, the
development of a programme for missiles with a range
beyond the authorized 150 kilometres and the
submission to the inspectors of further documents on
pending issues that were not included in the 7
December 2002 declaration all give rise to new
questions.

Yet, despite that, my delegation, which
appreciates the progress made thus far by the
inspectors, advocates continued inspections, although
we believe that they should not be continued
indefinitely. In the current state of affairs, a reasonable
amount of additional time would assist in the search for
a consensus that could bring together - as one must
note - the very divergent points of view expressed
around this table.

My country, Guinea, is concerned at the abrupt
rise in tension within the international community
concerning the Iraqi crisis. Yet everyone agrees on the
essential point: the disarmament of Iraq. But how to
bring it about? That is the great question - hence the
divergent views on what path to follow. That is why my
country appeals for a swift beginning of direct and
constructive dialogue among Security Council
members so that we can move beyond this climate of
tension, which could deal a harsh blow to the United
Nations system. I am sure everyone will agree that that
would not be in anyone's interest.

Very useful ideas with a view to a positive
resolution of the crisis have just been expressed in this
Chamber by eminent personalities. Taking careful note
of those ideas, my delegation wants to emphasize Iraq's
obligation to finally agree to cooperate immediately
and actively, in strict conformity with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, particularly resolution
1441 (2002). Iraq must end its delaying tactics; a
peaceful settlement of the crisis depends on that.

We reaffirm our confidence in Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei and in their respective teams, who have
demonstrated professionalism in carrying out their
mandate. They can be assured of our full support. We
urge them to continue their efforts with a view to
exploring all the possibilities offered by the inspections
process.

In conclusion, I should like to reiterate that the
Council must continue to work in unity, which is the
only way to attain our goal. We must not lose sight of
that imperative, because - above and beyond the unity
of the Council - it is the future of the Organization
that is at stake.

