Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): We
have asked for the floor to provide a brief explanation
of the perspective from which we will vote. In general,
my country is pleased with the resolution. We would
like to highlight three very important points. First of
all, it is important that the resolution reaffirmed that
the main priority of the Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is to protect the civilian
population. In that regard, we would like to underscore
the importance of this resolution stating that the
Mission must protect the civilians from violence
committed by any of the parties engaged in the
conflict.

In recent months we have noted with serious
concern that violence has been perpetrated against
civilians by some renegade elements of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo armed forces. This resolution
states quite clearly that the duty of the United Nations
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) is to protect civilians, including from the
Forces Armees de la Republique De'mocratique du
Congo (FARDC) elements, if such situations arise.

Secondly, I would like to underscore the duty of
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to take all necessary measures to ensure that members
of its armed forces comply with their duty to protect
the civilian population and not to threaten it. The
Council's appeal, in paragraph 22, has been stated in
previous resolutions, but it must be underscored here.
The Congolese authorities have an obligation to take
into account past behaviour with regard to human
rights, when deciding on candidates for official posts in
their security forces.

Third, my delegation would like to underscore the
aspects of MONUC'S mandate related to the arms
embargo and the illicit trafficking in natural resources.
We hope to continue to receive information on what is
being done in that sphere, in particular on the possible
additional measures that the Mission could take to
strengthen its supervision, inspection and monitoring
role under the sanctions regime and the arms embargo.
By way of conclusion, I welcome the Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Belgium to the Council, to whom we
extend our greetings.

