Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): It is an honour for
me to address the Security Council for the first time in
my capacity as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict. Members
may rest assured that I appreciate the responsibility
entrusted to me and the challenges that await us. In that
regard, I pay tribute to my predecessor, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, for her exemplary work during the
past six years and for the progress achieved made under
her guidance.

I would also like to thank Germany for convening
this open debate. The efforts of the German
chairmanship of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict over the past two years made it
possible to preserve a cooperative and open spirit. In
that regard, I welcome the personnel commitment and
the resolve of Ambassador Wittig and his team.

(spoke in English)

Before the Council is the eleventh report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2012/261). Since the last debate (see S/PV.6589),
there has been tremendous progress - more than
we have seen in previous years. However, violations
continue to be committed against children, the number
of persistent perpetrators has increased, and many new
challenges have arisen.

With regard to dialogue with parties to conflict, we
have seen a number of positive developments. Indeed,
eight years after the Council's unanimous adoption
of resolution 1539 (2004), action plans have generally
been accepted by listed State and non-State parties as
a unique tool that can successfully lead to de-listing.
In 2011 alone, two parties - the Unified Communist
Party of Nepal-Maoist in Nepal and the Tamil Makkal
Viduthalai Pulikal in Sri Lanka - were removed from
the annexes after having successfully implemented all
concrete and time-bound activities spelled out in their
action plans. That brings the total number of de-listed
parties to nine.

However, it is not just about adding or removing a
party from a list. It is about children, first and foremost
about releasing children. Since the framework was put in
place, tens of thousands of children have been separated
from armed forces and groups and reintegrated into
their communities. Indeed, actions plans are not only
a process. They are a unique tool, mandated by the
Council, to bring parties into compliance and to stop
violations against children.

In 2011, action plans were signed in Afghanistan,
the Central African Republic and Chad and, this year,
in South Sudan, Myanmar and Somalia, where the
Transitional Federal Government signed the first action
plan on killing and maiming of children in August.
To date, 20 action plans have been completed or are
in the process of being implemented. It is especially
heartening to note that practically all Government
forces listed for the recruitment and use of children
have now either signed an action plan or are negotiating
one.

I am also happy to report to the Council today that
the action plan with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has almost been finalized and is
expected to be signed in the coming weeks. That action
plan will include activities to end the recruitment and
use of children by the security forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and, in accordance with
resolution 1882 (2009), measures to prevent and halt
sexual violence against children.

The continued mainstreaming of the children
and armed conflict agenda into the United Nations
is central to my Office's work. We are currently
supporting the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Political Affairs in their efforts
to update the child protection policy for United Nations
field missions. That effort is essential. I would like to
emphasize that maintaining sufficient and dedicated
child protection capacities in peacekeeping and special
political missions is key to the implementation of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism, as well as the
successful conduct of dialogue with parties to conflict.

We also continue to work hand in hand with
UNICEF to enhance child protection capacities
in conflict-affected areas. Beyond our traditional
colleagues, new partners are also joining our efforts,
especially since the adoption of resolution 1998 (2011).
My Office is currently working with UNESCO and has
approached the World Health Organization to enhance
our monitoring of attacks against schools and hospitals.
We are also increasing our links with the International
Labour Organization, especially in relation to the
economic reintegration of children formerly associated
with armed forces and groups. In addition, we continue
to enhance our cooperation with partners on sexual
Violence against children to further our implementation
of resolution 1882 (2009). In that regard, I look forward
to working closely with Under-Secretary-Generai
Bachelet and Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Zainab Hawa
Bangura.

My Office has also been working to develop and
strengthen partnerships with regional political and
military organizations including the European Union,
the African Union and NATO. That has proven useful,
in particular in the areas of training, awareness-raising
and the conduct of military operations. With that
experience in mind, I will now look into working more
closely with the League of Arab States, the Organization
ofIslamic Cooperation and the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations.

Though much positive progress has been achieved,
our work is hardly accomplished. In this year's report,
52 armed forces and groups are listed in the annexes.
Forty-two of those are non-State armed groups and 10
are Government forces. At the request of the Council
and as a follow-up to resolution 1998 (2011), the
Secretary-General has listed for the first time five
parties to conflict responsible for attacks on schools
and hospitals.

Of the 52 parties listed, 32 persistent perpetrators
have been listed for five years or more. The majority
are non-State actors operating in situations where
Governments may have the willingness, but not always
the capacities to take measures. That is where the
Council can play a critical role.

The cost of inaction has become too high. It is time
to show the Council's determination to act. In follow-
up to resolution 1998 (2011), my predecessor requested
Ambassador De La Sabliere, former French Permanent
Representative to the United Nations, to prepare a
comprehensive report on the way forward. The paper
proposes a menu of options that could be considered
by the Council against those persistent perpetrators.
Those include increased tailored political engagement
of the Council, strengthened accountability measures
and targeted measures, where necessary. That could
be done in an incremental manner, starting with
those individuals in situations for which a sanctions
committee is already in place. It would send a strong
signal that the resolutions of the Council are not only
words on paper and that Vigorous action can be taken
when they are not implemented.

Last year, we witnessed a tremendous change
in the international environment. That created new
opportunities but also new challenges for the United
Nations and for this agenda in particular. The situations
in Libya, Syria and Mali, for example, pose new threats
for children that the Council, along with my Office and
its partners, must address.

The situation of children in Syria is dire. My staff
and other United Nations colleagues have documented
Government attacks on school, children being denied
access to hospitals, girls and boys suffering and dying in
bombardments of their neighbourhoods and also being
subject to torture, including sexual violence, sometimes
for weeks. Since the publication of the report before
the Council, my Office has also gathered evidence
on violations committed by non-State armed groups
in Syria. We have received information concerning
indiscriminate bomb attacks that have killed children
in Damascus and other areas, and continue to document
incidents committed by armed actors, such as the Free
Syrian Army, who may have children associated with
their forces.

I have met with the Syrian Permanent
Representative with regard to our concerns. I have
ensured the Ambassador that I am ready to establish
an open dialogue with the Syrian authorities as a sign
of good faith towards their moral and legal obligations.
In that regard, I have also asked the Ambassador to
transmit my call to the Syrian armed forces to evacuate
schools as a matter of utmost priority.

In Libya, the localized violence and continued
presence of so-called armed brigades threaten the lives
of children, long after the generalized violence of 2011
came to an end. It remains of concern that incidents of
the association of children with armed groups are still
being reported. My Office has been in close contact
with the Libyan Mission in New York to strategize
about how best to address the remaining threats to
children in the Libyan context.

Since its inception in March 2012, the crisis in
Mali has been characterized by grave violations against
children. Hundreds of cases of recruitment and use of
children by the Mouvement national pour la liberation
de l'Azawad (MNLA), as well as by Ansar Dine and
the Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa, have
been reported. Particularly alarming are recent reports
of new training camps in northern Mali, run by armed
groups. Sexual violence against children, especially by
the MNLA, is also of great concern.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
resurgence of violence in the east has once again taken
a heavy toll on children. The March 23 Movement
(M-23), an armed group established by former members
of the Congres national pour la defense du peuple,
has been responsible for intensive child recruitment
campaigns since April this year; reports of recruitment
in Rwanda on behalf of M-23 have also been received.
M-23 has killed, maimed and injured scores of children,
and sexual violence against girls has been reported. I
am disturbed by the fact that M-23 perpetrators have
a long history of violations against civilians, including
children. The flagrant impunity in which they operate
must be addressed once and for all. Measures must be
taken to avoid political legitimacy for M-23 elements
responsible for human rights violations.

Furthermore, the conflict along the border of the
Sudan and South Sudan has put hundreds of children
at risk, including children who are displaced from the
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile regions of the Sudan.
In addition, I remain deeply concerned about the
humanitarian situation concerning access for children
in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile.

Accountability is an integral element both to address
and to prevent violations against children. Though
imperfect, the preventive aspect of accountability is
real. It should start with the criminalization of under-
age recruitment and the domestication of international
norms and standards prohibiting the recruitment
and use of children. It must also be accompanied by
domestic enforcement through national rule of law
institutions. I would like to emphasize again that
achieving accountability must be a common effort;
while the primary responsibility lies with Governments,
donor countries should support and help to strengthen
national efforts by providing assistance to capacity-
building.

The Lubanga and Taylor judgements have been a
watershed in addressing violations against children
in conflict in international and hybrid courts, and
the possibility of appearing before the International
Criminal Court has proven to be an effective deterrent
for military commanders and is useful as leverage
in dialogue on action plans. Prosecutions for the
recruitment of children have also been undertaken in
Myanmar and Colombia with positive effect.

However, the international community must give
much greater support and attention to local and regional
accountability mechanisms to strengthen institutional
capacity for the long term. There is a need to further
examine best practices in this regard and obtain
institutional and financial support for these initiatives.
Only with local and regional buy-in can we truly say
that we have addressed these issues in a durable way.

As the Council knows, I served for four years as the
Deputy Special Representative for the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I would like to share with the
Council that children and their families have high
expectations of the Council. Victims feel that it can and
should alleviate their suffering. I have seen what the
Council in action can do. It can change the fate of a
child. Many challenges remain, but Governments and
non-State actors have begun to respond to the Council's
call for action.

I believe that the protection of all children from
grave violations is within our reach. If we stand firm
and united, we can move forward and deliver on what
is expected from us, namely, that the international
community come together and demonstrate its
determination to protect children from war. I would
like to assure all of my partners, including all Member
States, that I am willing to work closely, to listen and to
act together in this endeavour.

