Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) (spoke in Russian):
Allow me at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this special meeting of the Security Council
to discuss the situation in Afghanistan and to develop
effective measures to counter the global threat of drugs
coming from that country.

For a year and a half, Afghan society, following
23 years of war, has been living with the hope of
establishing lasting peace and stability, achieving
genuine national reconciliation and the long-awaited
changes on which Afghan citizens are pinning their
future. Tajikistan notes with satisfaction the significant
achievements of the Government of Hamid Karzai in
implementing the Bonn Agreement, which has become
a reliable compass for the normalization of life and the
re-establishment of Afghan civil society, which has for
many years suffered hardship.

Today's Afghanistan includes 1.5 million
refugees and half a million displaced persons who have
returned home. It embraces 3 million Afghan children,
including girls who now attend school after years of
being prohibited from doing so. It includes cinemas
and theatres that have reopened their doors to
spectators. It is composed of women who are
increasingly active participants in the restoration of
their country. It involves the rebirth of political life
open to all Afghans, regardless of their religious or
ethnic affiliations. Finally, it embraces an increasingly
strengthened process of State-building in the
framework of which complex work is being done on
developing the principal body of law, the country's new
constitution, and preparations for democratic elections
are under way, which should be a milestone in this new
chapter of Afghanistan's history.

We are all witness to how difficult it has been to
accomplish that. At the same time, we are not blind to
the fact that the country has many unresolved
problems, especially in the areas of guaranteeing
security and the rule of law. Opponents of the new
administration's policies continue to devise plans to
disrupt the Afghan peace process. Those forces are
counting on the fact that the Government is not yet
strong enough for Afghanistan to be able to pursue the
course for change. They are devising plans to return
Afghan society to the recent dark ages, arbitrary rule
and the debasement of the individual.

Such a chain of events would be cause for great
disappointment not only for millions of Afghan men
and women, who have breathed the air of freedom and
live with the hope of swift economic recovery and
political reconstruction, but also for the entire
international community. It is essentially a test of the
ability of the international community not only to
provide political and financial support to the Afghan
authorities and defend the peace process in Afghanistan
but also to follow up on earlier commitments to
promote peace and security in that country and stability
throughout the region.

To build peace and promote stability and national
reconciliation in the country, whose Government is
relying on a fragile peace process, is an extremely
daunting challenge. Without the support of the
international community, it is virtually unrealizable.
Tajikistan understands this well and will continue to
increase its assistance and support to the efforts of
President Hamid Karzai's Administration. At this
critical and fateful transition period for Afghanistan,
we are calling on the international community not to
forget the needs of the Afghan people, bolster the
lawful Afghan authorities with renewed vigour to give
additional momentum to the peace process in the
country.

This is especially important given that elements
hostile to the Government of Afghanistan and the
international community, including remnants of the
Taliban movement, are making efforts to destabilize
Afghan society. The activities of armed criminal
groups are becoming increasingly brazen. We note with
particular concern these terrorist acts in Afghanistan,
including against international workers and the
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan.

These destructive acts are being stepped up by
those who are controlling and encouraging the
development of drug production in Afghanistan,
including a network of international organized criminal
groups and terrorist organizations. Carrying out anti-
terrorist operations in that country has barely destroyed
the well-organized Taliban drug trade structure. The
main storage facilities, supply points and heroin
production laboratories have remained undisturbed.
The hellish machinery of heroin is working at full tilt.
Profits from the Afghan drug trade in Afghanistan in
2002 alone amounted to $1.2 billion. These illegal
revenues are practically equal to the level of
international assistance to Afghanistan.

Ten years ago Tajikistan confiscated 38 kilograms
of smuggled opium from Afghanistan for the first time,
and the first 6 kilograms of Afghan heroin were
withdrawn from illegal trade in 1996. Ever since,
Tajikistan, which has a 1,500-kilometre border with
Afghanistan and was once situated on the great Silk
Road, now, given its geopolitical position, is at the
crossroads of the great "opium road", along which
international criminal drug cartels are exporting
heroine across continents.

Tajikistan fully recognizes the seriousness and
scale of the drug threat coming from Afghanistan,
which is closely linked with international terrorist
activities that, in turn, are fuelled by illegal revenues.
Drug control is of particular concern to my
Government, and the President of the country, Emomali
Rakhmonov, views this as a priority objective of State
policy. With each year we increase bilateral and
multilateral cooperation to that end, especially in the
framework of the Commonwealth of Independent
States, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization. We are
building on our successful cooperation with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

In recent years Tajikistan has became a major and
reliable shield against Afghan drugs in transit to
Central Asia, Russia, Europe and the United States.
Since 1999 the law enforcement agencies of Tajikistan
and the Border Group of the Federal Border Service of
Russia in the Republic of Tajikistan have removed
from illegal circulation more than 25 tons of opiates,
including some 14 tons of heroin. The amount of seized

drugs, according to average wholesale prices of West
European countries, where the share of Afghan heroine
accounts for about 90 per cent of the general supply, is
equal to almost $1 billion. We can safely say that
thanks to joint operations of the law enforcement
agencies of Tajikistan and the Russian Border Service,
more than 13 million of the world's citizens have been
spared the dangerous encounter with white death.

Today, Tajikistan has seized more than 80 per
cent of heroin and opium from illegal trade in the
Central Asian region and more than 70 per cent in the
countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
According to United Nations data, our country was
ranked fourth in the world in the volume of heroin
seized and third in the volume of raw opium seized.
Those achievements result not only from the joint
efforts of Tajikistan's law-enforcement agencies and of
the Russian border service, but also from the efforts of
donor States that have provided generous financial and
technical assistance, including through the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, whose efforts we
deeply appreciate.

Despite the fact that the success in combating
drug smuggling on the Tajik-Afghan border and in
Tajikistan itself has been enhanced several times over,
we cannot say that the anti-narcotic security network is
100 per cent effective. In the areas bordering
Afghanistan, there are still dozens of laboratories that
produce heroin, tons of which are waiting to be sent on
the death route to Europe and America. Under the
remaining ashes of the inhuman Taliban regime, there
still smoulders a fire that poses a danger to
international and regional security.

The poignancy of the drug problem in
Afghanistan dictates the need to develop an appropriate
international strategy that must include specific,
appropriate and adequate measures to combat drugs
both within and outside Afghanistan. We fully share
the assessments that we have heard today in the
Security Council, and we believe that a summary of
today's discussion could form the basis for developing
such a strategy. We believe that, along with continuing
to work to establish and strengthen anti-narcotic
security networks around Afghanistan, the international
community must step up its assistance to the Afghan
authorities who are fighting opium poppy cultivation
and drug production in Afghanistan.

We also need new, innovative proposals for
Afghan farmers who are drawn into opium poppy
production. Moreover, targeted support for the
customs, border and law-enforcement agencies of the
States bordering Afghanistan would be very effective;
proof of that can be seen in the success of the
international programmes to combat the illicit drug
trade that have been implemented in Tajikistan.
Another equally important component of such a future
strategy would be to create a unified database
containing information about people and organizations
that have committed crimes related to Afghan drugs.
We must devote sufficient attention to the question of
where chemical precursors originate and how they
enter Afghanistan.

In conclusion, I should like to emphasize that
neutralizing the heroin beast can be accomplished only
if there is a united coalition of all the neighbouring
countries, supported by the United States, the Russian
Federation, the European Union and Japan, which, with
the coordinating role of the United Nations, can
implement an international strategy to combat the illicit
trafficking of Afghan narcotics. In Tajikistan, we are
convinced that only collective resistance to the global
drug danger emanating from Afghanistan will give that
country an opportunity to rid itself once and for all of
the heroin legacy left by the Taliban, to develop
national harmony and stability, and to make its
contribution to the cause of supporting peace and
security in the region.

