Ms. Bakoyannis (Greece): For the past month
the world has borne witness to another tragic chapter in
the history of the Middle East, an unbearable addition
to the pain of that long-suffering region. The images of
helpless children and mothers, wounded, sick and
despondent victims on either side of the conflict,
untold destruction and unimaginable pain, have
haunted all of us. This has shown once more how much
we, as an international community, have failed the
hopes and dreams and aspirations of those people.

Greece, from the very first moment of the outbreak
of the current crisis, has called for an immediate
ceasefire. War is not and cannot be the answer to
anything. Violence has never solved any problem. It
only serves to breed more violence and to create a new
generation full of hatred, devoid of hope and keen on
revenge - a nurturing field for extremism and terrorism.

The Middle East has been suffering from this
never-ending cycle of vicious wars and unstable peace,
broken promises, lost lives and unspeakable tragedy
not for years, but for decades. History has proven time
and again that neither victory on the battlefield nor
blind violence against innocent civilians, neither
suicide bombings nor Katyusha rockets, have ever
solved, or ever will solve, the problems of the Middle
East - or any other region for that matter. These are
issues that need political solutions brought about
through diplomatic means, in a spirit of compromise,
mutual respect and acceptance.

The resolution we have just adopted here today is
trying to do precisely that. It offers the basis for a

political solution to this long-lasting - and,
admittedly, extremely difficult and complex -
problem. It also offers the framework for a political
process with concrete goals and specific benchmarks
and time frames.

Full respect for the sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of Lebanon is the
first and foremost of those benchmarks. Security
Council resolutions 425 (1978), 1559 (2004) and 1680
(2006) must be fully implemented. After all, it is a
matter of principle that all Security Council resolutions
must be fully respected and properly implemented.

In the past two years, the international
community has done exceptional work in ridding
Lebanon of any foreign presence. It is therefore not
conceivable that it would accept foreign occupation of
any part of Lebanese national territory. Occupation by
any foreign force, anywhere in the world, is not
admissible in any way or on any pretext. It is
imperative for the Lebanese Government to take
effective and immediate control of Lebanese territory
in its entirety through the withdrawal of the Israeli
military forces and the deployment of the Lebanese
army. It is also imperative to proceed, as soon as
possible, with the delineation of the international
borders of Lebanon, including Sheba'a farms. The
Secretary-General, in presenting his proposals, should
take into consideration the seven points of the Siniora
plan.

At the same time, Israel's legitimate security
concerns are well understood and need to be properly
addressed. We continue, though, to believe that, while
preserving the right of self-defence, Israel must respect
its obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law.

We see today's resolution as a first, but very
important, step towards a lasting and sustainable peace.
We are fully aware that a lot remains to be done. We
need to make sure that this resolution is fully
implemented. The bloodshed has to stop, and it has to
stop now. The bombings have to stop, and they have to
stop now. The suffering of the civilians has to stop, and
it has to stop now.

Greece responded immediately to the enormous
humanitarian effort under way in Lebanon. But the
ongoing hostilities hamper our ability to reach those
most in need and to alleviate their pain.

Now that the end of hostilities is hopefully in
sight, we stand ready, together with the rest of the
international community, and especially the countries
of the region, to help in the enormous effort for the
reconstruction of a shattered country, the immediate
return of refugees to their homes and, hopefully, the
dawn of a new day over both Lebanon and Israel.

It is in that respect that this resolution deserves
our support and, even more important, deserves our
commitment to work very hard in the coming days on
the crucial steps that need to follow if we want our
efforts to bring tangible results and not end in one
more disappointing failure.

It is in that spirit that we call upon all parties to
set aside their fears and disappointments and, difficult
as it might be, to make the necessary commitment and
effort to overcome the current crisis and build a better
future for their peoples.

At this particularly critical juncture in the history
of the Middle East, we must not lose sight of the bigger
picture and allow ourselves to forget the suffering and
the plight of the Palestinian people in the West Bank
and Gaza. The question of Palestine, central to the
whole Middle East conflict, should be addressed with
the utmost urgency. As long as the Palestine issue
remains unresolved, it is clear that there will be no
peace in the region.

We must strive to create, as soon as possible, the
necessary conditions for the genuine and earnest
re-launching of a peace process for the achievement of
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, based on all relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), as well as on the
Madrid terms of reference and the principle of land for
peace, for the sake of the people in all of the region.
