Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome the Foreign
Minister of Italy, Mr. Massimo D'Alema. We thank
Special Representative Koenigs for his detailed
briefing on the situation in Afghanistan and for
presenting the new report of the Secretary-General.

We are also grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Costa for his briefing on the situation with respect to
countering the Afghan drug threat.

We endorse the statement to be made today by the
representative of Belarus on behalf of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO).

We share the concern with respect to the complex
ongoing security situation in Afghanistan connected to
the surge of violence occurring practically throughout
the country. We are particularly alarmed by the fact
that Taliban and Al Qaeda extremists have been able to
restore their control over entire regions of the country,
as seen in particular in the situation in Musa Qala. Now
more than ever, robust steps are needed to curb that
negative trend and to prevent radicals dreaming of
revenge from implementing their dangerous plans.

In that regard, one goal that remains urgent is to
build the potential of Afghan defence and security
structures without which, as experience has taught us,
it will not be possible to achieve meaningful progress
in rectifying the security situation. Russia has already
provided considerable assistance in the formation of
the Afghan army. We are prepared to assist further in
that area and in forming all the structures needed by an
independent Afghanistan.

Given the growing threat from the Taliban and Al
Qaeda, one issue of increasing relevance is strict
compliance with the Security Council-imposed
sanctions regime. We attach importance to the
implementation of the programme of national
reconciliation in the context of achieving the long-term
stabilization of the country. At the same time, the
process should not run counter to the basic
requirements of building the Security Council's
sanctions matrix in order to effectively oppose the
terrorist threat.

A key task both for stabilizing the situation in
Afghanistan and for countering terrorism continues to
be preventing the production and spread of drugs. Of
particular concern is the special linkage between drug
trafficking and the financing of the Taliban's and Al
Qaeda's terrorist activities, as was also noted in the
report on the outcome of the Security Council mission
to Afghanistan.
In order to counter the Afghan drug threat, the
Russian Federation, in its capacity as presidency of the
G-8 and with the active assistance of the United

Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, hosted in Moscow
last year the Second Ministerial Conference on Drug
Trafficking Routes from Afghanistan, which gave
significant impetus to developing the Paris-Moscow
process of international assistance with respect not
only to stemming illicit drug production and trafficking
and the smuggling of precursors through Afghanistan's
neighbours, but also in the areas of health care and the
resolution of social problems. The Moscow
Declaration, as the outcome of that Conference, laid a
stable basis for continued international efforts to
counter the Afghan drug threat, the fight against which
requires joint efforts and intensified work in all areas.

We believe that establishing broad international
assistance in counter-terrorism, in particular by
exploiting the capabilities of the CSTO and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, will allow us to
achieve greater progress in that area.

Clearly, exclusively military and security
methods will not improve the security situation. We
must pursue wide-scale and coordinated efforts for the
social and economic recovery of Afghanistan, while
maintaining the active involvement of the world
community. In that process, it is important to ensure
the full and complete implementation of the tasks laid
down in the London agreement.

Maintaining the established ethnic balance in
Afghan Government structures continues to be relevant
to strengthening the pillars of internal peace in
Afghanistan. Of particular importance in that area is
the regional dimension as well. It is important to
continue to assist in the processes of regional
integration and cooperation. We reaffirm our support
for the leading role of the United Nations in assisting
in the consolidation of peace and the restoration of
Afghanistan. We note the important stabilizing role of
the United Nations Mission and its useful coordinating
functions in the area of recovery, including the Joint
Control and Monitoring Board. We support the
extension of the Mission's mandate.

Russia will continue to provide assistance in
various areas to the Afghan people. That was
reaffirmed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation, Sergey Lavrov, during his working
visit to Afghanistan. We are certain that only through
joint international efforts, together with those of the
Afghans themselves, will we be able to truly assist in
turning Afghanistan into a flourishing, independent
State, free from the violence of the Taliban and from
terrorism and drugs.

