Ms. Tincopa (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like at the outset to welcome Mr. Ian Martin, the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, and to thank
him for his briefing. We would like also to thank
Ambassador Guterres for his briefing on behalf of
Minister Ramos-Horta.

Peru regrets the violent incidents that have taken
place in recent weeks in Timor-Leste related to the
political and security situation in that country, which
make clear the serious problems that the country is still
facing. We would like to express our gratitude to all of
the Timorese and international players that are seeking
dialogue and reconciliation, with a View to restoring
peace and security.

We welcome also the support of the four
countries that provided security and defence forces in
the framework of bilateral agreements, and we take
note also of the statements they made today in the
Council.

Likewise, we would also like to highlight the
timely humanitarian assistance provided by some
international organizations, including the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and non-governmental organizations, to assist the
civilian population and displaced persons. We believe
that such assistance should continue.

Peru believes that the instability that Timor-Leste
is experiencing requires international support. The
United Nations cannot abandon Timor-Leste at a time
when it is in such dire need of assistance. As we have
pointed out in previous statements, we believe that
Timor-Leste requires a compact whereby the United
Nations, the friends and partners of Timor-Leste and
the international community, including international
financial institutions, would provide resources for the
achievement of specific objectives that would ensure
stability, development and security in that country.

To do so, it is important for the Government
responsibly to present a political and development plan

agreed upon by all social actors which would include
policies and actions aimed at ensuring good
governance, as well as programmes related to the
allocation of income obtained from oil and gas to
development and to the fight against poverty. It is
important for the Government to ensure that resources
are distributed in such a manner that they benefit the
neediest segments of the population. We believe that
this is a crucial step on the path to a viable State that is
sustainable in the long term.

We reiterate that the Security Council must do all
it can in order to protect the investment that the United
Nations has made in Timor-Leste. We support the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Office
in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) for another month, but we
believe that the United Nations office that will
established after UNOTIL must have a robust mandate
that is focused on strengthening democracy, building
the capacity of national mechanisms for the promotion
and protection of human rights, and providing the
necessary assistance in the area of security and support
for the elections. The success of the 2007 elections will
be a decisive step for peacebuilding and democracy in
Timor-Leste.

Likewise, Peru calls on the Timorese leaders to
act responsibly, through dialogue and confidence-
building. We deem it important to investigate the
causes of the violent incidents that took place in Dili
and in other towns and that action be taken in that
respect. We also deem it important that the task of
implementing the recommendations of the Commission
on Reception, Truth and Reconciliation should
continue, in particular with respect to acknowledging
the victims and denying impunity to those responsible
for human rights violations.

