Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I thank the French and German
presidency for having convened this briefing. We
also join other speakers in welcoming to the Security
Council Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative
of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, whom we thank for her informative presentation
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union.

The conflicts and challenges of the twenty-first
century require new approaches and perspectives
that reflect the growing complexity of existing armed
conflicts. These levels of complexity - which go
beyond the conflict between two States and include the
participation of armed groups, terrorists and organized
transnational crime, by land and by sea - make it
difficult for States, which bear primary responsibility in
such situations, to find sustainable and lasting solutions.

That is why the cooperation and support of regional
and international organizations, such as the United
Nations, are crucial to building and guaranteeing
peace and security. For this reason, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea recognizes the important leadership
of the European Union in the resolution of conflicts
and applauds its cooperation with and support for the
peacekeeping missions of the United Nations not only
in Europe, but also in Africa, Central Asia and the
Middle East.

The partnership between the United Nations
and the European Union on peace operations and
crisis management for the period 2019-2021 reflects
the determination and commitment of the two
organizations to multilateralism, international law and
the peaceful resolution of conflicts. In particular, we
note that, among the eight priorities of this alliance, are
cooperation and support for peace operations led by
Africa, training and capacity-building, and facilitating
contributions to peacekeeping operations.

The phrase "African solutions for African
problems" is focused on the need to value and use the
wisdom and local experiences on the ground of African
institutions, organizations and experts. In this regard,
we recognize and praise the trilateral cooperation
efforts among the African Union, the European Union
and the United Nations, and we encourage those
efforts to be strengthened even more, which we would
like to see culminate with the adoption of a draft
resolution on United Nations financing of African
Union peacekeeping operations, which is still pending
in the Council. In that regard, we recall with pleasure
the adoption in February of resolution 2457 (2019), on
silencing arms in Africa in 2020, under the presidency
of my country, Equatorial Guinea.

In this important month for recognizing the need
to empower and encourage the equal participation
of women and youth in all spheres, and especially in
peace and security activities, we also recognize in
particular the priority role of the joint strategy between
the United Nations and the European Union for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security.

The resolution of ongoing armed conflicts, the
consolidation and maintenance of peace and the
prevention of conflicts must be done in accordance
with Chapters VI and VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, which note that all States have an obligation
to respect the principles of sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-interference in the internal affairs of
States. In this regard, we commend the commitment of
the European Union to sustainable development, peace
and security and human rights.

When respect among Member States exists and is
nurtured, multilateral cooperation between the United
Nations, the European Union, the African Union, and/
or other regional and international organizations can
be strengthened in a sustainable and growing manner.
This helps us all to strengthen existing efforts or to
design joint efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts and
humanitarian crises.

The need to strengthen multilateralism is central to
the execution of the mandates of the Security Council
and its allies, such as the European Union and the
African Union. We all have something to contribute
and we all have a role to play. The Security Council
can count on Equatorial Guinea to assist in every
possible way.

