Mr. Cook (United Kingdom): I welcome this
opportunity to take part in our debate on the Secretary-
General's report. I would first of all say that I regard that
report on promoting peace and prosperity in Africa as lucid,
compelling and directly relevant to the work of the Security
Council. Kofi Annan has laid a firm foundation for our
work on Africa.

However, I am sure Kofi himself would be the first to
say that praise is not a sufficient response to his powerful
report. Only action by the Security Council and its
members will adequately reward the Secretary-General for
the work that has gone into it.

The Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) has called for us to meet the report with
commitments. This morning I commit Britain to three goals
which are central to the report before us today.

First, we will help build prosperity in Africa. As a
Government we are determined to reduce poverty at home.
That confers on us a moral obligation to help fight poverty
abroad. And we also have a hard-nosed self-interest in
seeing Africa wealthy and prosperous. The richer Africa
becomes, the better it is for the rest of the world as well.
The global economy is not a zero-sum game. If we are all
prosperous, we all win. If there is widespread poverty, we
all lose.

There are four key steps that Britain is prepared to
take to encourage economic growth in Africa.

We will promote African trade, by demanding that
African countries get a fair deal in international trade
negotiations and that Africa benefits from the
globalization of the economy. Free trade must also be fair
trade.

We will reduce African debt, so that African
economies are not crippled by having to pay extravagant
proportions of their income to countries far richer than
themselves. Britain has already played a leading role in
the Mauritius initiative to reduce the debt of the poorest
countries, so many of which are in Africa.

We will act to promote African development. Britain
has refocused its development assistance so that it makes
a real difference to the poorest people and gets through to
the rural areas which, as the report before us
demonstrates, have received a small minority of aid
although they may have a large majority of the
population. We will be increasing our development budget
dramatically over the next three years to an extra $1.6
billion over those three years. Forty per cent of that aid
budget already goes to Africa, and Britain will thus be
increasing our aid to Africa.

And we will encourage sound economic
management. All the development assistance in the world
will not help any country which mismanages its economy.

The second commitment I give the Security Council
is that we will make it the priority of our diplomacy in
Africa to build peace and to prevent conflict. Without
peace, nothing else is possible - no development, no
prosperity, no improvement in the lives of ordinary
Africans. Yet in one single year, as the report before us
details, one in four countries in Africa experienced
conflict and half of the worldwide deaths from conflict
were in Africa. The days have long gone when anyone
could think of imposing solutions from outside the
continent. As has already been said by the Secretary-
General of the Organization of African Unity, Africa's
problems require African leadership to find the solutions.
But there is much that countries with greater resources
can do to make those solutions work.

Britain will support the Organization of African
Unity in its peacekeeping initiatives. In support of those
initiatives we have helped establish military training
centres in Ghana and Zimbabwe to develop Africa's own
capacity for peacekeeping. We will fund the process of
rebuilding peace where war has destroyed it. For example,
in Sierra Leone, Britain is supporting the cost of

 

demobilization and demilitarization. If we want the armed
parties to a conflict to lay down their arms, then
realistically we must demonstrate to them that they also
have a better economic future in peace. I would urge more
of my colleagues here to join us in this essential task.

And we will be responsible in our own policy on the
export of arms. We will not allow our sales to fuel other
countries' conflicts, and we will support initiatives to
control the trade in small arms and to stamp out the illicit
market in firearms. On their side, the countries of Africa
could do more to promote restraint and transparency in
weapons levels. It is particularly disappointing that the
report before us confirms that only eight African countries
last year submitted an entry to the United Nations Register
of Conventional Arms.

My third and final commitment is that we will be a
friend of democracy in Africa. Africa is a diverse continent,
and we respect the continent's political diversity. But all
Members of the United Nations are committed to hold
firmly that certain principles and values are universal, such
as the people's right to choose their leaders; human rights;
basic freedoms; and the rule of law.

Britain will support the democratic process through
funding of voter education and the supply of election
monitors. With our friends in the Commonwealth, we will
work for observance of the Harare principles of human
rights and democratic government. And we will support
human rights through our development aid. We understand
that, in the modern world, the wealth of nations lies in the
talents and skill of their people, and that those human
resources cannot be promoted when their human rights are
suppressed.

It is easy to look at the difficult areas in Africa, but
we should not forget those areas where progress has been
made. Nigeria is a current example of progress towards
democracy. Since June, Nigeria has embarked on a
remarkable process of transformation. General Abubakar's
willingness to listen and respond to the many shades of
Nigerian opinion is impressive. With the support of the
Nigerian people, he has redefined Nigeria's political and
economic landscape. The progress now being achieved in
Nigeria is good not just for its people, but for the whole of
West and North Africa, where the Nigerian economy could
become an engine of growth for the region.

Before concluding, let me respond briefly to the
observations by Mr. Salim A. Salim on the settlement that
we have offered to enable a trial to take place of the two
suspects accused of the bombing of the Pan Am flight
over my country of Scotland. May I assure the Secretary-
General of the Organization of African Unity that we are
confident that a trial before Scottish judges, under
Scottish law, under Scottish rules of evidence and
procedure will indeed be a just and fair trial.

It is only six months ago that the Secretary-General,
at my invitation, sent United Nations observers to observe
Scottish courts in action; those observers confirmed that
a trial under Scottish procedure and Scottish law would
be just and fair. I can also say that we have also set aside
appropriate prison facilities in Scotland should the
accused be convicted; we are confident that their
treatment in those prison facilities will be humane and
will be fair. Those prison facilities were also inspected by
the observers who were sent to us by the Secretary-
General; they confirmed the humanitarian nature of the
detention there. We are open to other observers and
monitoring from any Member of the United Nations or
any organization attached to it, because we are confident
that we can satisfactorily pass any reasonable test of
whether our court proceedings are fair or our prison
conditions humane.

I agree with Mr. Salim that it is important that we
make progress now in ending the sanctions and in ending
the delay for the relatives of those who died, who are still
waiting for justice. The way to achieve that is for Libya
now to respond to the fair offer we have made and to
surrender the two suspects for trial, at which point we are
willing to start the process of lifting sanctions on the
country of Libya. I am glad that Mr. Salim recognized the
case for accommodation, but accommodation cannot be
achieved simply by concessions by one side only. We
have made a fair and detailed offer; it is now up to Libya
to respond to that offer.

Finally, let me end with two further assurances. The
first is that Britain will remain fully engaged with the
regeneration of Africa. Both I and Prime Minister Blair
plan to visit Africa next year. Britain and Africa have
close community ties between our peoples and strong
commercial ties between our economies. Those ties rest
on a long shared history between Britain and Africa; I
confess, that history has not always been based on shared
equality. So my final assurance is that we approach our
shared future in the spirit of partnership. We want the
same relationship with African countries as we are
forging with the rest of the world: relationships based on
equal partnership and mutual respect. If all of us from
other continents approach our relations with the countries

 

of Africa in that spirit, then together we can ensure that the
new century will see a new African renaissance.

