Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation abstained in the vote
on the comprehensive Security Council resolution
prepared by the delegation of the United Kingdom on
Somalia and Eritrea (resolution 2182 (2014)).

Like all other members of the Council, we are
aware of how important it is to find a prompt and
peaceful solution on the Horn of Africa. We would have
been ready to support the draft resolution if some of its
provisions had not been based on statements from the
last report of the Monitoring Group and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) that are not backed up by
facts.

Once again we need to recall that, in drawing up
their documents, experts should be guided exclusively
by verified facts and not draw conclusions based on
assumptions and rash accusations. We would like to
once again underscore that sanctions are a measure of
last resort. The true road to resolving the problems of
the Horn of Africa lies in the establishment of a broad,
multifaceted dialogue between the countries of the
region.

Yesterday we had an open debate in the course of
which a lot was said about the need to democratize the
working methods of the Security Council in order to
give them a more open and fair character. However,
the way in which the work on the draft resolution
was conducted, especially in its final phase, when
the sponsors made a point - and not for the first
time - of disregarding the views of other members
of the Council, definitely does not reflect well on the
delegation of the United Kingdom. That is not the way
to build consensus. We also think that more attention
could have been paid to the request of the Arab Group
and to the members of the Gulf Cooperation Council
with regard to the need for more thorough preparatory
work on certain provisions of the draft resolution that
touch upon fundamental principles of international law
and directly affect the interests of many members of the
international community.

