Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Foreign
Minister Aman, we are honoured to have you presiding
over the Council and guiding us today.

New Zealand welcomes Malaysia's initiative in
bringing this item before the Council. It builds usefully
on the open debate held under France's presidency in
March (see S/PV.7414), when we provided an overview
of our approach to this subject.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2015/409) shows
that 2014 was a particularly devastating year for children
in countries affected by armed conflict. Thousands
of children died unnecessarily. The report highlights
several trends relevant to this enormous loss. Even with
the good work of the Children, Not Soldiers campaign,
major problems persist, especially with rehabilitation
and reintegration, particularly among girls following
sexual violence and among children with disabilities,
thereby exacerbating the impact of conflict.

We have to face the reality that for many, including
members of this Organization, targeting schools and
hospitals is considered acceptable despite the fact
that such action is a blatant violation of international
humanitarian law. New Zealand urges all countries to
put in place safeguards such as those outlined in the
Safe Schools Declaration adopted in Oslo last month
to protect schools and hospitals from military use in
armed conflict. We owe it to our children and their
futures to do all we can to protect them.

In 2014 increasing numbers of children were
abducted, in particular by extremist groups, and used as
tools designed to punish communities in the cruellest of
ways. From the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, in
Iraq and in Syria, to Boko Haram in Nigeria, children
have been taken into captivity, tortured and abused,
indoctrinated or sold into sexual slavery.

Resolution 2225 (2015), adopted today and
which New Zealand was pleased to co-sponsor, is an
important response to this trend. Adding abductions as
a trigger Violation for listing in the Secretary-General's
report demonstrates our commitment to calling out the
perpetrators of such crimes before the international
community. This can have an important deterrent effect
on those who may be considering such actions and
those who command them. It will also help to ensure
that the right information is being documented in order
to support long-term accountability. We congratulate
Malaysia for its leadership in this important step
forward.

New Zealand has noted with considerable concern
the observations section of this year's annual report. In
this, the Secretary-General deplores the fact that the
way in which the case was made by some parties about
the targeting of children in conflict has threatened the
integrity of the Council's listing mechanism. We share
the Secretary-General's concern at efforts to interfere
in the independent discharge of the Secretary-General's
office and the implicit presumption that some forces
are exempt from criticism, whatever the objective
evidence may suggest. The Secretary-General has
a clear mandate to report on what he considers to be
grave Violations committed against children in armed
conflict. When he does, he is acting at the behest of the
Council - and, indeed, of the wider membership of
the Organization. We all have a responsibility to protect
those who cannot speak for themselves.

