Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking Mr. Guehenno for his
briefing and by congratulating you, Mr. President, on
having consolidated this interactive format that we
appreciate and value.

Since we last discussed this item in the Council
almost a month ago, the situation in Kosovo and its
surroundings has changed considerably in a positive
way. I would like to put three questions to
Mr. Guehenno and make a final comment.

The first question has to do with refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs). Clearly, the
situation of the refugees and IDPs is still very
concerning. Unfortunately, this continues to be one of
the most complex problems in Kosovo. There are
figures that reflect this problem, but the information is
not entirely clear. I had planned to ask Mr. Guehenno
for clarification on the actual situation of the refugees
arriving in Kosovo from other regions and people from
Kosovo migrating to other parts of the region. So I am
grateful for the comments you already made during
your presentation and in response to others, and if you
have anything to add, I would appreciate it very much.

My second question has to do with the situation
in southern Serbia. Negotiations to settle disputes in
southern Serbia are important and must continue. We
wish to appeal for Albanian extremists to comply with
their agreed commitments and return the five hostages
by 10 April, at the latest. In my delegation's view, there
is no reason that justifies this detention. Perhaps Mr.
Guehenno could give us some idea how the
negotiations are proceeding?

The third question has to do with illegal activities
along the borders. The re-opening of the border
between Kosovo and Macedonia bears tribute to the
fact that the violence has been controlled to some
extent. However, the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission of
Kosovo (UNMIK), as appropriate, must guarantee that
this border area stop being a place for illegal activities.
Additionally, we must foster awareness among the
people living along the borders for them to realize that
preventing and denouncing illegal activities is also
their responsibility.

In this context, I would like to ask Mr. Guehenno
for more information about measures to control illicit
trafficking in small arms along the border and in the
Presevo Valley. How is the community participating in
this matter? What results have emerged? Ambassador
Durrant of Jamaica has spoken eloquently on this issue,
and my delegation supports what she has said. I hope
we will start having more concrete replies on these
matters because we have already posed questions in
this regard on several occasions.

A final comment concerns the relationship with
Belgrade. Colombia supports the ongoing efforts of
Belgrade and UNMIK to improve their relationship and
to work as a team on various matters.

The agreement for the participation of the Serb
Kosovo population in the Working Group to develop a
legal framework, together with the increase in the
participation of the Serb population in the Kosovo
assemblies, can be seen as an achievement of the
teamwork between UNMIK and Belgrade. We hope
that these trends will continue so that the general
elections to be held in Kosovo in the near future elicit
the support of the Serb population and thus become
truly representative.

I would like to conclude by praising the work of
UNMIK and the great willingness of the Government
in Belgrade to contribute to regional stability.

