Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I
welcome the presence for the first time before the
Security Council of the High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy of the European
Union. Her presence marks an important step in the
relations between the European Union and the United
Nations.
I noted with a mixture of pleasure and
consternation that the majority of what I have to say
has already been said by Baroness Ashton - with
pleasure, as this means that there truly is a European

vision of international affairs, but also with
consternation, because I think I am going to be
repeating much of what she has said. That having been
said, repeating things is somewhat a habit for us
diplomats.

The European Union is very much involved in the
United Nations - first of all, in financial terms, as we
contribute some 40 per cent of the United Nations
budget, while our gross national product contribution
amounts to only 30 per cent. We contribute 44 per cent
of the resources of the United Nations Development
Programme and some four fifths of the resources of the
Peacebuilding Fund.

The European Union is also strongly involved
with the United Nations in managing crises. That has
been the case for several years, with several military
and civilian operations having been launched by the
European Union under mandates from the Security
Council. France, as a permanent member of the
Council and a founding member of the European
Union, has always supported this synergy between the
European Union and the United Nations. As a result,
several European Union missions are currently
deployed in coordination with United Nations
missions. In Afghanistan, the European Union Police
Mission works on police reform with the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan to stabilize
that country. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the European Union mission to provide advice and
assistance for security sector reform and the European
Union police mission undertaken in the framework of
reform of the security sector and its interface with the
justice work in complement to the activities of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. And in Guinea-
Bissau, the EU mission in support of security sector
reform works in cooperation with the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in that country.
Following the earthquake in Haiti, the European Union
mobilized more than €1.2 billion, making it the top
donor, and we continue to work in close coordination
with United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti on
the ground.
In the fight against piracy off the Somali coast,
the European Union mobilized with Operation
Atalanta. World Food Programme ships enjoy the
protection of the European Union, as do vessels
providing United Nations logistical support packets to
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). In
Somalia, the European Union is also involved in
training soldiers of the Somali Transitional Federal
Government, in coordination with AMISOM.

With the Lisbon Treaty, the European Union is
now equipped with better tools to make its voice heard
on the international stage, in particular at the United
Nations. France hopes that the partnership between the
United Nations and the European Union on matters
relating to the maintenance of international peace and
security will continue and grow in strength. There are a
great number of possible areas for this - through
training personnel deployed in United Nations
peacekeeping operations before crises occur, or
strengthening African capacities to manage crises;
through European Union participation in observing
electoral processes - as in Burundi over the coming
weeks, for example - or through working together on
security sector reform, the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and providing support
for the Peacebuilding Commission.

We are convinced that such cooperation is ever
more necessary and that, today, in order to succeed, we
need to mobilize all of the means at our disposal - be
they political, civilian or military. In that regard, of
course, the European Union has a great deal to
contribute. France will spare no effort to strengthen the
links between the European Union and the
Organization.

