Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): We
thank the Chinese presidency for organizing this open
debate on the critical issue of strengthening multilateral
cooperation for peace and security.

The principles of multilateralism in international
relations today are not merely neglected but are being
completely ignored. We have forgotten the meaning of
mutual trust and respect. Armed conflicts, political
confrontations between the world's greatest Powers,
information wars, the undisguised persecution of
uncooperative countries, international provocations
and sanctions are all vivid proof ofthat. Doubt has been
cast on the fundamental documents of multilateralism
in the area of the maintenance of international peace
and security. Our disarmament and non-proliferation
regimes are being dismantled, and we have seen
recent examples of that in events related to the
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty and the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action for Iran's nuclear
programme.

Belarus has always adhered to the principles of
a peace-loving, non-confrontational policy based on
multilateralism and mutual respect. Not only do we
participate in the implementation of peace initiatives,
we are also active contributors to stability and security
in our region. Belarus is the only country in the post-
Soviet space that has never been involved either
directly or indirectly in active or extended conflicts in
the region. We have continued to consistently support
the peace process for resolving the conflict in south-
eastern Ukraine, making a significant contribution by
holding in Minsk the meetings of the Tripartite Contact
Group on Ukraine and its working subgroups. We also
call for a solution acceptable to all the parties regarding
the formulation of parameters for deploying a possible
United Nations peacekeeping mission in the region, and
we are ready to contribute to the work of such a mission.

The principles of multilateralism also correspond
to the idea that Belarus has long promoted for
recreating a comprehensive process for resolving
relations between East and West analogous to the
Helsinki process, based on a new, broad discussion.
Our appeals have not gone unnoticed, and only last
week in Minsk we held a major international event,
a meeting of the Munich Security Conference's Core
Group, which brought together leaders of European
States, prominent and authoritative political figures,
representatives of international organizations and the
academic community, and experts. Nowadays the mere
possibility ofbringing States to the negotiating table is
a valuable and important achievement for international
peace and security, and we will continue to stick to the
principle behind the wise Chinese saying that water
wears away stone. In Chinese the phrase goes something
like "dripping water will wear a hole in stone". Or, as
President Alexander Lukashenko of Belarus said at the
meeting in Minsk, "Better years of negotiations than
one day of war."

Preserving and strengthening multilateralism
in international relations, in accordance with the
principles of mutual respect and consensus, can give all
ofus a chance for a future, for geopolitical calm and for
peace and security.

