Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): Every three months we
meet here to debate the agenda item "The situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question".
If these meetings are really meant to be helpful, we
must start by finding a more appropriate and more
frank name for the agenda item. I suggest that the
name be "The situation in the Middle East, including
the suffering of the Palestinian people at the hands ofa
Government that sponsors terror" or, if we want to be
more precise, we can call it "The situation in the Middle
East, including Israel's crimes against humanity".

We need to make that change because in all these
meetings we hear stories about how the Government
of Israel violates the basic rights of Palestinians on
a daily basis. We are told of the number of children
killed by the extremists running the Government of
Israel. We learn about the number of Palestinians
who cannot receive medical treatment or who cannot
go to school just because the Israeli Government is
hijacked by a terrorist state of mind. We hear of how
many Palestinians are in prison for protesting Israel
and how many Gazans are starving just because the
current Government of Israel believes that inhumane
policies will help them to extend their borders. And
as if all those stories were not enough, in all these
meetings we have to listen to the delusional excuses
of the representatives of that Government of terror as
to why killing a child is in line with international law.
Today, once again, we have listened to our daily dosage
oflies. When these lies come from the representative of
a Government of terror, they are just a waste of time.
And no - those who want to advance their political
careers over the dead bodies of children cannot lecture
us about international law and human rights.

Recently, the independent international
commission of inquiry on the protests in the occupied
Palestinian territory indicated that during the Great
March of Return, Israeli soldiers committed violations
of international human rights and humanitarian law,
some of which may constitute war crimes or crimes
against humanity. According to the report, week after
week at the protest sites by the separation fence, more
than 6,000 unarmed demonstrators have been shot by
military snipers. Israeli snipers have shot at journalists,
health workers, children and persons with disabilities,
knowing they were clearly recognizable as such. Is it
perhaps time for the representatives of Israel to tell
us What is the purpose of those killings? Why would
anyone kill a kid or a disabled person? How does that
help the security of Israel?

Israel must also immediately stop all settlement
activities, as well as house demolitions, land confiscation
and other policies that deny the Palestinians' right
to development. The attempts to deny the historical
and legal rights of the Palestinian people violate
international law. These rights, including the right to
return, cannot be withheld. The continuation of those
practices will only deepen the sense of injustice and
breed desperation. That is not in anyone's interest.

This ongoing tragedy was created by the current
Government ofIsrael. And now it wants to discredit the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and end it. But we
are not going to allow that. For seven decades, UNRWA

has been indispensable to the well-being of Palestinian
refugees and to the stability and security of the region.
At a time when the region is witnessing conflict
and significant volatility, the impact of a potential
disruption in UNRWA services would be gruesome.
Can anyone imagine the terrible repercussions of
the closure of 700 UNRWA schools? We cannot fail
530,000 Palestinian refugee children. Next month,
together we should task UNRWA to continue to provide
assistance and protection to about 6 million Palestinian
refugees. We have an obligation to support UNRWA
until a just and lasting political solution is found. That
is our collective responsibility.

A two-State solution, with the establishment of
an independent State of Palestine based on the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, is the only
way to achieve just, comprehensive and lasting peace. It
is also the only way to protect the Palestinians against
the terrorist ideology of the current Israeli Government.
Any peace plan or initiative should be and will be based
on those established parameters. That requires unity,
courage and resilience, particularly on the part of the
Security Council.

