Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
welcome the fact that you, Sir, are presiding over this
meeting and thank you for organizing it. The convening
of this meeting at this level undoubtedly reflects the
Security Council's interest in the issue before us and
we, as the Security Council, must find solutions to it
and support the people of Mali. I would also like to
welcome the participation of the Prime Minister and to
thank his Government for hosting the visiting mission
of the Security Council last week.

We thank the Secretary-General for his valuable
briefing on the latest developments in the Republic of
Mali, in particular, and the Sahel region, in general. I
would also like to thank and commend the efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Mohamed Saleh Anadif, and all the staff of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), which
operates on a daily basis in a hazardous environment in
order to achieve peace in the Republic of Mali.

We have seen positive steps in the peace process over
the past few months. However, the security situation
has deteriorated, especially since the beginning of this
year, with an increasing number of attacks targeting
peacekeepers and Malian forces as well as an increasing
number of incidents on ethnic groups. In that regard, we
express our shock and condemnation in the strongest
terms regarding the heinous crime committed in Mopti
on 23 March that resulted in the killing of nearly
160 people. We call upon the Government of Mali to
undertake the necessary investigations concerning this
crime. We express our condolences to the families of the
victims and to the people and the Government of Mali.
We also wish speedy recovery for the injured persons.

I would like to touch upon the following issues in
my statement: the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation, the security situation and the
humanitarian affairs.

With regard to the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation, I would like to note that, during the
previous Security Council meeting on Mali, which was
convened in January (see S/PV.8445), we welcomed
the positive steps taken to implement the agreement, in
particular the establishment of provisional authorities
at the district level in Kidal, Menaka and Timbuktu. We
also welcomed accelerating the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR). But the pace
of progress is not at the appropriate and expected level.
As reported by an independent observer - The Carter
Center - we are halfway in the implementation of
the agreement. We urge all parties to intensify their
efforts to ensure its implementation. Continuing delay
in the peace process will not only lead to prolonging
the crisis; it will also encourage terrorist groups to
continue their activities.

The commitment of all parties to the cease-fire
agreement since 2017 and to the peace process
represented by the Pact for Peace, which was signed in
October 2018, is very positive. National ownership of
the peace process is essential, and the United Nations
must support that aspect. We call on the parties to now
implement all the requirements of the Pact for Peace
in a comprehensive manner. We also encourage them
to prioritize the requirements of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation. There is a need for many
reforms, especially constitutional reform. Those steps
are essential to building trust among all parties. We call
on the Government to complete its efforts specifically
in the area of establishing a national consultation
framework. We welcome the steps taken to launch
that process.

With regard to the DDR process, we welcome the
steps taken to reform the security sector and restructure
of the Malian defence and security forces, which will
be crucial steps in strengthening Government control
over many areas that suffer from the proliferation of
terrorist groups across the country. All parties must
agree on the numbers of those linked to the signatories
to the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation who will
join the national forces.

We are concerned about the security situation
following the increase in the number of attacks in the
country since the beginning of the year - a threat
not limited to Mali but also faced by neighbouring
countries and all parts of the Sahel region. On
17 March, we witnessed a terrorist attack targeting a
military base in central Mali that killed 23 soldiers.
Therefore, steps must be taken to combat terrorist
threats. That is a role to be performed by the Malian
national forces to implement the Government's latest
plan on the situation in central Mali, as well as by the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to combat violent extremism in the border areas,
especially because combating violent extremism is not
within the mandate of MINUSMA. However, we call on
the two forces to use the expertise of the Mission and
support it in accordance with resolution 2391 (2017).
We stress the need to fully activate the Joint Force and
the importance of ensuring sustainable funding for it.

The security situation in the country is dangerous,
and MINUSMA deserves appreciation given the
environment in which it operates. As the Force
Commander told the Mission, there are nearly 18
attacks each month by improvised explosive devices.
He also stated that the Mission had improved its
capabilities to be able to address half the attacks it had
been subjected to. We commend that effort to confront
the security challenges.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, the
deteriorating security situation in Mali has continued
and it reflects negatively on the humanitarian issue.
The activities of terrorists in central and northern Mali
have contributed to the displacement of 129,000 people,
whereas nearly 2.5 million people are in need of food.
Many schools are closed and humanitarian challenges
persist throughout the country. Therefore, the
Government of Mali and the Governments of the region
must cooperate with humanitarian workers to ensure
that assistance reaches those in need. Kuwait appreciates
the role played by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to alleviate the suffering of the
Malian people. We urge the Government to make every
effort to open schools. Young people play an important
role in stabilizing the country in the long run.

Development plays a key role in avoiding conflict,
as it creates hope for the people and constitutes an
important element in dissuading them from joining
terrorist groups. We are pleased to see the work
done by the Government in that regard. We call on
MINUSMA to support it and the priority action plan
for the G-5 Sahel, the 2063 Agenda of the African
Union and the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel. We reiterate our position that implementing
all those strategies and achieving all their objectives is
something that promotes stability.

In conclusion, I welcome the Secretary-General's
report (S/2019/207) on the implementation ofparagraph
4 of resolution 2423 (2018), on the assessment of
progress made in the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation. The report provides an
overview of the current situation. We must now consider
the next steps to be taken pertaining to the renewal of
the Mission's mandate. We will be closely monitoring
developments over the next few months, and we hope
that progress will be made during that period.

I would like to end my statement by expressing my
sincere gratitude to the peacekeepers participating in
the Mission in Mali. I commend their important role in
supporting the peace process and ensuring the safety
and security of the Malian people.

