Mr. Minton (United States of America): I, too, want
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his briefing
today and welcome those who have been invited to speak
here. All of us have been heavily involved in the
international effort in Bosnia.

We welcome Special Representative Klein's
determined efforts to carry out the Council mandate in
resolution 1247 (1999). Those efforts appear to be
achieving results. There clearly has been progress, as the
Secretary-General has noted in his report, in several critical
areas, such as police restructuring, review of the judicial
system and the establishment of the Breko unified police
force.

Like Ambassador Greenstock, I think that the work
of the Judicial System Assessment Programme (JSAP)
merits special mention. This programme has made an
invaluable contribution in the area of judicial monitoring.
Once the final reports are completed later this year, we
understand that the Programme will end, as was agreed
initially, but we also agree on the need to see that this
progress is continued and that its recommendations are
implemented. To ensure that JSAP's reports are acted
upon, my Government has been working with officials of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and other organizations and with the donor
community to create a new judicial reform programme
that we hope will have sufficient resources and the
mandate it needs from the Peace Implementation
Conference.

I want also to recall that last November the Bosnian
Joint Presidency appeared before us in a historic meeting
and announced a series of commitments known as the
New York Declaration. Here again, we can welcome
recent reports of progress made in implementing their
commitments and can acknowledge their efforts, for
instance, in establishing a secretariat for the Joint
Presidency, organizing a multi-ethnic Bosnian police
contingent for deployment to the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET),
and seeking additional funding for the Council of
Ministers.

This is all to the good, but unfortunately it is only
half the story. There is still powerful resistance in Bosnia
to making the reforms that are called for in the New York
Declaration. For instance, while there is a law establishing
the State Border Service, it had to be imposed by the
Office of the High Representative. While there has been
movement on a single passport, progress has been
overshadowed by unhelpful public statements and
obstacles which are likely to lead to more delays.

There is no doubt that we will need to continue to
insist that Bosnia's leaders accept their responsibilities
and make the difficult choices. This is not at all to reject
the concept of ownership espoused by the High
Representative, Mr. Petritsch; on the contrary, we need to
be realistic and determined in its application.

Progress cannot disguise that there are many in
Bosnia and elsewhere in the region who do not support a
unified multi-ethnic Bosnia. There are extreme
nationalists who have not given up their efforts to
undermine Dayton and what it stands for; there are

 

criminals who seek to preserve and protect illicit profits.
We should not be surprised by the resistance in western
Mostar to integration of the Ministry of the Interior and
police force there, which the Secretary-General notes in his
report. And even as the new democratic Government in
Croatia has taken steps to normalize and make transparent
its assistance to Bosnian Croats, extreme nationalists in
Mostar have only resisted reform even more fiercely. And
we continue to see other examples of extremism, including
threats to the upcoming municipal elections by radical Serbs
in the Republika Srpska.
Such continued obstruction by extremists will require
a firm and forceful response by the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), the Office of the
High Representative and ultimately by the Security Council.
The solution, however, is not to turn to inflammatory
rhetoric, as some leaders have done recently. Ownership
does not mean departing or heading for the exit; it means
intensifying our support for those in Bosnia - and there
are, I am glad to say, more every day - who have shown
the courage, strength and commitment to ensure that the
hopes of Dayton will be realized.

We applaud the efforts in Bosnia of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and of those
Bosnian officials who are working to fulfil Dayton's
promise. They are committed to establishing the institutions
of central government in Bosnia, to returning refugees to
urban areas, and to carrying out other critical tasks that will
help provide Bosnia with a secure future. We pledge our
ongoing support for their difficult but vital work.

