Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): It is a distinct honour
and privilege for me to deliver this statement on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).

Let me begin by expressing my sincere appreciation to
the Secretary-General for presenting his "Supplement to an
Agenda for Peace: position paper of the Secretary-General
on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the United
Nations" (S/ 1995/ l).

The Movement has taken due note of the
Secretary-General's Supplement. It offers many proposals
and approaches which warrant our careful consideration.
The Movement concurs with the objective of strengthening
the capacity of the Organization in all fields, including the
maintenance of international peace and security and the
promotion of economic and social development within the
framework of and in accordance with the provisions of
the Charter. Considering that the paper before us has still
to be examined in depth by both the Security Council and
the General Assembly, this statement offers only a few
preliminary comments of a general nature.

The Movement has noted that a number of elements
contained in the report "An Agenda for Peace" have been
neither included nor elaborated in the present Supplement,
to which the NAM. member countries would give further
consideration. In addition, we note that the Supplement is
relatively silent on the role of the General Assembly in
contributing to the maintenance of international peace and
security, as specified in the Charter and reaffirmed in
General Assembly resolutions 47/120 A and 47/120 B. It
is important that respect for State sovereignty be
recognized as one of the basic principles in the conduct
of international relations.

The Movement concurs with the Secretary-General' s
observation that:

"only sustained efforts to resolve underlying
socio-economic, cultural and humanitarian problems
can place an achieved peace on a durable
foundation." (S/1995/I, para. 22)

The Secretary-General has rightly focused his attention on
economic and social issues which have long been
sidelined. These have become all the more important
today as conflicts are increasingly recognized to have
socio-economic origins. The non-aligned countries fully
agree that, as the Organization closes the first half-century
of its work and stands poised to assume the challenges of
the future, its primary mission will be to convey to the
world a renewed vision and to fulfil its commitment to
development as the best means to uproot the fundamental
causes of conflicts which pose threats to international
peace and security. Development should be brought to the
forefront of the international agenda. We look forward to
discussing further the Secretary-General's report on an
Agenda for Development.

The Movement attaches particular importance to the
issue of peace-keeping operations addressed in the
position paper of the Secretary-General. It is to be noted
that most of the United Nations peace-keeping operations
are in the member countries of NAM. and that most of the
troop contributors are members of NAM. Considering
some recent successes and setbacks in United Nations
peace-keeping operations, and taking into account the fact

 

that such operations have moved beyond the traditional
concept, NAM. finds that there is an urgent need to review,
take stock of and draw conclusions from recent experiences.

The Non-Aligned Movement is pleased to note that the
Secretary-General has reiterated the validity and relevance
of the traditional principles of peace-keeping operations.
We suggest that these principles be strengthened, given
prevailing conditions in this changing world. These include
the support of the general membership of the Organization;
the consent of the States involved; non-intervention in the
internal affairs of States; impartiality; the non-use of force;
equitable opportunity for all States to participate; and,
above all, a clearly-defined mandate, time-frame and secure
financing. Furthermore, we think it essential that all
measures for the peaceful settlement of disputes be
explored before launching peace-keeping operations.
Primary emphasis should be on utilizing peaceful means for
resolving conflicts; coercive measures and military means
must remain the last resort to be used only after other
measures have failed. They should be temporary in nature
and create an atmosphere conducive to a peaceful and
durable settlement, and should not be perceived as a
substitute for other efforts to be made in endeavouring to
reach a just solution. However, the Movement is of the
View that the concept of multifunctional peace-keeping
operations, in the light of the basic principles of traditional
peace-keeping operations, requires further clarification.

Similarly, the idea of a rapid reaction force, put
forward in the section on peace-keeping, requires greater
clarity concerning the scope and circumstances under which
it would be deployed. This far-reaching proposal needs a
very careful scrutiny of its cost implications and even more
of the modality of its establishment and use, of the need for
consent before such a force may be deployed and of its
command and control structure. It is not clear, for instance,
what types of emergency are referred to and who will
determine the existence of such crises. These ambiguities
may lend themselves to interpretations that would challenge
the sovereignty and independence of States. In addition, the
concept of enforcement action needs to be further reviewed
and evaluated, inter alia, on the basis of the contents of the
Secretary-General' s report.

The issue of command and control has now emerged
as one of the central issues requiring the most careful
consideration and study. We agree that unity of command
and control is a sine qua non for peace-keeping to proceed
effectively and safely. As a matter of principle,
peace-keeping operations should be under the operational
control of the United Nations. There must be a clear
delineation of functions between United Nations
Headquarters and the field. While operational matters
should basically be the responsibility of the force
commander, United Nations Headquarters ought to be
given the responsibility for overall control and political
direction.

Another equally important aspect of peace-keeping
operations is the consultations between the United Nations
and troop-contributing countries. Such consultations
should focus on political and military objectives, the
responsibilities and expectations of their troops and the
conduct of the operations in general. We believe that
further specific improvements, including the possible
expansion of this consultative mechanism to any other
interested countries, will depend on how effective the new
set-up will prove in its entirety.

The Movement notes with concern that expenditures
on peace-keeping operations have far exceeded those
committed to developmental activities. It considers that a
similar emphasis should be given to development
programmes and activities as the best contribution for the
preservation of peace and security.

The costs of peace-keeping operations should
continue to be calculated in accordance with the existing
scale of assessments established by General Assembly
resolution 3101 (XXVIII), which takes into account the
special responsibilities of some Member States and
economic considerations. These arrangements should be
institutionalized and must be in keeping with paragraph 2
of Article 17 of the Charter. The Secretariat should also
continue to consider ways to facilitate prompt
reimbursement to troop-contributing countries as well as
other related administrative and financial issues.

As regards the issue of preventive diplomacy and
peacemaking, the Movement has noted the proposal to
establish in the United Nations regular budget a
contingency provision and the enlargement of existing
provisions for unforeseen peace-keeping activities. The
proposal for small field missions, because of its possible
implications, requires careful study by the appropriate
intergovernmental organs. These ideas should be clearly
defined - at least operationally - after thorough
examination by the General Assembly.

The Secretary-General, in his report, refers to a
norm for Member States to accept the offer of United
Nations good offices. The adherence to such a norm will
be practical only if a favourable climate of opinion, or

 

ethos, is created. The Movement feels that this ethos can be
created only by the free will and consent of the States
concerned.

The Movement takes note of the Secretary-General's
View that:

"Progress (...) in the area of weapons of mass
destruction and major weapons systems must be
followed by parallel progress in conventional arms".
(S/I995/I, para. 65)

Although recent changes in international relations have
diminished the likelihood of a nuclear war, the issues of the
non-use of nuclear weapons, the prevention of nuclear war
and the elimination of all nuclear arsenals deservedly
continue to be a preoccupation of the international
community. It is essential to reaffirm the importance of
nuclear disarmament and its priority in disarmament
negotiations, as contained in the Final Document of the first
special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament.

It is pertinent to recall the stalemate in the Conference
on Disarmament over negotiating and reaching the long-
sought goal of a comprehensive test-ban treaty. We also
should recall the lack of progress in either launching
multilateral negotiations for a legally binding instrument on
the production and the stockpiling of fissile materials or the
work carried out by the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons. Likewise, the deadlock in the
Preparatory Committee for the 1995 Conference of the
Parties to the Non-Proliferation Treaty persists. Many other
issues, including unhindered access to technology for
peaceful purposes and negative security assurances to non-
nuclear States, have not been resolved.

The Secretary-General's position paper also touches
upon the question of sanctions. Member States are obligated
to comply with the Security Council decisions concerning
sanctions, in keeping with Article 41 of the Charter. There
has been a threefold increase in the number of sanction
regimes within the past two years. This expanding use of
sanctions has not been accompanied by a thorough
consideration of the short- and long-term effects.

Many critical issues need to be clarified before the
imposition of sanctions. Their potential impact on the
country that is targeted, as well as their time-frame, clearly
defined objectives, humanitarian aspects and special
provisions to minimize the collateral damage suffered by
third parties, ought to be worked out in detail. Such an
approach would strengthen international support for the
imposition and implementation of sanction regimes.

Sanctions have profound ramifications, not only for
the target country, but also for the neighbouring States
and trading partners. While Article 50 of the Charter has
called for consultations in seeking a solution to these
problems, a more extensive use of that provision as a
means to limit the impact of sanctions has now become
essential. The comprehensiveness of today's sanctions has
also raised a different set of complex issues. Increasingly,
the costs are being borne by the civilian population,
without accomplishing the objectives of the sanctions. It
is therefore imperative to rectify this situation, taking
special precautions to ease the impact of sanctions on the
vulnerable groups of society.

The Charter review Committee at its last session
invited the Secretary-General to submit, before its 1995
session, a report on the question of the implementation of
the provisions of the Charter. That report should include
reference to Article 50, concerning special economic
problems confronting States arising from the carrying out
of sanctions mandated under Chapter VII. We look
forward to receiving the detailed report of the Secretary-
General on this issue, which we trust will include an
analysis of the proposals and suggestions, as contained in
the report of the Committee's 1994 session.

Regarding compensation, the Movement considers
that the establishment of a sanctions mechanism, as
proposed by the Secretary-General in his report, deserves
to be explored further. Moreover, sanctions should be
lifted as soon as their objectives are achieved.

Consultations with Bretton Woods institutions for the
purpose of giving effect to Article 50 is not necessarily
the most effective way of alleviating the damages suffered
by third parties. The Security Council, which imposes
sanctions, has the responsibility also to provide relief.

Within the framework of Chapter VIII of the
Charter, regional organizations can cooperate with the
United Nations in the resolution of conflicts in their
regions which are seen as threats to international peace
and security, within their respective mandates and spheres
of competence. In this context, the Movement welcomes
close cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations on the basis of the Charter.

The Non-Aligned Movement believes that the largest
possible number of delegations should participate in the

 

debate on the Secretary-General's position paper. The
Movement would like all Member States to give careful
attention to the proposals contained therein so as to create
the opportunity to collectively contribute to fostering a new
era of true multilateralism. It is our view that the Secretary-
General's position paper should be examined by the
General Assembly, as it is the sole United Nations body to
encompass all States, both in the discussion and in the
decision-making processes. We would welcome the
establishment of a working group of the General Assembly,
at an appropriate time, to study the position paper.

