Mr. Seger (spoke in French): Like Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, I would first like to warmly
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council. As I have the
privilege of knowing you personally, I know that you
do not like Permanent Representatives to use a written
text so this time I will not use such a text.

On the one hand, I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his briefing
and to simply recall that the report of the Secretary-
General on the issue of Burundi (S/2014/36) is fully
relevant. Yesterday, I also submitted my own report to
the Security Council. I do not wish to come back to that
now but would just like to make two or three additional
comments.

Before doing so, I would once again like to thank
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, who is not only an
excellent Special Representative but also a friend.
I think that our success to date in building peace in
Burundi is certainly also due to the fact that, as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the Peacebuilding Commission, we have worked hand
in hand and, I hope, will continue to do so. But that
success is thanks, too, to the excellent cooperation
with the Government of Burundi. Here, I would also
like to thank my neighbour on my right, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of
Burundi, with whom I have truly had the privilege of
having an excellent relationship.

I would like to step back a little. Last June, I wrote
that the country had made considerable, or exceptional
progress. What we must do now - and it is even more
important at this stage - is to stay the course and to
maintain what I call the gains of the Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi and of the
Geneva Partners Conference of October 2012. If we
stay that course, I am sure that we will succeed and
come out as winners. But, as in a marathon, the last
kilometres are always the most difficult and I believe
that we are now in our final kilometre. That is why it is
so important to stay the course.

Here, I would like to mention three elements
that I think are particularly important in that regard.
As Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga has already said,
an important aspect is the constitutional review that
is currently under way. It is truly crucial for us, the
Government and the country to uphold that spirit of
consensus and also of the Arusha accords. We must
focus primarily on the parts of the Constitution on
which there is consensus. Moreover, the Burundi
configuration wrote a letter to the President of the
National Assembly precisley to encourage him along
those lines. That is my first piece of advice.

My second piece of advice, which the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General also
mentioned, concerns the 2015 elections. There, I think
that we are also on the right track. The opposition
parties with whom I spoke are ready to take part in
the 2015 elections and not to make the same mistake
that they committed in 2010. However, precisely in
order to enable everyone to participate in the electoral
process fairly and openly, the environment and the
political and legal framework must be truly fair, open
and transparent. There, as Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga
said, with regard to the Imbonerakure youth league, the
unrest that sometimes occurs must come to an end.

Thirdly, another aspect that I also believe to be
important for peacebuilding and unity is the issue
of land and other property. As the Council probably
knows, a new law that gave the National Commission
for Land and Other Property new powers was adopted
on 31 December. All that, to put it in a sentence, in
the context of restoring the property of those who were
deprived of it in 1972 and later.

It is important that justice be rendered but also
that it be done in a fair and just way that respects the
principles of reconciliation and peace. Everyone told
me that there is a significant ethnic connotation to that
dimension. That is truly something that we must bear
in mind. It is part of what the Arusha accords achieved.

I myself have said, and the President of the
Republic has reiterated - it is perhaps a rather common
saying - that there is no peace without development
and no development without peace. In that context,
when I spoke with the development banks - the African
Development Bank and the World Bank, with whom I
spoke in order to mobilize resources - the two banks
also told me that they have some concerns about the
country's future in the context of the investments that
they have made and continue to make in the country. A
political commission like ours making such an analysis
is one thing but if a bank, which by definition is not
a political institution, reaches the same conclusion, I
think that that is something that should make us listen.
What is also interesting is that the representatives of the
banks told me that the political support of the United
Nations, for them, is an assurance for the investment
that they are making in the well-being of the country.

Something that we should also perhaps bear in mind
is that it is really good for the country for economic
and social reasons that it be supported by the United
Nations.

I come back to the image of the marathon that I
mentioned earlier. When I was younger and my knees
would allow it, Iran half-marathons, not full marathons.
I remember that during the first one I ran, it was very
hot. I reached the twentieth kilometre and could go no
further. At one point, a friend came out of the crowd and
accompanied me for the last two or three kilometres,
which made it possible for me to finish the race.

I think that we are in exactly the same situation
with respect to Burundi. We still need some support to
finish the race, and I am sure that with that support we
are all going to be winners.

Obviously, when it comes to the principle of
national ownership, as the Special Representative said,
Burundi has every right to demand that the mandate
of the United Nations Office in Burundi come to an
end. But if that is the case, I would urge everyone in
the Chamber, Burundi and the Security Council that
this outcome and transition be undertaken in a way that
ensures the continuity of United Nations support. IfI
understand correctly, the Government wants to continue
to work with the United Nations, but in another form.
Therefore, let us make sure that the transition occurs
in a way that would allow the United Nations to take
up those duties through the country team and other
functions. Instead of creating artificial deadlines now,
in my opinion we need to think about duties. What do
we need to do to allow the United Nations to take up
new duties in a smooth and unproblematic way?

I wouldjust like to tell the Council that, I, as Chair,
and the configuration remain at the country's disposal,
if it would like more support. However, I would also
like to tell the Security Council that we cannot replace
a permanent political presence of the United Nations

on the ground. Let us be aware of that fact, and of the
configuration's limitations.

I would like to conclude by saying that I share the
optimism expressed by Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga
about the future of the country. We do not need very
much for things to move in the right direction. And
in the spirit of prevention and of concluding the
peacebuilding successfully, we must maintain that
support. I think that, with that, we shall succeed.

