Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking High Commissioner for
Refugees Filippo Grandi for his very enlightening and
important briefing. Allow me to also pay sincere tribute
to his work, as well as to the teams of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) for their outstanding work in protecting
refugees and defending their rights. UNHCR, as
Mr. Grandi knows, can count on the strong support of
France in the context of our exemplary partnership, just
as it can count on France's commitment to ensuring
unconditional respect for the right of asylum in Europe
and around the world.

As High Commissioner Grandi pointed out, 2019
is the year of a bleak record: 70 million people have
been forced into exile and are refugees. Without going
into a list of the countries concerned, I would like to
echo what Mr. Grandi said and stress three priorities
that we think must guide our action: first, the sharing
of responsibilities; secondly, a response to the root
causes of displacement and, thirdly, respect for the
fundamental principles to guide and aid the return
of refugees.

First, with regard to the sharing of responsibilities
and the need for solidarity, the reception of refugees
is an international obligation and a moral duty. It is
the responsibility of States to protect on their territory
foreign nationals who have fled their country as a
result of persecution. We must also ensure safe and
legal routes for those people, who too often risk their
lives to go into exile. It is in that spirit that France has
organized protection missions, together with UNHCR,
in the Niger and Chad. Approximately 1,150 particularly
vulnerable refugees have been resettled in France.
We must do everything we can to support countries
that are at the forefront of large-scale displacements.
It is only through a concerted approach that we will be
able to improve the care of refugees and achieve better
management of migration flows. We must also increase
our efforts to combat traffickers and smugglers. That,
too, is a priority.

It is in that spirit that the Global Compact on
Refugees was developed and adopted. We must
redouble our efforts to move into the implementation
phase of the Compact. The Global Refugee Forum to be
organized by UNHCR in December will be a major step
towards providing a collective and effective response
to the challenges of refugee protection and care. France
will be present, alongside UNHCR, which is by far
the international humanitarian organization that has
received the most humanitarian assistance from France.
We call on all States and relevant actors to participate
and commit themselves to the implementation of
the Compact.

Secondly, with regard to the response to the root
causes of population displacement, as everybody
knows, insecurity and mass human rights violations,
which unfortunately characterize conflicts, are the
main causes of displacement. It is important to prevent
and suppress them. It is also up to the Security Council
to establish the conditions for a lasting settlement
of crises.

In Syria, where over 6 million people are internally
displaced and 5.7 million are refugees, only a credible
political process can guarantee stability and prevent
further refugee flows. In Libya, the escalation of
violence has already pushed 2,800 people out of conflict
areas and aggravated the already precarious situation of
migrants and refugees. We call on all Libyan leaders
to remain engaged in the process led by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, as only a
political solution will make it possible to stabilize
the country in a sustainable manner and address the
challenges related to migration. In that regard, I have a
question for the High Commissioner, echoing what he
already said concerning cooperation between UNHCR
and the Libyan authorities to ensure the protection of
migrants and refugees.

With regard to Palestinian refugees, of whom
there are more than 5 million in the region, we call for
a realistic, equitable, just and lasting solution within the
framework of a future Israeli-Palestinian agreement,
based on internationally agreed parameters. In the
meantime, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) must
continue to receive our full support in the context of
the suspension of the American contribution. For its
part, France has doubled its contribution to UNRWA
this year.

Finally, in Venezuela, which we will discuss again
tomorrow, about 5,000 people are leaving the country
every day, and there are now more than 3.4 million
Venezuelan migrants and refugees. The origins of that
crisis are political and institutional, and only new, free,
transparent and credible presidential elections will
bring it to an end.

Thirdly, with regard to respect for fundamental
principles for the return of refugees, it is everyone's
responsibility to ensure the voluntary nature of the
return of refugees to their countries of origin, as
Mr. Grandi said. States must ensure conditions for a
safe and dignified return based on access to information
about the place people are planning to return to. As
everyone knows, in Syria or Burma, just to take two
examples, such conditions are not being met at all today.
In Syria, France is extremely concerned about reports
of arbitrary arrests by Syrian security services of
refugees who are returning home. In Burma, there will
be no possible return for Rohingya refugees without
full freedom of movement and access to basic services.

To return to what Filippo Grandi said at the
beginning ofhis important briefing, the attitude towards
refugees is one of the defining characteristics ofa time
and of the compass that guides our contemporaries. In
echoing what he said, I would like to reiterate France's
conviction that only a global, collective, responsible
and supportive approach will make it possible to
respond effectively and sustainably to the challenge
posed by the increasing number of refugees. France is
determined to continue to spare no effort to that end.

