Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): May I say that I am
grateful to our briefers for their clear explanation of
the facts this afternoon. I want to thank the head of
the Leadership Panel, and through him his whole team,
for their committed, impartial and expert work over
the past five months investigating the use of chemical
weapons in Syria.

As we have heard so clearly today, those
investigations have reached a clear, unmistakable
conclusion. Syria, a State Member of the United Nations
and a party to the Chemical Weapons Convention, has
used chemical weapons against its own people. The use
of such weapons by anyone, anywhere, is unacceptable,
and we condemn their use by both the Syrian regime
and by Da'esh. These are weapons that more than 190
States have come together to outlaw, weapons that have
no place in the world today.

And yet we have been here before. Last year we
were told by the Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM)
that the Syrian regime had carried out three poison gas
attacks and that Da'esh had used sulfur mustard. And
yet some on the Council doubted the conclusions of
that investigation, an investigation that they themselves
had set up, with a methodology they had approved. In
February, action in the Council was vetoed.

We now have another report from independent
United Nations experts mandated by the Council.
The report sets out a clear conclusion: on 4 April, the
Syrian regime used sarin against its own people in
Khan Shaykun, just five weeks after the Council was
prevented by Russia from taking action on Syria's use
of chemical weapons.

The Joint Investigative Mechanism has done what
we as a Council asked it to do. It has done so thoroughly,
impartially and professionally, and today, presented
with its findings, we must speak with one voice to
condemn the use of chemical weapons by Da'esh and
this attack on Khan Shaykun by the Syrian regime.

We must hold those responsible to account, but
experience to date suggests that we will not be able
to do that. Russia continues to deny what happened.
Since the attack on that morning in April, Russia has
advanced a contradictory series of hypotheses and
claims, moving from one to the next as soon as it is
proved untrue, as it seeks to prevent the Council from
holding the Al-Assad regime to account.

Faced with science and fact, Russia has had no
answer but fantasy and fiction, and it has provided no
evidence for its claims. The investigators have looked
at the evidence. In their report, they set out the rigour
with which they approached their task; how they had
received information from 12 Member States, including
the Syrian regime itself; how they had scientifically
corroborated that information; and how they had
consulted numerous independent experts and scientists.

The JIM. reached its conclusions not on the basis
of any one single piece of evidence. Rather, it built
its case on the totality of evidence available to it, as
any professional, rational investigation would do. And
those conclusions are clear: aircraft of the Syrian air
force were in the vicinity of Khan Shaykun on 4 April
between 6.30 am. and 7 a.m., at the time munitions
were dropped on the town. The crater from which the
sarin emanated was created by an aerial bomb dropped
on 4 April, and, most tellingly of all, sarin found at
the scene in samples supplied by the Syrian regime
contained the same unique - unique - signature found
in the chemicals handed over by the Syrian regime
to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) in 2014.

The Russian representative suggests that sarin can
be easily made, or home-made. Perhaps Mr. Mulet could
please explainjust how complex it would be to recreate
that sarin exactly to the unique chemical signature of
the Syrian regime.

In 2013 Russia promised the world that Syria
would abandon all of its chemical weapons. Today, to
the cost of the people of Syria and to the cost of the
international consensus against chemical weapons, that
promise remains unfulfilled, and Russia continues to
protect Al-Assad and his regime.

I therefore call on the whole Council to renew
the JIM's existing mandate, which has delivered the
rigorous and conclusive findings that we are discussing
today. There is more work to be done. The OPCW fact-
finding mission has now reported evidence of likely
sarin use in nearby Latamneh on 30 March.

We need to support the JIM. and enable it to carry
out its important work. The draft resolution that
Russia has circulated today is not a serious attempt at
renewal. It is a cynical ploy to discredit a professional,
independent and impartial body. Russia is trying to
shoot the messenger to cover up for the crimes of the

Syrian regime.

To the Syrian Government, I say that evidence has
been carefully gathered of the inhuman crimes it has
committed. Russia is protecting Syria for now, but the
day will come when it is held accountable for its actions
before international law and its victims will get the
justice that they deserve.

There is no middle ground in the Security Council
when it comes to chemical weapons. We must condemn
the use of these weapons in Syria and support the Joint
Investigative Mechanism to identify those responsible.
To do otherwise is to effectively condone these appalling
attacks and undermine the international architecture
that we collectively designed to stop them.

