Mr. Shava (Zimbabwe): As this is the first time I take
the floor in the Security Council this month, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of February.
I also wish to convey the appreciation of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) to you for
convening this open debate, which provides us with an
opportunity to reaffirm our strong commitment to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, at a time when we are looking forward to
celebrating the seventieth anniversary of the founding
of the United Nations.

I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing, and all of the Foreign Ministers
who have enriched the debate by personally attending
and delivering statements on this very important
subject.

SADC associates itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

SADC recognizes the fact that the world has
undergone profound changes over the past decade
as new threats to international peace and security
have continued to emerge. The Charter of the United
Nations provides the basic framework for the peaceful
conduct of relations between States. The purposes and
principles of the Charter should continue to guide us in

the maintenance of international peace and security and
in the pursuit of the common good of all our nations.

Experience has shown that upholding the
principles of the sovereign equality of States, respect
for sovereignty and territorial integrity, the peaceful
settlement of disputes and non-interference in the
internal affairs of States fosters a global environment
conducive to peace and security. Member States should
respect each other's cultures and values and commit to
peaceful coexistence.

As we approach the seventieth anniversary, we
should address our shortcomings and challenges.
The Security Council, as the principal organ of the
United Nations charged with the responsibility for
the maintenance of peace and security, should reflect
current geopolitical realities in order to maintain peace
for the future. A more democratic and representative
Security Council will enhance the legitimacy of its
decisions in the maintenance of peace and security.
Reform of the Security Council, which is long overdue,
will involve the embedding of equity, transparency and
accountability.

According to Article 24 of the Charter, the Security
Council acts on behalf of all Member States. That
universal representation needs to be reflected in the
composition of the Council today. The way by which
we reform the Council will have a strong bearing on
this world body and on our common security.

It is important that the Security Council act
in an even-handed manner. Double standards and
the selective application of rules and concepts only
undermine confidence in the Council. SADC is
concerned that the protection of civilians is used as a
pretext to intervene in some conflicts, and yet it is not
applied in connection with graver situations that result
in thousands of causalities.

SADC also notes with concern the growing
inequalities among nations in terms of adherence to the
rule of law at the international level. It is regrettable
that in practice international law is applied only against
smaller and weaker States, while bigger Powers enjoy
unmerited, yet unassailable, immunity. The sovereignty
of smaller and weaker States is increasingly becoming
less sacred than that of powerful States. Equally
agonizing is the impotence and helplessness on the part
of the United Nations in the face of growing violations
of international law by major Powers.

The Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National
and International Levels, adopted by Heads of State
and Government in September 2012, cautioned States
to avoid the use of unilateral measures against other
States. Such measures, which are often employed by
powerful States against weaker ones to achieve narrow
political objectives, undermine international peace and
security as well as socioeconomic development. SADC
is concerned about the increase in Council-imposed
sanctions. Over the years, the Security Council has
increasingly resorted to using Chapter VII of the
Charter to address issues that do not necessarily pose a
serious threat to peace and security. We strongly believe
that coercive measures should be used only when peace
and security are under real threat. Sanctions should be
considered only after measures for the pacific settlement
of disputes under Chapter VI of the Charter have been
exhausted. Furthermore, they should be imposed for a
specific time frame. We reject the use ofthe multilateral
system to pursue selfish political agendas.

States must refrain from the threat or use of force
to solve disputes. The United Nations must continue
to champion the resolution of conflicts by peaceful
means within the confines of international law. History
has demonstrated that heavy-handed interventions do
not bring about sustainable solutions, but cost more
lives and destroy economies and social infrastructure,
resulting in failed States. The use of force must be
guided by the provisions of Article 51 of the Charter,
which authorizes force only in cases of legitimate
self-defence. In the African context, article 4 (h) of
the Constitutive Act of the African Union authorizes
intervention in grave circumstances, such as genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity.

Since both the General Assembly and the Security
Council often are not in a position to undertake
the proper assessment of any conflict due to their
remoteness from situations of conflict, it is imperative
that regional and subregional organizations in areas of
proximity are empowered to take action in that regard.
The importance of building sustained partnerships
between regional organizations and the United Nations
cannot be overemphasized. Such partnerships enhance
the operational capabilities of those organizations in
peace enforcement and peacekeeping activities. The
foundation of Africa's partnership with the United
Nations is based on Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, which provides for the participation of
regional organizations as first responders to ensure the
pacific settlement of local disputes. In Africa, where
most peacekeeping missions operate, the partnership is
proving critical for saving civilian lives and averting
tragedy. In Darfur, the African Union took proactive
action to save lives before the United Nations moved in.
In the Central African Republic, the swift deployment
of the African Union-led a force and the French
Operation Sangaris prevented a further deterioration of
the situation.

In accordance with the Protocol Relating to the
Establishment of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, SADC has established a standby brigade
whose mandate includes undertaking interventions for
peace and security. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo Force Intervention Brigade is a good example
of the cooperation that exists between SADC and the
United Nations.

Finally, SADC believes that the nexus between
development, peace and security, human rights and the
rule oflaw is inextricable. As we craft a transformative
post-2015 development agenda, let us also ensure that
it is responsive to the critical needs of our peoples.
Poverty eradication, economic transformation,
including industrialization and protection of the planet
Earth, can be achieved only in an environment of peace
and security.

