Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (Spoke in Chinese): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. We
appreciate the positive efforts that the Secretariat and
the Secretary-General himself have undertaken to
move the Middle East peace process forward. China
has also listened attentively to the statements of the
representatives of Palestine and Israel.

War and conflict continue in the Middle East,
which is deplorable. Efforts to find a solution should
focus on resolving differences through dialogue and
on eradicating instability through development so
that the region can ultimately embark upon the path
of peaceful and stable development. That is where the
responsibilities of the United Nations and the Security
Council lie.

The question of Palestine is at the core of the
Middle East issue. Defending the legitimate national
interests and rights of the Palestinian people is the
shared responsibility of the international community.
At present, the Palestinian-Israel peace talks are
deadlocked. The violent conflict has intensified. The
humanitarian disaster is deepening. The two-State
solution and the prospect of its achievement have been
weakened. A comprehensive and just solution to the
Palestinian issue is in the interests of all sides. China
proposes that the international community should take
swift action in the following respects.

First, the international community needs to adhere
to the path towards independent statehood, with
Palestine and Israel living side by side in peace. The
establishment of the State of Palestine on the basis of
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital
and with full sovereignty, is an inalienable right of the
Palestinian people. It is also the key to the solution to
the Palestinian-Israeli question.

We should adhere to the principle that the peace
talks are the only way out. The deadlock in those
talks can only aggravate differences, incite hatred
and drag Palestine and Israel into an endless, vicious
and ever-escalating spiral of violence. Only with an
early resumption of peace talks can there be peace
and stability in Israel and Palestine and in the region
as whole, which is in the fundamental interest of both
Palestine and Israel. There is a need to adhere to the
principle of land for peace, the two-State solution, the
Arab peace initiative and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, with a view to advancing the peace
process. The afore-mentioned initiatives are significant
outcomes of the excruciating negotiations on the part
of the international community, and as such, are highly
significant in guiding the Middle East peace process.

Secondly, both Israel and Palestine should stop
engaging in violent conflict, and they should exercise
the utmost restraint and refrain from taking any
unilateral actions. In particular, they should altogether
avoid using force against civilians. Israel should stop its
expansion of settlement activities and demonstrate good
will and meet the basic conditions for the resumption
of peace talks. Israel must abide by international law
and the basic norms governing international relations,
lift its blockade against Palestine, especially Gaza,
and rescind its restrictions on aid to Palestine. At the
same time, Israel's legitimate security concerns must
be respected and addressed.

Thirdly, the international community needs to
jointly explore a broader scope of peace promotion,
drawing lessons from the manner in which the situations
in other Middle East hotspots have been resolved;
explore broader efforts to promote peace on the basis
of the Quartet's recommendations; and demonstrate the
will to promote peace through international synergy.
Existing mechanisms can be maintained, and new
initiatives need to be encouraged. At the same time,
attention should be paid to giving free rein to the
leadership role of the United Nations, and the outcome
of efforts to promote peace should be approved by the
Security Council. The international community should
help relaunch Palestine-Israeli peace talks and establish
follow-up mechanisms to provide robust support and
ensure that the outcomes of peace talks are monitored
and assessed.

In the process of peace talks, the international
community should identify mechanisms to provide
incentives in the light of actions taken by both sides.
There is a need to further support Palestinian capacity-
building. China has always remained supportive of
the just cause of the Palestinian people to restore their
legitimate national interests and rights. It has always
been committed to promoting peace talks. Earlier this
year, President Xi Jinping of China, when delivering
a speech at the headquarters of the League of Arab
States, called for a resumption of peace talks in the
political arena and for reconstruction to be promoted in
the economic arena.

China welcomes and supports all efforts conducive
to easing Palestinian-Israeli tensions and achieving the
two-State solution promptly. China has long supported
Palestinian capacity-buildingbyprovidinghumanitarian
assistance, training and aid for reconstruction. China is
confident that, as long as the international community
stays the course of promoting peace and as long as
Palestine and Israel continue to choose the path ofpeace
talks, peace will ultimately prevail. China stands ready
to work with the international community in advancing
ajust resolution to the Palestinian-Israeli question at an
early date.

