Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Mr. Sma'i'l
Chergui and Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka for their
very enlightening briefings. I would like to mention
three major issues of concern for France.

First, the difficult situation and the suffering of
women in South Sudan, who remain marginalized. That
was the main focus of the joint mission that the briefers
conducted as part of the women and peace and security
agenda. I thank them for having done that. It was
essential in order to highlight that common priority. It
was also an important example of the joint work of the
United Nations and the African Union.

France shares the comments that the briefers made
and is deeply concerned about the seriousness of the
facts brought to light in the Secretary-General's report
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2018/250), which
highlights hundreds of cases of gang rape and genital
mutilation used as weapons of war, often leaving
irreparable scars. France condemns in the strongest
terms those criminal acts, of which women and
children, because they are the most vulnerable, are the
primary victims.

We urge that the joint communiques and commitments
be fully implemented, that those responsible be
identified, tried and punished, including those in the
ranks of the army and that the protection of women, as
well as the investigative mechanisms, be strengthened.
In that regard, France calls on the South Sudanese
authorities to strengthen the specialized police units
by ensuring women's access to them. We support the
efforts of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS), UN-Women and Special Representative
Pramila Patten to ensure that what has been promised
on paper is translated into action and made a reality.

France hopes that the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan makes full use of the sanctions against those who
commit and sponsor sexual violence. The cooperation
between the Panel ofExperts on South Sudan, UNMISS
and the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict is
essential in that regard.

The situation of children is also extremely worrying.
The report of the Secretary-General on that subject
reminds us that since 2014, more than 600 children
have been victims of sexual violence (see S/2018/865, para. 54), and those are only verified violations.
The actual number is undoubtedly much higher. We
must act, and we welcome the fact that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mrs. Virginia
Gamba de Potgieter, has visited the field, as has the
Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict, which
will discuss the draft conclusions in the coming days.

The second major issue that I wish to address today
is the revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, signed on
12 September. It provides for the involvement of women
and young people in the peace process, which is crucial
and which, I hope, will guarantee its success.

The signing of the Agreement is an encouraging
development, which, on behalf of France, I wish to once
again commend. My country hopes that the Agreement
reached will lead to a lasting and inclusive peace. That
is our hope and that of millions of South Sudanese
women and men who yearn for peace and a better life.
We do not want peace on paper alone.

The current period is crucial for the success of the
peace. Now is the time to build trust among the parties,
strengthen the ceasefire, win the support of the people,
and make the security and institutional arrangements
necessary for the implementation of the Agreement.
In that regard, we welcome the holding of the first
meeting of the National Pre-transitional Committee in
Khartoum on 21 and 22 October. We call on the parties
to continue in that direction.
Finally, on the third issue, I would like to say a word
about the humanitarian situation in South Sudan, which
must continue to mobilize us. Seven million South
Sudanese still need humanitarian aid and nearly half of
the population is severely malnourished. The first signs
ofthe positive impact ofthe peace agreement in terms of
improving the food situation and humanitarian access
are encouraging. It is essential that they endure over the
long term. It is also crucial to do everything possible to
protect humanitarian personnel, who continue to be the
target of attacks, and to continue our efforts to ensure
that such crimes do not go unpunished.

The Security Council can count on France's
ongoing commitment with regard to such issues.

