Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): The
European Union will be speaking on our behalf later
on. However, I would like to say a few words in our
national capacity. First of all, I would like to tell you,
Madam President, how pleased we are that this debate
is taking place during your term of office. Your
commitment to the cause of children is known by each
and every one of us, and I am pleased that you have
taken the symbolic decision to hold this discussion on
20 November, the anniversary of the adoption by the
General Assembly of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. The importance that we all attach to this
question is confirmed by the presence of the Secretary-
General at our meeting this morning, as well as that of
his Special Representative, Mr. Otunnu, and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF), Ms. Bellamy.

I do not wish to dwell on the topical relevance of
the question of children in armed conflict. I can only
endorse what has been said by most of the previous
speakers. The particularly moving testimony this
morning of a young child soldier enabled the Council
to comprehend the magnitude and seriousness of the
problem. In the strongest possible way, it demonstrates
the urgency incumbent upon us, the Council - indeed,
our moral responsibility - to take up a challenge that,
under the Charter, constitutes a threat to peace and
security.

When the Council decided in September to
respond to the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's most recent report, we set
particularly ambitious goals for ourselves. The Council
was to organize a debate at the highest possible
level - that of heads of State and Government - to
deal with this question. The draft resolution was
designed as a true plan of action for all actors and was
to be formally adopted by the heads of State and
Government. The postponement of the General
Assembly's special session changed the format of our
debate; however, it has not lessened our determination
to produce a document that can meet the challenge, as
the Secretary-General said this morning.

The draft resolution that we are about to adopt
marks an important stage in protecting children in war.
Let me give me a broad outline of the essential
elements. First of all, there are two goals: to build on
what has been accomplished, to streamline and to
reorganize commitments made by the Council in
previous resolutions; and at the same time to sketch out
new areas of action by precisely codifying what could
be achieved by all actors concerned. This approach
underlies the distinctive structure of the draft
resolution, which outlines, for the first time, the
responsibilities of all - the Council first and foremost,
the belligerents themselves, the Member States, United
Nations funds, programmes and agencies, international
financial institutions, regional development banks,
regional organizations and non-State actors such as
private enterprise - and presents them in a sort of
global road map. Those are the goals.

Now, turning to the subject of ways and means,
according to the draft resolution, the Council should
have more effective tools, in relation both to
monitoring the fulfilment of commitments and
obligations by parties to conflicts, and to mobilizing
resources for supporting activities to help the child
victims. The Council will continue to give high priority
to the situation of children when it considers each of
the issues before it. It will ensure that enforcement
measures that could be adopted under Article 41 of the
Charter take into account the particular vulnerability of
civilian populations and that of children in particular.

Finally, we ought to emphasize a new mechanism
that would also be set up by this Council draft
resolution. Paragraph 16 requests the Secretary-
General to submit an annual list of parties to armed
conflicts that recruit or use children in Violation of
international obligations applicable to them. That list,
submitted to the Council, could be seen as an initial
step towards establishing a more effective monitoring
and follow-up system for all of the commitments that
appear in the text of the draft resolution. The list
should also make it possible to measure the progress
made on an annual basis. There is no doubt that this
could serve to orient the principal donors,
Governments and international institutions in the
provision of technical and financial assistance and in
their contributions to the rehabilitation programmes for
children who are victims of conflict.

Year after year, the international community has
increasingly mobilized itself to protect children in
armed conflict. The publication, in 1996, of the report
by Ms. Graca Machel probably marked a significant
stage in the raising of consciousness. The response of
the Security Council thereafter did not fall behind. In
September 1997 it named Mr. Olara Otunnu as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General; the
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda has prosecuted those
responsible for rape and sexual violence during times
of civil war; special provisions were made for children
in the Lome' peace agreements on Sierra Leone; and,
finally, the Council adopted numerous resolutions
devoted to the protection of children.

It is my hope that the draft resolution to be
adopted by the Council today can also be ascribed to
our efforts in this direction. I also hope that it will
enshrine our determination to end barbaric practices
against children and, in the end, against humankind.

