Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too welcome the holding of this
discussion, which makes it possible to take stock of the
first results of the implementation of the decisions of
the summit of the Security Council held six months
ago. The results of that meeting had a substantive
influence on the further work of the United Nations.
On the whole, the documents adopted at the summit, as
well as the documents adopted at the Millennium
Summit, are important in and of themselves, because
they clearly set out priorities for United Nations
activities and clearly reaffirm that these activities must
be carried out on the solid basis of the Charter of the
United Nations. And - no matter how funny this may
sound-that reaffirmation was not easy to achieve,
but common sense won the day and the principles of
the Charter were unanimously reaffirmed.

A great deal is being said to the effect that the
summit of the Security Council provided an impetus
for efforts to improve United Nations peacekeeping
activities, and that is indeed the case. The Council did
its job. The General Assembly did its share of the
work, and the Security Council adopted resolution
1327 (2000), in accordance with the mandate given us
by the heads of State on 7 September. That resolution
contains a number of innovative decisions. We believe
that this was a step forward and that it is necessary at
this stage to implement those innovations. Only when
some progress has been achieved in the actual
implementation of those agreements will it be possible
to ask if further changes are necessary.

A great deal is also being said on the subject of
the reform of United Nations peacekeeping. The need
to strengthen the military component in planning
operations and in their implementation has been
discussed at length.

In that connection, I should like to recall that in
resolution 1327 (2000), the Security Council decided to
consider the question of how best to make use of the
Military Staff Committee. I think that here there is a
need - and this was spoken to earlier by Ambassador
Greenstock-not to leave all of this on paper or
simply within the sphere of conversation, but to see
what, in fact, can really be done.

Incidentally, that would be in keeping with the
wishes that have been expressed here by many
Members of the United Nations -that the permanent
members of the Security Council participate more
actively in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Naturally, in current conditions, the activities of the
Military Staff Committee in rendering assistance to the
Security Council in the planning and carrying out of
operations must be implemented in close interaction
with the troop-contributing countries. That,
unquestionably, is in our view a fully realistic
possibility, and we once again propose that we continue
to consider how to make our decisions truly functional.

An important subject which was raised at the
Millennium Summit, at the Security Council summit
and in our resolution 1327 (2000) was the subject of
cooperation between the United Nations and the
regional organizations. A great many of the
participants in today's discussions have spoken to this,
and, in my View, that is one of the most promising
areas for the development of peacekeeping as a whole
on the basis of the Charter of the United Nations.

I should like to recall, incidentally, that both the
Millennium Summit and the Security Council summit
meeting emphasized that cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations must be
developed on the basis of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations.

I think that everyone understands what that
means: force can only be used on the basis of the
Charter, either in terms of the right to self defence or
with the sanction of the Security Council. Mention was
made of double standards and reference was made to
the examples of Kosovo and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Double standards, of course, exist in the
work of the Security Council, but the specific example
cited by my colleague from Singapore is, it seems to
me, not quite correct.

Regarding the Kosovo Force (KFOR), that is not
a United Nations operation. It is an operation of a
coalition of countries that represents an ad hoc regional
arrangement. In answer to the appeal of those countries
and with the agreement of the parties to the conflict,
the Security Council gave a mandate for the
implementation of that operation. The operation is
being carried out through the means supplied by its
participants, including financing.

As for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
are talking about the expansion of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. That is a somewhat different
situation. I am not now going to go into the reasons
why the expansion of this operation is proceeding
rather slowly. I would only like to express the hope that
in the light of the most recent events, possibly this
process can be speeded up. But if we take the
United Nations peacekeeping operations as a whole,
then I think that the majority of them are now being
carried out in Africa. That in itself reflects the
implementation and practice of those decisions that
were taken by the heads of State at the Security
Council summit.

Not only the African operations are important.
One of the biggest operations is in East Timor,
Although I recognize the existence of double standards,
in the specific example that was being spoken of here I
think the situation is somewhat different. Of course,
double standards in fact continue to exist, and they
persist primarily in the positions of certain members of
the Council when we are not able to reach agreement
because certain national approaches do not coincide
with the positions of the Security Council. The most
obvious example is Iraq. We have a policy drawn up by
the Security Council and expressed in our resolutions,
and, yes, it is now encountering difficulties. Moreover,
it is in fact at a dead-end, but that dead end was created
as a result of unilateral actions of force that were
undertaken against Iraq and that have no legal grounds.

These are individual separate subjects, and I am
sure that in the very near future the Security Council
will have to take up that problem of Iraq too, in a
comprehensive and transparent way, so that we can
all - not just the members of the Security Council, but
the other United Nations Member States - express our
views on how we can manage to overcome this most
serious problem, because it is not going anywhere.
Today mention was also made of the fact that in
order to overcome double standards, the Security
Council must draw up criteria that will enable it to take
decisions as to when there is a need to intervene in one
crisis or another. Here I am a sceptic, and I agree with
Ambassador Greenstock that to provide criteria that
would make it possible in some magical way to resolve
any problem whatever simply automatically is
impossible. This also applies to the well known
proposals to the effect that a single set of criteria for
humanitarian intervention should also be drawn up.

Regarding humanitarian intervention, there is no
need to invent anything. There is the United Nations
Charter, and everything that is not based on the United
Nations Charter is a violation of international law.

I wish to focus on the question of interaction of
the Security Council with other organizations of the
United Nations system. That subject was also brought
up here today. I fully share what was said to that effect
by the Permanent Representative of China. I do not
think the Security Council is acting correctly when it
begins increasingly to take under discussion and
include on its agenda issues that are being considered
by the General Assembly or the Economic and Social
Council (ECOSOC) and other bodies and organizations
of the United Nations and its system.

Of course, interaction is necessary, but that
interaction must be implemented through working
methods and pragmatically, and not through the
organization of public debates in this Chamber on
subjects directly taken from the agenda of the General
Assembly, ECOSOC and other bodies.

I understand that it is easier to reach an
agreement among 15 members than among 189
members. But such are the drawbacks of democracy,
and all the more so since everything is written in the
Charter and the rules of procedure as to who does what.

In conclusion, I wish to note that the Security
Council summit also devoted attention to our working
methods and many of those decisions that were adopted
by the heads of State are being implemented. We are
substantively improving the relations between the
Security Council and the troop-contributing countries.
We are seeking practical ways to approach peace-
building, that would take into account the mutual
competencies of the Security Council, ECOSOC, the
General Assembly, the specialized agencies and the
United Nations programmes and funds and would not
allow for duplication or interference in each another's
competencies. In these areas, as in other areas set out
by the heads of State, there is a need to continue work.

In conclusion, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, once again, and I would like to thank the
delegation of Ukraine for having undertaken the
initiative to hold today's follow-up review meeting. I
think that these exchanges of views are useful and, in
our view, they reaffirm the most important thing, which
is that the Security Council must focus its efforts on its
central task: resolving practical problems of the
maintenance of international peace and security.

