Mr. Skinner-Klee (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to thank the
delegation of Indonesia for having organized this open
debate, which allows the countries that are not
members of the Council to express our points of view
on this very important topic. I would also like to thank
that same delegation for the very clear reference
document that was distributed to all of the delegations.
It is also an honour and a privilege to see our friend,
Hassan Wirajuda, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
presiding over this meeting.

We are aware of the fact that the more complex
the challenges of our globalized world, the more
crucial it is to have the partnership and pooling of
efforts between our respective organizations in order to
achieve a security that is authentically collective,
effective and equitable for all. The maintenance of
international peace is the most powerful and practical
proof of our commitment to collective security. The
association in this area between the United Nations and
regional organizations has become crucial for the
success of our common efforts.

The partnership between the United Nations and
the regional organizations is today stronger than it was
during the early 1990s. Many of the very regional and
subregional organizations are much more robust, and,
therefore, interaction with them is more intensive,
substantial and significant. In recent years, political
and operational cooperation has included, to mention a
few examples: cooperation with the hybrid
peacekeeping operation with the African Union in
Darfur, with the European Union in support of the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad, continued partnerships with
Economic Community of West African States, and
cooperation with NATO in Afghanistan and Kosovo
and with the Organization of American States in Haiti.

Those are a few examples of the range of policies
and operational activities that have been carried out in
recent years. Therefore, we think that the United
Nations today already has a better idea of the scope,
magnitude, advantages and disadvantages of this
cooperation. Thus, the knowledge of given situations is
improving, thanks to the political contributions of
regional actors. Their military and peacekeeping
capabilities have made it possible to respond more
rapidly, when a crisis breaks out, as well as during
decisive moments. Their resources are crucial for
peacebuilding in the post-conflict stage.

Nonetheless, despite these definitely positive
events, for this relationship to be more substantive and
effective, we still have to resolve many outstanding
problems. As we have said in previous debates,
although Chapter VIII of the Charter refers to regional
arrangements and bodies and establishes its functional
relationship with the Security Council, there is nothing
said about the constitutional relationship of such
arrangements with the Security Council. We think it
crucial that there be greater clarity on a series of
questions, which would facilitate the creation of a
global and regional mechanism for peace and security,
agreed to by the Security Council as well as by
regional organizations, as recommended by the former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan in his report of July
2006.

In the Western Hemisphere, an example of
successful cooperation has been the case of Haiti,
where the Organization of American States has
established a valuable strategic partnership with the
United Nations. This has facilitated the implementation
of the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), whose main military
and civilian component is Latin American, thanks to
the leadership and experience acquired in the
preparation of Haiti's elections.

The heads of State and Government of the
member States of the Central American Integration
System (SICA) have pointed out the importance for the
whole region of the democratic process in Haiti. They
have since urged MINUSTAH, in its continuing
presence, to consolidate that process and offered their
assistance to it.

It is important for regional and subregional
authorities to develop their own mechanisms. In the
subregional sphere, the member countries of SICA and
Mexico are working on a Mexican and Central
American security strategy, which, from a
comprehensive perspective, seeks to guide the
coordinated security actions adopted by the countries
of the region into their respective legal frameworks.
The specific objectives of this strategy are:
harmonization of the different efforts in the region in
the area of security so as to achieve better results;
facilitating coordination, the exchange of information
and experience between the various operational
agencies and authorities in the region so as to more
effectively combat regional crime; and identifying and
managing the financial needs, in addition to the
resource and training needs, required by security
institutions. In short, combating organized crime and
drug trafficking, strengthening information exchange
mechanisms and combating the illegal arms trade and
terrorism are priority areas in the strategy.

With regard to the final point - relating to
peacekeeping - in paragraph 14 of the concept paper
for this debate (S/2007/640, annex), we believe, first of
all, that a single hybrid model cannot always be
applicable to all conflicts and regions. Past experience
has shown us that conflicts must be assessed and
managed on a case-by-case basis. Therefore, we
believe that this issue should also be discussed in depth
within the framework of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations.

Today, more than ever before, regional
organizations must play a crucial role not only in
conflict prevention and resolution, but also in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The geographic
proximity of their members and the close historical and
cultural ties among them give regional organizations
comparative advantages in better understanding the
root causes of regional conflicts, and thus in finding
peaceful solutions to those problems.

As for how we can encourage broader
participation by regional organizations in United
Nations peacekeeping efforts, we propose that, when
they are on a special Security Council mission, Council
members try to meet with representatives of regional
organizations. Furthermore, provision should be made
for representatives of regional organizations to inform
the Security Council about their activities.

The Peacebuilding Commission now plays a key
role in the United Nations system in defining
peacebuilding strategies for countries emerging from
conflict and in improving coordination. Close
collaboration with regional organizations and the
participation of civil society in peacebuilding will be
important contributions to the Commission's success.

In conclusion, I should like to express our full
support for all efforts to enhance the capacity of
regional and other organizations. If the United Nations
and its Member States really want to develop an
effective partnership, they should promote the
capacities of such organizations by providing them
with technical, financial and human assistance.

