At the outset, allow me to thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her comprehensive briefing on the situation in the Sudan. South Africa continues to support the full implementation of resolution 1593 (2005), which referred the situation in Darfur to the Prosecutor of the ICC to investigate war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. South Africa is encouraged by the progress relating to ongoing discussions regarding justice for the victims of the Darfur conflict. Public announcements indicating a commitment to bringing perpetrators to justice, including public statements by Sudanese officials indicating a commitment to cooperate with the ICC, are welcomed. We congratulate the ICC and thank all the stakeholders for their significant contributions that resulted in the voluntary surrender of Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman to the ICC yesterday. We welcome that development. South Africa ardently supports the principle of complementarity and encourages States to develop their legal systems to ensure accountability for the most serious crimes. South Africa is therefore particularly pleased with reports that the Sudanese authorities have raised the possibility of proceedings in the Sudan against the ICC suspects, including by means of an ICC trial or by means of a hybrid court in Khartoum, which would allow the process of ensuring accountability for perpetrators and ensuring justice to take place closer to the victims of the crimes. South Africa welcomes the continued peace negotiations in Juba, but expresses concern over the security situation. South Africa is concerned about the civilian casualties reported to have occurred in Darfur. It is particularly disturbed by the incidents of sexual and gender-based violence against women and children as reported by the United Nations Panel of Experts on the Sudan, and condemns such actions in the strongest terms. Humanitarian aid workers provide assistance to vulnerable people during conflict and South Africa deplores all attacks against them as well as the looting of humanitarian supplies from local non-governmental organizations. In conclusion, South Africa wishes to echo the concerns of the Prosecutor in relation to the protection of civilians and the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic on humanitarian assistance, and stresses that sufficient weight should be given thereto. We urge all stakeholders in the Sudan to engage in constructive dialogue in order to restore peace and stability in the country. In this regard, the support of all stakeholders in the international community also remains vital for regional stability.
