Mr. Mohammed (Ethiopia): Allow me at the outset
to congratulate you most warmly, Sir, on your assumption
of the high office of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April. I wish to thank you in particular for
organizing the present debate of the Council on the
situation in Somalia, which we hope will be followed by
concrete actions in support of the present efforts for peace
in that country.

May I also thank your predecessor, His Excellency the
Permanent Representative of Poland, for his leadership of
the Council last month. I would also like to pay a special
tribute to His Excellency Mr. Arman, the Secretary-General
of the United Nations for the very important and
constructive report submitted to the Security Council on the
situation in Somalia, contained in document S/ 1997/ 135.

The Security Council held its last open meeting on
Somalia a little more than a year ago to express concern
over the deterioration of the situation in that country at that
particular time. Today, although the problem in Somalia is
still far from being resolved, this meeting is being held at
a time when the prospect of peace seems to be closer and
quite promising.

Since the adoption of the Nairobi declaration of
1994, and after more than three years of complete
impasse and uncertainty, we have for the first time
witnessed in the last six months a promising sign of
progress and movement towards peace and national
reconciliation in Somalia. This encouraging movement
began with the very commendable initiative taken by His
Excellency President Daniel arap Moi of Kenya, which,
in October of last year brought leaders of the three major
Somali groups together in Nairobi.

At the same time, Ethiopia, as mandated by the
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), began consultations with all Somali
factions with a view to setting in motion direct
consultations and negotiations among all Somali political
movements and factions. As a result of this initiative by
Ethiopia, leaders of 26 Somali political organizations were
able to meet for a high-level consultation in Sodere,
Ethiopia, and after eight weeks of intensive, frank and
responsible negotiations, agreed on a common course of
action to resolve the crisis in their country and to put an
end to the misery and suffering of their people. The
Sodere High-level Consultative Meeting was conducted
with commendable seriousness and with a spirit of give
and take on the part of the Somali leaders, who put the
interests of their nation and the people of Somalia first
and high above sectarian and individual interests.

To ensure the success of the Sodere consultations,
Ethiopia and the IGAD countries as a whole made all the
necessary efforts so that all Somali factions would be
represented in the process. To this end, from August to
October 1996, as a prelude to the commencement of the
High-level Consultative Meeting, a series of consultations
were held with the representatives of virtually all Somali
factions. Invitations were extended to all Somali political
movements and factions, without exception, to participate
in the high-level consultations. In spite of all these efforts,
it is indeed regrettable that one of the Somali factions did
not participate in the high-level consultations held in
Sodere.

Since the very inception of the crisis in Somalia, we
have been persistently stressing the fact that the primary
responsibility for the solution of the problem in that
country lies in the hands of the Somalis themselves, and
that the role of the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
IGAD, the United Nations and others is to assist and
facilitate the efforts of the Somalis. This has also been
one of the main guidelines adopted by the member States

 

of IGAD for their efforts for peace in Somalia. The Sodere
high-level consultations were initiated and conducted on the
basis of this principle.

Acknowledging their responsibility for the future of
their country, the Somali leaders undertook, in their
Declaration of national pledges and commitments adopted
at Sodere on 3 January 1997, to place national objectives
over and above clan interest and personal ambition and to
work with determination and resoluteness for the revival
and renaissance of their nation. To implement these and the
other important pledges and commitments, in particular to
meet the greater challenge of forming a Central Authority,
the Somali political movements established at their Sodere
meeting a National Salvation Council, with a mandate to
embark on a preparatory course of action that would lead
to the establishment of a Transitional Central Authority or
Provisional Central Government of Somalia. In pursuing
this mandate, the Somali political movements also agreed
to convene a National Reconciliation Conference at
Bossaso, Somalia, to be followed by a Concluding National
Conference to announce the formation of a Transitional
Central Authority. We are pleased and encouraged that
preparations are currently under way in this direction and
that the Somali political movements have agreed, at their
recent meeting held in Mogadishu, to convene the National
Reconciliation Conference on 10 June 1997, in Bossaso,
Somalia.

We are convinced that for peace and national
reconciliation to succeed and take firm root in Somalia, it
is essential that all concerned parties are brought together
and join hands as genuine partners in the ongoing peace
process. In this context, the need for the establishment of
a broad-based and all-inclusive government in Somalia is
one of the guiding principles underlined by the IGAD
Heads of State and Government. The Sodere initiative
clearly recognizes the need for inclusiveness and sets
procedures for the eventual inclusion of all those who might
not, for a variety of reasons, have joined the process
initially. It is therefore our hope that those who have not
joined the Sodere process will do so and come on board.
As rightly stated by the Secretary-General in the report
before the Council,

"The onus is now on those who chose not to join in
the negotiation of the Nairobi and Sodere declarations.
It will be their responsibility if the people of Somalia
continue to suffer." (5/1997/135, para. 51)

In the past few months, in particular as the result of
the recent Sodere agreement, we have witnessed promising
prospects for peace and national reconciliation in Somalia.
While it should be stressed once again that the solution to
the problem in Somalia rests in the hands of its own
people and their leaders, the role of the international
community in supporting and facilitating these efforts
cannot be overemphasized. The Organization of African
Unity and the Intergovernmental Authority for
Development have been closely following the crisis in
Somalia since its outbreak six years ago. The various
initiatives, including the recent Nairobi and Sodere
initiatives, represent a genuine effort by the regional
countries aimed at assisting the Somalis in their
endeavours to bring peace and national reconciliation to
their country.

We pay tribute to the important efforts that other
regional and international organizations and individual
Governments, in particular the League of Arab States and
the Government of Italy, are making to complement and
to assist the ongoing regional peace process.

The role of the United Nations and its Security
Council in ensuring the success of the regional effort for
peace is particularly important at this critical stage in the
evolution of the problem in Somalia. In this regard, we
wish to recall that Ethiopia, with a mandate on Somalia
from both the OAU and IGAD, and Kenya, as Chairman
of IGAD, have submitted a joint proposal to the United
Nations, upon the request of the Secretary-General,
indicating the areas in which the support of the United
Nations would be vital for the success of the regional
effort for peace. We are grateful to the Secretary-General
for the serious consideration he has given to this joint
proposal and for the important observations and
suggestions contained in his recent report, which, in our
opinion, should be given serious attention by the Security
Council.

In the light of these observations and suggestions,
and taking into account the developments in Somalia, we
believe the United Nations, and in particular the Security
Council, should take the following measures. First, as
indicated in paragraph 46 of the report of the Secretary-
General, the Security Council should call upon all the
Somali parties to cooperate with the efforts of OAU and
IGAD, and make it clear that the Council will not tolerate
any faction's non-cooperation with those who have shown
concrete commitment to peace and national reconciliation.
Secondly, the United Nations should expand its relief and
rehabilitation assistance to Somalia with the clear aim of
maintaining and advancing the present momentum for
peace and of strengthening the constituencies for peace in

 

the country. Thirdly, to ensure the success of the National
Reconciliation Conference, scheduled to take place in
Bossaso, Somalia, on 10 June 1997, and to support the
regional peace process, the Security Council should request
the Secretary-General to establish a trust fund and call upon
Member States to contribute to such fund, as is suggested
in the Secretary-General's report. Fourthly, the United
Nations and its Security Council should emphasize the
importance of closer coordination and consultation among
those working for peace in Somalia. The new spirit of
cooperation and commitment to consultation on the part of
the United Nations and others should be welcomed and
further enhanced. To this end, proliferation of initiatives
needs to be resisted by the United Nations. The role of the
Security Council is very crucial in this regard.

We believe the positive developments that have taken
place in the last six months indicate that the peace process
in Somalia has reached a critical stage. The success of the
present efforts for peace depends, first and foremost, on
the resolve of the Somali leaders to continue on the path
of peace and national reconciliation they have chosen, and
to live up to the commitments made under the agreements
they accepted. In this regard, we are encouraged, in
particular, by the seriousness and the sense of
responsibility exhibited by those who participated in the
Sodere process and in the subsequent follow-up and
further implementation of their commitments under the
agreement.
At the same time, it should be stressed clearly that
while chances for peace in Somalia seem to be quite
promising, one should not underestimate the challenges to
success. We strongly believe that the international
community in general, and the United Nations in
particular, should make a concerted effort to preserve and
advance the current momentum for peace and to meet the
challenges to it.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that, for their
part, countries of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development are determined to participate in the efforts
for peace in Somalia, and that Ethiopia too will continue
to do its utmost in discharging the heavy responsibility,
entrusted to it by the regional countries and by the States
members of the Organization of African Unity, to assist
and to facilitate the search for a lasting solution to the
problem in Somalia.

