Mr. Laro (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation thanks
you, Sir, for organizing this open debate on the review of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture. We also
thank the briefers, Ambassador Kamau, Ambassador
Skoog and Ambassador Rosenthal, for sharing their
perspectives on this important topic.

Nigeria welcomes the report (see S/2015/490) of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture. We commend the Advisory
Group for the effort put into preparing the report. The
report indicates that, while progress has been made
with regard to the peacebuilding efforts of the United
Nations, considerable challenges still remain. Our

statement will focus on the following recommendations
in the report. First, the need for a strong partnership
between the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and
regional and subregional organizations; secondly, the
need for improved leadership and inclusive national
ownership of peacebuilding processes; and, thirdly,
ensuring predictable financing for peacebuilding.

Nigeria supports the recommendation made by the
Advisory Group on the need for a strong partnership
between the PBC and regional and subregional
organizations. Those organizations are usually the
ones closest to the areas of conflict, and are often
the first to respond when conflicts break out. It is for
that reason that we endorse the recommendation that
the PBC should hold consultations with regional and
subregional organizations with a view to promoting
sustainable peace. We believe that peacebuilding efforts
will be more effective when regional and subregional
organizations, as well as countries contiguous to
fragile States, are given the necessary encouragement
to actively participate in peacebuilding processes.

National leadership, ownership and inclusivity
are central to post-conflict peacebuilding. They must
therefore be strengthened through inclusive politics.
Where peacebuilding efforts are rooted in inclusive
consultative processes, trust and legitimacy in the
State and its institutions are likely to be enhanced.
Efforts to sustain peace must start with the crafting
of genuine, open and inclusive peace accords that
reflect the broad aspirations of all stakeholders in
post-conflict societies. On predictable financing for
peacebuilding, we encourage affected States to explore
domestic sources of financing for peacebuilding. In
this connection, we urge Member States to provide
them with technical support aimed at improving State
capacity in the management of natural resources,
public funds, tax collection and curbing illicit financial
flows. We welcome the recommendation that the
Peacebuilding Fund should have predictable financing
through a symbolic 1 per cent of peacekeeping
operations expenditure or $100 million, whichever is
higher, annually, as core funding for the next 15 years.

Nigeria recognizes the difficulty of adopting an
integrated approach to peacebuilding among United
Nations entities empowered by different mandates. We
therefore see merit in having one set of objectives and
a single vision to guide all actors on the ground. This
calls for closer coordination and integration between
the Secretary- General's Special Representatives,
Envoys and Advisers on the one hand and United
Nations country teams on the other. We commend the
Advisory Group of Experts for highlighting this issue
and promoting an enhanced, integrated approach.

Finally, Nigeria reaffirms its support for the 2015
review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
and remains fully committed to the objectives of the
process. We encourage Member States and other
stakeholders to continue to render their support to the
review process as we collectively seek to improve the
peacebuilding architecture of the United Nations.

