Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, my
delegation would like to congratulate the Republic
of Cote d'Ivoire on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of December and to
assure you, Mr. President, of our support. I would also
like to express our great appreciation to the delegation
of China for its able, constructive and productive
presidency in November.

My delegation thanks the United Kingdom for
calling for this meeting to re-confirm the readiness
of the members of the Security to fight terrorism and
support the people and the Government of Iraq. We
believe such efforts will move Iraqis along the path
to peace, stability and unity. I also welcome Special
Adviser Karim Asad Ahmad Khan, appointed on
13 July as Head of the Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), established
by resolution 2379 (2017) to collect, preserve and
ensure the storage of evidence from that terrorist group
in Iraq. I thank him for his most informative briefing.

We believe that resolution 2379 (2017), adopted
unanimously in September last year, was a testament
to the full support of the international community to
combat the common evil of terrorism, which threatens
the entire world. The resolution, which requested the
establishment of an investigative team to bring ISIL
(Da'esh) to justice, was an important milestone in
ensuring the prosecution of that terrorist group for all
the atrocities it committed in and outside Iraq. We are
convinced that those criminals are equally guilty for
also destroying cultural heritage sites. Our delegation
has high hopes for Special Adviser Khan and his team.

We welcome the intensive preparatory work
conducted by the Investigative Team in such a short
period, and support its vision for investigating and
gathering of evidence of crimes committed by ISIL.
That should include cooperation with all organizations,
agencies of the United Nations, the private sector,
academia, media and non-governmental agencies.
It is important that the documentary evidence be
preserved in accordance with international standards.
We will also need outreach research activities from
relevant non-governmental and civic organizations,
including groups of victims, as our partners, to ensure
the Investigative Team's credibility and effective
operations.

We note the importance of ensuring adequate
protection and support for the victims of ISIL in order
for their voices to be heard and become a decisive factor
for investigative activities and future courts. In that
regard, we welcome the intention to create a specialized
group for the protection of victims and witnesses, which
will be responsible for providing advice and assistance
to the investigative team to ensure maximum protection
for witnesses and victims.

We note with satisfaction the holding, on 17 October
2018 in the framework of the Committee pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999), of a briefing by Mr. Khan
on the implementation of resolution 2379 (2017).
According to its mandate, the Investigative Team can
interact with all structures of the United Nations and
subsidiary bodies connected with suppressing ISIL
activities and investigating its crimes. In that regard,
we welcome the support expressed by the members of
the 1267 Committee for the provision of comprehensive
assistance to the work of the Investigative Team under
the leadership of the Special Adviser. Kazakhstan
firmly believes that solving the complex problem of
international terrorism would entail greater coordination
and a holistic, systemic and innovative approach by
the entire international community, represented by
Member States and international organizations.

Kazakhstan, which deeply believes in human
dignity, justice and freedom, joins other Member States
in upholding and fully implementing resolution 2379
(2017), in accordance with the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. We are sure that the elimination
of socioeconomic factors that give rise to terrorism will
prevent the return of chaos, suffering and irreparable
loss for the civilian population and give them new
hope for a better future. In conclusion, I would like
to reassure the Council of Kazakhstan's commitment
to combat international terrorism, including by
implementing relevant United Nations resolutions,
particularly resolution 2379 (2017).

