The Secretary-General: I commend the
Government of Turkey for having convened this
Security Council summit and for its focus on
preventing and ending conflict and building peace.

Since the end of the cold war, Violent conflict has
declined. Success in peacemaking and peacekeeping
has played an important role in this development. Yet,
we still live in a troubled world, with new threats and
flashpoints. Often, when Violence breaks out, the world
turns to the United Nations. We are at the centre of
crisis management in hotspots throughout the world.

We - this Council and we in the Secretariat -
have come a long way in responding to these diverse
challenges. We have reinvigorated preventive
diplomacy and upgraded the United Nations mediation
capacity. We are more nimble in responding to brewing
trouble from Guinea to Kyrgyzstan. We continue to
make our peacekeeping operations more efficient and
effective, including through the New Horizon process.
That initiative - which includes the global field
support strategy - is designed to help us better adjust
to complex situations involving difficult terrain and
volatile political contexts, and to better address the
resource and technological implications of this work.

We have more instances in which peacemaking
and peacekeeping are being carried out simultaneously,
as in Cyprus. We continue to enhance our pool of
envoys, deepen our cooperation with regional partners,
help Member States build up their capacities, and
support our field missions and regional offices. We
have deployed 122,000 civilian and uniformed
personnel in 15 peacekeeping missions, and a further
4,000 personnel in 14 political field missions. They
continue to deliver on wide-ranging mandates.

We have strengthened peacebuilding in order to
ensure the sustainability of such efforts. Allocations
from the Peacebuilding Fund are increasingly targeted
and timely. We are working to protect civilians in
armed conflict, both as part of peacekeeping mandates
and in our humanitarian assistance. Last month's
shocking mass rapes in Eastern Congo remind us of the
difficulty of this challenge. I have asked my Special
Representative on this matter, Ms. Margot Wallstrom,
to help us develop more Vigorous mechanisms in
tackling these atrocities. We have also taken steps to
improve the security of the many thousands of our own
10-54839
staff who risk their lives every day to improve the lives
of others.

These incremental yet significant changes are
making our engagement in troubled areas more and
more effective. But we must do more. Let me focus on
four critical areas.

First, we should move beyond the idea of a clear-
cut sequence of peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. These tools should be deployed in
integrated fashion, not kept in separate silos. Conflict
seldom follows a tidy path. We must continue to evolve
towards a faster and more flexible architecture of
response that allows us to customize our assistance to
the real and immediate needs on the ground. With
respect to peacekeeping, we will continue to work in
close partnership with the Security Council and others
to advance the New Horizon initiative.

Secondly, there is no quick fix for broken
societies. It demands patience, resources and a long-
term commitment. The United Nations core business
must be helping people to solve their conflicts, not just
serving as a band-aid to keep troubles in check.

Thirdly, we need to further develop the
peacebuilding architecture, empower the Peacebuilding
Commission and Fund, and promote greater coherence
among the many pieces of the United Nations system
that make up the peacebuilding picture.

Fourthly, we must expand our work on
prevention, in particular to improve our ability to read
the warning signs and trigger early action.

The world needs the Security Council to uphold
its responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security fully, fairly and without delay. We must do
more, and be equipped to do more, to fulfil this
cardinal mission.

In closing, allow me to note that just yesterday
we gathered to recommit ourselves to the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). Let us recognize the
close links between that summit and this, and between
the MDGs and the work of this Council. Building
peace and advancing development are mutually
reinforcing. On all these fronts, the Security Council's
leadership will be crucial. Its unity is essential. I
pledge my full support as we move forward together.

