Ms. Mindaoudou (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the members ofthe Security Council for giving
me the opportunity to brief the Council, on behalf of
the Secretary-General, on the most recent report on the
situation in Cote d'Ivoire.

Today is a historic one in relations between Cote
d'Ivoire and the Security Council. It is historic because
it marks the removal ofCote d'Ivoire from the Council's
agenda. It is also historic because Cote d'Ivoire was
elected as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council for a two-year mandate, which will begin in
January 2018.

Let me warmly congratulate His Excellency
Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
on Cote d'Ivoire's election to the Security Council.

Since I last briefed the Security Council in
February (see S/PV.7880), a new Government has
assumed power following legislative elections held
in December 2016. The Senate is being established.
What is remarkable is that for the first time in C6te
d'Ivoire's political history, the three main political
parties * Rassemblement des republicains (RDR),
the Parti democratique de Cote d'Ivoire and the Front
populaire ivoirien (FPI) - all took part in and fielded
candidates in the elections. It should be recalled that
the legislative elections of 2000 were boycotted by the
RDR and those of 2011 by the FPI. The latter boycott
led to an increased presence of the RDR in the National
Assembly, which gave an absolute majority to the ruling
coalition of Rassemblement des houphouetistes pour
la democratie et la paix. Although the FPI opposition
party won only four seats of deputies in the elections
in 2016, its leaders were clear on their intentions to
fully play their roles as deputies. Such commitment is
positive for democracy in Cote d'Ivoire.

In February, I told the Council that the security
situation was generally stable despite the recurring
movements of soldiers in January and February. Since
my last briefing to the Council, similar movements took
place on 12 and 14 May, when a faction of the Bouake-
based armed forces, mostly former members of the
Forces nouvelles de C6te d'Ivoire, claimed payment
for its participation in the resolution of the 2010-2011
post-election crisis. Those disruptions have spread to
several parts of the country, causing the death of one
person and injuring more than 20. On 22 and 23 May,
demobilized ex-combatants of the Forces nouvelles,
previously considered to be allies to the army, erected
barricades and demonstrated in Bouake and other parts
of the country, calling for financial compensation
from the Government. Three ex-combatants were
killed during the confrontation with the police. Those
two movements totally paralysed economic activities,
particularly in Bouake. During the incidents of 12 and
14 May, a large cache of weapons was discovered,
thereby reviving, both internally and externally, a
certain psychosis of armed violence.

In February, I felt that the soldiers' movements did
not threaten the institutions or stability of the country
and did not wish to resort to violence because the claims
put forth by the soldiers were merely financial. That
assessment remains unchanged. However, things have
changed somewhat since the incidents that occurred
in May. This time, the soldiers attacked civilians
and certain political symbols. The recurrence of
military movements confirms the residual challenges
that remain to be met before we can consolidate the
achievements of peacekeeping in Cote d'Ivoire. Those
challenges were identified and documented in the
special report of the Secretary-General of March 2016
(S/20l6/297), which recommended the closure of the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI),
and in the Secretary-General's February report on
Cote d'Ivoire (S/2017/89).

It is urgent that the Government, with the support
of its partners, improve discipline within the armed
forces and implement the reforms provided for by the
2016-2020 Military Planning Law. It is also imperative
to ensure the full integration of ex-combatants into
society. These incidents highlight, on the one hand,
the threats posed by impunity within the armed forces
and, on the other, the imperative of ending impunity
for human rights violations committed during the post-
election crisis by the two parties in conflict, as well as
the need for impartial justice.

However, the situation I have just described
should not make us lose sight of the achievements of
more than 14 years of peacekeeping made possible by
bilateral, regional and international support. In April
2004, when UNOCI was deployed, C6te d'Ivoire was a
country divided in two along a security zone policed by
forces of the United Nations and the French. Violations
of the ceasefire and serious Violations of human rights
were recurrent. Since the end of the post-electoral
crisis in Cote d'Ivoire in 2011, significant progress has
been made in all sectors. The political environment
has improved, although much remains to be done,
particularly in the areas of national reconciliation
and social cohesion. The situations of human rights
and transitional justice have progressed, albeit in an
uneven and hesitant manner. Economic growth is
continuing and steps need to be taken to ensure the
equitable sharing of resources so that all sectors of
society benefit from the dividends of peace. The
security situation has greatly improved, but efforts
have still to be made to establish responsible security
forces that enjoy the trust of the population.

In just four weeks, on 30 June, UNOCI's
closure will be official. This process has not been
without challenges when we consider the two-month
liquidation period granted by the Council. I am pleased
to inform the Council that, in spite of everything, we
are keeping to the 30 June deadline of closing the
mission. All uniformed personnel left Cote d'Ivoire in
February. The gradual reduction of the civilian staff
was completed in April, and today only a reduced
team of eight civilians remain in the Mission's core
and liquidation teams. ONUCI's FM. radio station was
transferred to the Fe'lix Houphouet Boigny Foundation
for Peace Research in Yamoussoukro. It is broadcasting
today as the Radio of Peace. Of the 63 UNOCI sites,
61 have been returned to their respective owners. Most
of the mission's equipment has been removed from our
books and their final disposal or destruction is under
way. The liquidation process was conducted in strict
compliance with the environmental standards set by
the Secretariat.

Some members of the Council have asked me
what lessons I have learned from experience in Cote
d'Ivoire that might be useful in other contexts in which
peacekeeping missions are deployed. In that regard, I
should like to highlight three essential lessons that I
consider important to share.

The first lesson I would like to address is the
most important. A peacekeeping operation can
achieve its objectives and withdraw from a country
only in a context in which the Government is a
determined partner deeply committed to assuming its
responsibilities to the people it serves. No peacekeeping
mission can substitute for national political will and
national efforts to resolve the problems that led to the
conflict. There is no doubt that much remains to be
done in order to meet all the remaining challenges, but
Cote d'Ivoire has demonstrated its resolve to assume
the responsibilities necessary for the country to return
to its former position as the torchbearer of West Africa
for peace, stability and economic prosperity.

The second lesson relates to the leadership of the
Council. I would point to the risks that the Council was
able to take that led to the success of UNOCI, starting
with the strong political mandate bestowed upon my
predecessors and myself and supported by the trust
of the Security Council. In addition, the Council has
been very supportive of inter-mission cooperation,
allowing us to maximize the strategic and operational
interdependence of neighbouring peacekeeping
missions. The rapid reaction force established within
UNOCI, with the potential to intervene in Liberia in
support of mandate of the United Nations Mission
in Liberia, is certainly one of the most progressive
inter-agency cooperation initiatives in the history
of United Nations peacekeeping. Where necessary,
the Council has also been proactive in adjusting the
successive mandates of UNOCI, based on regular
assessments conducted by the Secretariat, in order to
prevent the mission from bogging down.

The third and final lesson that I draw from UNOCI's
experience is that a United Nations peacekeeping
mission is much more likely to succeed in a context
where there is a coalition of international partners
working to achieve the same goal of peace, essentially
in a policy framework with enhanced and concerted
accountability measures. The foundation of UNOCI's
success is based on many pillars: African Union
mediation, the Economic Community of West African
States deployment of peacekeeping troops that later
become peacekeepers, advocacy by women members
of the civil society organizations of the Mano River
Union, the parallel deployment of French forces and
the commitment of bilateral and multilateral partners.

Allow me to express my appreciation for the
important role played by the Council in the return
of peace to Cote d'Ivoire, including through the
deployment of a peacekeeping mission. I salute the
memory of all those who made the ultimate sacrifice
in the service of UNOCI and express my gratitude
to all troop- and police-contributing countries. My
appreciation also goes to all UNOCI civilian and
uniformed personnel who have served our mission
with professionalism, dedication and a deep sense of
duty to fulfil our mandate. It has been a great honour
for me to have collaborated with those women and
men. I also thank the United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes whose role in Cote d'Ivoire has been
and will continue to be essential.

I am also grateful to the regional, bilateral and
multilateral partners whose contribution has enabled
the United Nations to successfully close the chapter
on peacekeeping in Cote d'Ivoire. Their unflagging
support is key to consolidating lasting peacekeeping
gains.

Last but not least, I would like to express my
deep gratitude and my great admiration for the
people and the Government of Cote d'Ivoire at all
levels - local, regional and national. In reality, they
were the determining factor for resolving the crisis
and the conflict in their country. I am convinced that
the daily, personal and collective investment of each
Ivorian will make it possible to sustainably consolidate
our hard-won peace.

