Ms. Achouri (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this meeting, and to thank Mr. Bernard Miyet
for his introduction of the Secretary-General's report
before us. In this regard, allow me to express my
delegation's satisfaction with the clarity of the
proposals contained in this report on the suggested
structure and concept of operations for the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE). We
are also grateful to the Secretary-General for his
diligence in planning this Mission, which, we are
confident, will have a very positive effect in
normalizing the situation between the two countries
concerned and will help ensure conditions favourable
to the establishment of lasting peace in the region.

My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
express once again its deep appreciation for the
positive attitude of the two parties, as shown by their
commitment to constructive means of settling their
dispute. By signing the Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities, the two parties have demonstrated they are
resolved to secure by peaceful means a lasting peace,
which will guarantee the peoples of the two countries
the conditions necessary for their well-being. This
quest for peace should be encouraged and promoted by
all parties concerned, in particular by the Security
Council, which has played an active role in the effort to
bring about a peaceful settlement to the dispute.

The relevant proposals presented by the
Secretary-General in this regard, which we fully
endorse, call for diligent action on the part of the
Council in order to speed up the implementation of the
Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities and thus
facilitate the rapid conclusion of a comprehensive and
final agreement between the two parties. The Council
should also authorize, as early as possible, the
expansion of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea and its deployment to the region.

In this respect, we encourage the two parties to
maintain their positive attitude by cooperating fully
with the United Nations Mission and to continue
proximity talks in a sustained manner under United
Nations auspices on the subject of border demarcation
and delimitation. Moreover, we welcome the
coordination mechanism established between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), which will likely enhance the effectiveness of
their respective endeavours in assisting these two
countries to implement the Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities and prepare the way for a lasting settlement
of the dispute.

The deployment of the expanded United Nations
Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea is vitally important in
terms of promoting the comprehensive and lasting
peaceful settlement of the dispute between the two
parties, which we are all most anxious to see.

Thus, we must make available to the Mission all
the means it requires to do its job effectively. In this
regard, my delegation welcomes the fact that the
Secretary-General has provided for a mine action
assistance programme and the establishment of a
demining coordination centre at UNMEE headquarters.
We believe this programme must be implemented as a
priority, given the danger the presence of mines poses
to the civilian population and the obstacles it will pose
to the deployment and proper operation of the Mission.

Finally, I wish to conclude by emphasizing that
the peace process that has been undertaken cannot fully
succeed unless the humanitarian situation in the two
countries is not immediately redressed. Therefore, it is
incumbent on the international community to show
solidarity with the peoples of Ethiopia and Eritrea by
providing the assistance required, particularly financial
assistance, in order to cope with the acute humanitarian
needs described in the Secretary-General's report,
which call for urgent action.

