Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): As this is the
first time I am speaking in the Chamber this month,
let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming
the presidency and our Russian colleagues for the
presidency in the month of September.

It is very good to have the Foreign Minister of
Colombia with us once more. He is very welcome. It
is always good to have him here and we appreciate
the seriousness with which he takes the Council's
consideration of this important mission. My thanks as
well to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for his briefing.

I think we all know that we are meeting almost
three years since the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace was
signed in November 2016, and significant progress has
been made since then. Transitional justice institutions
have gained more stable ground, programmes for the
substitution of illicit crops are under way and thousands
of ex-combatants are being reintegrated into civilian
life. And there have been other advances.

The progress, however significant, though, has
been met with a number of serious challenges. The
recent announcement by former leaders of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) that they were returning to armed
activity was an obstacle. We have to admit that,
but we should not let it overshadow positive steps
forward. We condemn the dissidents' rejection of
the peace accords, but at the same time welcome the
swift response by the Colombian Government, the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun (FARC)
political party and the transitional justice system,
among other stakeholders. It remains clear - and this
is welcome - that the majority of former FARC-EP
combatants remains committed to the peace process.

Of course, we must guard against complacency
and step up efforts to ensure that currently manageable
threats like those do not escalate, worsen and spiral
beyond our control. Therefore, rather than calling
broadly for the implementation of the agreement, which
is customary at these meetings, I would like particularly
to respond to the request made by President Counsellor
Archila, who is in the Chamber today, regarding the
Council's recent trip to Colombia for us to be more
specific in our appeals.

First, we recognize the political and financial
challenges facing the Colombian Government, but we
believe that sufficient funding for rural development
in the 170 municipalities benefiting from development
programmes with a territorial focus is essential to
deliver the accords. Adequate resources should also
be made available to the transitional justice system
and reincorporation process, as these are crucial for
public and ex-combatant trust in the peace process and,
therefore, to ex-combatants' continued participation in
it. Increased State presence in rural areas will assist in
addressing ongoing security issues, not least the killing
of former FARC-EP members, community leaders and
human rights defenders, as has been discussed in the
Council before.

Secondly, I would like to underscore the importance
of the parties' renewed high-level engagement with
vital spaces for dialogue, including the Commission
for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement, the National
Commission on Security Guarantees and the National
Reintegration Council. These mechanisms have been
less active recently, but they serve an important purpose
in maintaining communication and coordination on
the accords.
Looking ahead to emerging developments, on
27 October Colombians will vote in regional and local
elections - a milestone on the road to peace, especially
given the strong regional focus of the peace agreement.
The Secretary-General's report (S/2019/780) highlights
worrying statistics on candidates being threatened
and killed. In that regard, we welcome the signature
of the new National Pact for Political Culture and
Non-Violence during the Electoral Campaign. We
call on all stakeholders to adhere to the Pact, to
refrain from violence and intimidation and to ensure a
peaceful election.

The United Kingdom commends the Colombian
Government for the progress made so far amid
challenging circumstances. We look forward to
continuing to provide support along Colombia's road to
sustainable peace.

