I thank the Special Coordinator, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing, and I thank him and his team for their relentless efforts. We welcome the recent announcement regarding the normalization of relations between Israel and the United Arab Emirates, and we acknowledge the constructive role played by the United States in that regard. The announcement of the suspension of plans to formalize the annexation of parts of the occupied Palestinian territory is clearly a step in the right direction. However, we urge Israel to abandon those plans once and for all. As we have stated before, any annexation, irrespective of its size and denomination, would constitute a grave breach of international law, including the Charter of the United Nations. We will therefore not recognize any changes to the 1967 borders other than those agreed upon by the parties. Annexation would undoubtedly have consequences for security on the ground and in the wider region. But, most important, annexation would seriously undermine the viability of a two- State solution and close the door to future negotiations. The normalization of relations between Israel and the United Arab Emirates not only will benefit both countries but also constitutes an important building block for peace and stability in the wider region. There can be no peace in the Middle East without a permanent solution to the Palestinian question. We hope that the agreement between Israel and the United Arab Emirates will create opportunities for Israelis and Palestinians to re-engage. In that regard, we reiterate our call for intra- Palestinian reconciliation. We remain committed to a negotiated and viable two-State solution built upon the internationally agreed parameters and international law. All parties should come to the negotiation table, without preconditions, and resume meaningful negotiations. Belgium encourages all international and multilateral efforts aimed at a meaningful resumption of talks provided that they are fully in line with international law and the internationally agreed parameters and that they equally take into account the legitimate aspirations of both sides. We fully support the efforts of the Middle East Quartet, of which the European Union is a member. Inthe absence ofa perspective on sucha just and lasting peace, the humanitarian, socioeconomic and security situation on the ground continues to deteriorate. We are deeply concerned about the recent violent incidents in Gaza and the West Bank. We condemn the terror attacks and violence from all sides. International human rights law and international humanitarian law, including the principles of necessity, distinction and proportionality in the use of force, must be fully respected. We call for independent and thorough investigations into alleged violations of international human rights law and international humanitarian law. Perpetrators of such acts must be held accountable. Following the firing of rockets and the launching of incendiary balloons from Gaza into Israel, the Israeli authorities have halted the entry of most goods into Gaza, including fuel, and prevented access to the fishing area along Gaza's coast. We call on both sides to de-escalate tensions and exercise maximum restraint. We commend the efforts of the United Nations and Egypt in that regard. These developments only further add to the hardship of the Palestinian people in Gaza. We call for an end to the closure and a full opening of the crossing points, while addressing Israel's legitimate security concerns. Against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), unimpeded humanitarian access to Gaza is needed more than ever. In that regard, I reiterate Belgium's unwavering support for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. To conclude, I would like to voice Belgium's concern regarding the impact of COVID-19 on the occupied Palestinian territory, in particular on children. We call on all sides to immediately and unconditionally release all Palestinian children from detention and to put a moratorium on new admissions into detention facilities. Second statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the United Nations, Philippe Kridelka Let me first express my appreciation for the efforts of the Indonesian presidency during these difficult times. I want to assure you, Mr. President, of the full support of my delegation to you and your team. Belgium deeply regrets the present situation, which could pose a threat to the proper functioning, authority and integrity of the Security Council. As already stated in the letter sent to you, Mr. President, Belgium does not recognize the legality of the purported notification by the United States. The United States ceased its participation in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on 8 May 2018, and is therefore no longer a JPCOA participant State. Belgium firmly supports the ongoing efforts of the remaining JPCOA participant States to address issues concerning Iran's non-compliance with its JCPOA commitments within the framework of the Dispute Resolution Mechanism. In the same vein, Belgium is of the view that the issue of the upcoming lifting of the conventional arms embargo should not jeopardize the nuclear agreement and its achievements. The JCPOA is crucial in order to effectively ensure the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme. This is a top priority for the region and for international security, as well as for the global non-proliferation architecture. We must abide by the methods and decisions agreed upon by this body and by the international community, not undermine them. We must actively preserve the JCPOA, as well as the non-proliferation regime. Let me express, therefore, the willingness of Belgium to engage constructively and work towards a solution along these lines.
