Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank Under-
Secretary-General Stephen O'Brien for the
comprehensive briefing on his recent visit to Yemen and
other countries in our region, including Somalia and
South Sudan, which are facing enormous humanitarian
challenges. Nor can I forget to mention his visit to
the Somali region of Ethiopia, which is facing a
drought situation.

What we heard from Mr. O'Brien is indeed
disturbing, given the scale and magnitude of the
humanitarian challenge. We take this opportunity to
express appreciation to the Secretary-General, who
undertook his first field visit to Somalia to show
solidarity and make a strong appeal to the international
community for support.

Like others, we will restrict ourselves to the
humanitarian situation in Yemen, which is indeed a
source of grave concern. The people of Yemen are at
risk of falling into famine if action is not taken now.
Therefore, the international community must respond
urgently and decisively to avert a humanitarian tragedy.
In this regard, we support the call made by Mr. O'Brien
for an immediate international response. Ensuring
safe and unhindered humanitarian access is indeed
imperative to deliver much-needed assistance to the
millions of Yemenis affected. We express appreciation
to all humanitarian workers on the ground, who are
operating under extremely difficult circumstances to
reach people in need.

We agree with Mr. O'Brien that addressing the huge
funding gap is absolutely critical to meet the urgent
humanitarian needs in Yemen. We note with concern
that only 6.3 per cent of the required $2.1 billion has
been received so far. We hope that the high-level
pledging event for the humanitarian crisis in Yemen, to
be hosted by the United Nations and the Governments
of Switzerland and Sweden on 25 April in Geneva,
will contribute to mobilizing the necessary support to
address the existing funding gap.

Finally, we agree with all the other members that
the security, economic and humanitarian challenges
in Yemen cannot be addressed without finding a
resolution to the Yemeni crisis. That is why achieving a
comprehensive political settlement should be an urgent
priority. In this regard, we will continue to support the
efforts of the United Nations Special Envoy, Mr. Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed, to resume inclusive peace talks
and achieve a cessation of hostilities according to the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

