Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): My delegation welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2488 (2019), renewing the
sanctions regime relating to the Central African
Republic, in particular the arms embargo. The
resolution is aligned with the road map contained in
resolution 2454 (2019) and is yet another sign of the
great attention the Security Council accords to the
situation in my country.

I reiterate my sincere thanks and profound gratitude
to all members of the Security Council for the support
they provided with a view to achieving consensus
during the consultations. The provisions governing the
arms embargo have been modified positively, easing
the measures in the light of the situation on the ground.
Indeed, armed groups are still present on a large part of
the territory and continue to receive supplies through
elicit flows of weapons and ammunition, largely from
neighbouring countries. In this regard, it is absolutely
crucial that all Member States, in particular those of
the subregion, join efforts to fully respect the sanctions
regime so as to ensure its effective implementation in
support of peace in the Central African Republic.

We are aware that exemption and notification
procedures remain effective tools to allow the security
and defence forces to be trained, equipped and armed.
They also provide for support to the Central African
authorities in the process of security sector reform and
in implementing their strategy to extend State authority.
We are also aware that sanctions are not an end in
themselves, but a tool for consolidating stability and
restoring lasting peace in the Central African Republic.

The resolution just adopted is a step in the right
direction towards a partial - and, why not, even
total? - lifting of the arms embargo. My country
expresses this hope because the power balance on the
ground puts the Central African State at a disadvantage
in terms of the supply of weapons, ammunition and
logistical resources reaching armed groups on a
significant scale.

I join the members of the Security Council in
welcoming the new Ambassador of the United States to
the United Nations.

The meeting rose at10.40 am.
