Mr. Sharifov (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the United Kingdom for convening
today's debate on children and armed conflict and to
welcome Mr. Jean Asselborn, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg, to
today's meeting. I also wish to thank all briefers for
their extensive statements.

In recent years, the issue of children and armed
conflict has been placed firmly on the international
agenda, and a solid framework of international legal
norms and standards has been developed. Important
steps have been taken through the application and
enforcement of those norms and standards in order to
achieve accountability for grave violations committed
against children. The engagement of the Security
Council has increased the general awareness of the
issue of the protection of children in armed conflict,
significantly advanced the scope of actions and created
opportunities to improve common approaches in that
regard. We welcome the increasing attention of the
Security Council to this topic and commend the efforts
of its Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
under the able leadership of Ambassador Sylvie Lucas
of Luxembourg.

Azerbaijan's strong position with regard to the
protection of civilians, including children, in situations
of armed conflict is based on my country's keen interest
in contributing to the protection of human rights and

fundamental freedoms and to the achievement of
sustainable peace and development. Our interest also
stems from our practical experience in addressing
the devastating consequences of serious violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law
committed during the war unleashed against my
country. Azerbaijan continues to suffer from one of the
highest number of refugees and displaced persons in
the world, many of whom are children.

Azerbaijan welcomes the progress made in
preventing and responding to violations and abuses
committed against children, especially with regard to
the thousands of children who have been demobilized,
rehabilitated and reintegrated. We also note the
increasing number of action plans that have been
adopted or are under negotiation. At the same time,
we acknowledge that the provision of sufficient
and sustained resources is crucial to the timely
implementation of such agreed plans.

At the same time, we remain deeply concerned
by the high number of violations and abuses against
children in the various situations of armed conflict
throughout the world, where children are being used for
military purposes and continue be the indiscriminate
target of military targets. Furthermore, the military
use of schools, including as shields, as barracks or for
weapons storage, in the course ofarmed conflict deprives
children of their right to education and potentially puts
them at risk of attack. Other challenging issues that
call for urgent attention include children being taken
hostage, being reported missing in connection with
armed conflict, or being used as suicide bombers in
acts of terrorism.

Azerbaijan remains deeply concerned by the
negative impact of armed conflict on children and
strongly condemns all violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law committed against
children. We have always been consistent in demanding
the strict observance by the parties to armed conflict of
their obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law in all circumstances.

Governments bear the primary responsibility to
ensure protection of and provision of relief to all children
affected by armed conflict, and the United Nations
must continue to support and supplement such national
efforts. The monitoring and reporting mechanism of
the United Nations envisages the involvement of and
close cooperation with the countries concerned. It is
equally important that access by the United Nations for
the purpose of monitoring and reporting on violations
and abuses committed against children is carried out
with strict respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the State concerned.

The vulnerability of children in wartime brings an
element of urgency, dedication and strong commitment
to worldwide protection efforts, which must be free of
selectivity. Azerbaijan highlights the role of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflicts in that
regard. The fulfilment of the Special Representative's
mandate with respect to all situations of armed conflict,
including those of a protracted nature, is crucial in that
regard.

Important steps have been taken in a number of
situations of armed conflict to achieve accountability
for grave violations against children, including the
development of international jurisprudence. However,
serious challenges remain.

In conclusion, I would like once again to reiterate
that more resolute and consistent efforts are required
to end impunity and to find a long-term and sustained
solution to eliminate and prevent illegal practices
affecting the rights of children.

