Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): Allow me to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation to you, Madam
President, and to the delegation of Jamaica, for
arranging this debate.

Before turning to the subject matter of our
discussion and commenting on the interesting and
thought-provoking presentations we have just heard
from our briefers - the Executive Director of the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), Ms. Carol
Bellamy, and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Olara Otunnu - I would like to
commend in particular the approach you have chosen,
Madam President, in dealing with this topic by
inviting, in the first place, non-members of the Security
Council to express in open debate their views on the
latest report of the Secretary-General so that their
positions can properly be taken into account by the
Council prior to starting its work on a draft resolution
on this question.

Only several days ago we applied an innovative
approach when preparing the resolution on HIV/AIDS
and international peacekeeping. Early consultations
with troop-contributing countries allowed us to take
into account many of their concerns and to avoid those
things that would have drawn criticism if we had not
consulted the wider membership of the Organization
before adopting that resolution. We are convinced that
a similar approach can also work for many other
questions on the Council's agenda.

My delegation has already had several
opportunities to state its position on the issue of
children in armed conflict. I will therefore limit my
remarks to those points that are particularly relevant to
our deliberations today.

This is not the first time that the issue of children
in armed conflict has been considered by the Council.
We have gained considerable experience in addressing
humanitarian aspects of the maintenance of
international peace and security, and we think it is time
to take stock of what we have achieved in the domain
of the protection of children, and of what remains to be
done. The presentation of the new report of the
Secretary-General is a good opportunity to do this, and
we would like to sincerely thank him for preparing that
comprehensive and important study.

It has somehow become a commonplace to say
that children, women and other civilians are not simply
collateral victims of atrocities committed by various
parties in present-day conflict, but, rather, that they
have become direct targets of such attacks. This is a
sad reality. It is encouraging that these challenges are
increasingly the focus of the Council's attention. By
addressing these issues, the Security Council not only
promotes the protection of children from the impact of
war, but also contributes to the goal of conflict
resolution, thus advancing the maintenance of peace
and security.

Last year the Council adopted resolution 1261
(1999), which became an important tool for advocacy
on behalf of children affected by conflict. Some three
months ago the Security Council took another step
forward by adopting resolution 1296 (2000), which
represents a major milestone in the Council's work and
reflects a growing consensus among the members of
the international community as to the ways and means
to ensure the protection of civilians, including children,
in armed conflict.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
provides an incisive analysis of the ways to enhance
the protection of children in armed conflict from
different perspectives - including the political, legal,
humanitarian, disarmament and peacekeeping
perspectives - and also puts forward a number of bold
and action-oriented recommendations. We note with
satisfaction that they are addressed not only to the
Security Council, but also to the General Assembly and
individual Member States, which acting within their
spheres of responsibility, can effectively contribute to
the protection of this most vulnerable group. It should
be noted at the same time that a number of those
recommendations have already been reviewed by the
Council in the context of the working group on the
protection of civilians, and that the Council has already
acted on them. However, translating general
commitments into specific action on the ground still
remains the key task in the context of implementing
previous decisions, and more efforts should be devoted
to that end.

Ukraine fully subscribes to the recommendations
of the Secretary-General relating to the legal aspects of
enhancing the protection of children, as the provisions
of resolution126l (1999) stress the responsibility of all
States to bring an end to impunity and their obligation
to prosecute those responsible for grave breaches of
international law, in particular violations of the Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols. Ukraine
considers it important that Member States adopt
national legislation for the prosecution of individuals
responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes.

We concur with the Secretary-General's view that
the issues of the protection and the needs of children in
armed conflict should be entrenched in the mandate of
every peacekeeping operation. Peacekeeping missions
play a critical role in providing protection to children.
In order to ensure the implementation of that
dimension of the mandate, a senior officer should be
responsible for coordinating activities aimed at
ensuring the protection and welfare of children. In
addition, greater attention should be given to the
appropriate training of peacekeeping personnel - both
civilian and military - in the area of the protection of
the rights of children. It is also important that
participants in peacekeeping operations be given
specific training that addresses local cultural
sensitivities as well as gender-sensitivity issues.

Member States should be further encouraged to
provide United Nations peacekeeping missions with a
greater number of women personnel, who could play an
important role in the protection of children and in
tackling gender-sensitivity aspects. When designing its
operations, the Security Council must make every
effort to protect both children and their supportive
environment: schools, hospitals, health centres and
religious institutions. Ukraine strongly endorses the
concept of children and their protective and nurturing
institutions being considered as "zones of peace".

As the provisions of resolution 1261 (1999)
require that the situation of children be better
addressed in the establishment and implementation of
peace agreements and in relief and protection
measures, the international community should exercise
its influence and bring concerted pressure to bear on
parties to a conflict to place the protection of children
on the agenda of the peace process in question.
Moreover, in every case the inclusion of the issue of
children on the agenda of the peace process should be
accompanied by appropriate publicity and special
promotion actions.

The demobilization and reintegration of soldiers
should be an integral part of the humanitarian relief
and peace-building strategy. There is an urgent need for
the international community to support programmes,
including advocacy and social services, for the
demobilization and community reintegration of child
soldiers. At the national level, the conscription of
children as actors in war should be condemned and the
immediate demobilization of children ensured. To that
end, we agree with the Secretary-General that
Governments should be encouraged to enact legislation
to prohibit the recruitment of minors in armed conflicts
and together launch a global campaign that would bring
an end to such practices and rehabilitate and reintegrate
children into society.

The recent adoption of the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
minimum age for children in armed conflict represents
a significant contribution to the protection of the rights
of this most vulnerable group. We hope that the
Protocol's adoption will be followed by its rapid
ratification by States and its subsequent effective
implementation in their national legislation.

As to the economic sanctions imposed by the
Security Council, we strongly support the idea that
sanctions must be used appropriately to target those
responsible in order to avoid causing suffering to the
most vulnerable part of population - women and
children - both in target and in neighbouring States.
In this regard, Ukraine also endorses the idea of
establishing a permanent technical review mechanism
of United Nations and regional sanctions regimes,
which could use information provided by Council
members, relevant financial institutions, the Secretariat
and other humanitarian actors to monitor the impact of
sanctions on civilians, especially children.

Standards and rules aimed at minimizing the
humanitarian impact of sanctions must be further
developed to ensure that sanctions are not imposed
without provision for obligatory, immediate and
enforceable humanitarian exemptions. In this
connection, we wish to recall the request made by the
Security Council in its resolution 1296 (2000) that the
Working Group on the general issue of sanctions
consider the relevant recommendations of the
Secretary-General contained in his report of 8
September 1999. In the context of today's debate, it is
important that the Group also be asked to look into the
recommendations contained in section F of the report
on children in armed conflict and to present its
conclusions on them to the Security Council.

In conclusion, I wish to stress that the Secretary-
General's report sets out an important agenda and the
basis for future work by the Council and by other
United Nations bodies. We look forward to further
progress in this direction and express our readiness to
contribute to the subsequent consideration of the
question of children in armed conflict, both in the
Security Council and in the General Assembly.

