Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. President, I would like to welcome you and
to extend my thanks to the delegation of Nigeria for
holding this open debate on security sector refore, as
well as for the concept note (S/2014/238, annex) that has
been circulated among delegations. We would also like
to thank His Excellency the Secretary-General of the
United Nations for his briefing.

We hope that our debate today will contribute to
putting into effect discussions on security sector reform
(SSR) - from defining the United Nations concept
and role therein to creating guidelines and practical
mechanisms for defining the form of assistance
that should be offered. Security sector reform is an
important aspect of peacekeeping at large and of
United Nations special political missions. It serves as
an important element of the peacebuilding agenda in
achieving stability in post-conflict situations.

Jordan believes that the United Nations has an
important role to play in providing assistance in SSR,
given its legitimacy, objectivity, neutrality and the
public acceptance it enjoys among national authorities,
local communities and host countries, in addition to
the experience and expertise it enjoys in that area,
whether at Headquarters or in the field. The efforts of
the United Nations should be focused on the main goal
of achieving SSR, namely, to produce a security sector
that is professional, effective and efficient, can be held
accountable and respects the rule of law and human
rights values.

In that regard, Jordan underscores that United
Nations participation in providing assistance must
always be based on fundamental rules, which include
host countries providing security, their having national
ownership of the reform process and their coordinating
assistance in line with national priorities. In addition,
national authorities must bear in mind the needs of
the population and their aspirations. Jordan supports
the comprehensive approach adopted by the United
Nations in order to support national SSR efforts. We
believe that the Security Council has an important
role to play in that respect, as well as in providing a
strategic vision - especially given the marked increase
in the number of mandates that include SSR and their
increasing complexity.

At the same time, Jordan underscores that the
General Assembly has a role to play that is no less
important than peacekeeping operations and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. Jordan
appreciates the efforts exerted by the Secretariat.
We calll for increasing coordination and cooperation
system-wide, including between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations and deepening
partnerships with them. In recent years, the United
Nations has achieved much in the assistance it provides
in the SSR area. However, the increase in the number
of conflicts and transnational threats such as terrorism
and drug trafficking, along with changes in the security
environment, require us to continue exploring means
to increase the United Nations capability to respond to
such changes.

In that regard, Jordan calls on Member States to
enhance United Nations capabilities and provide the
resources that will enable it to effectively support
national authorities. As a troop-contributing country,
we know how essential it is that support and financing
are provided to peacekeeping operations in general
so that they can carry out their mandates, including
security sector reform.

We support the vital role the United Nations plays
in facilitating national dialogues on security sector
reform, bsaed on the Security Council's mandates.
We agree that universality is crucial to security sector
reform and to ensuring that a national process is
embraced by host Governments. It is important that
consensus be achieved between national authorities at
every level, and that those authorities are in constant
consultation with national human-rights institutions
and civil society. We also believe it essential that the
Security Council consult host countries when designing
mandates that concern them. It is important that we
increase understanding of security sector reform and
awareness of the role of the United Nations in providing
assistance in this area with concepts, for example, such
as the rule of law and non-proliferation of weapons,
particularly since the concept of security sector reform
itself is relatively new.

In conclusion, Jordan looks forward to cooperating
with other Member States in enhancing the momentum
that has been created in security sector reform in order
to meet the needs of our peoples and improve national
Governments' capacities. A sense of safety, security and
confidence among the people is essential to achieving
sustainable peace and security.

