The Secretary-General: It gives me great
pleasure to join the Council and to provide it with an
update on the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea (UNMEE).

This new operation holds great promise for the
countries and the peoples involved, for Africa and for
peacekeeping in general. We must get it right and I
look forward to working closely with the Council to
achieve that goal.

My representative for Ethiopia and Eritrea,
Ambassador Legwaila, has now taken up his functions
in the Mission area. His qualifications are known to all
Council members. Mr. Legwaila met in Addis Ababa
with Prime Minister Zenawi, Minister for Foreign
Affairs Mesfin and other senior officials, all of Whom
have pledged their support. Yesterday, Ambassador
Legwaila arrived in Asmara and plans to have similar
contacts with the Government of Eritrea there. He has
also met with the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), members of the
diplomatic community and various United Nations
officials, who will be working closely with UNMEE. In
carrying out his assignment, Ambassador Legwaila
expects to travel regularly between his two offices in
Asmara and Addis Ababa so as to maintain close
contacts with both parties as well as with the OAU.

I have also appointed two senior officials as
Deputy Special Representatives: Mr. Cheikh Tidiane
Gaye and Mr. Ian Martin, who will reside full time in
Addis Ababa and Asmara, respectively. The two
deputies Will take up their posts shortly.

The military deployment is also proceeding on
schedule. The Force Commander, Major-General
Patrick Cammaert of the Netherlands, has assumed his
functions in the mission area. As of today, some 120
United Nations military observers have been deployed
to the two countries and the first troops Will begin to
arrive soon. With the continued cooperation of the two
parties, the deployment of UNMEE is expected to be
completed by early next year, up to an authorized
strength of 4,200 troops of all ranks, including up to
220 military observers. Military teams from several
troop-contributing countries - Canada, Denmark,
Jordan, Kenya, the Netherlands and Slovakia - have
already undertaken reconnaissance missions for their
deployments.

You yourself, Sir, visited the area last week and I
am interested to hear your assessment. I would like to
take this opportunity to thank the Government of the
Netherlands for its generous support of this operation,
as well as all other Governments that are making
contributions.

The situation on the ground appears to have
stabilized in recent weeks, but humanitarian conditions
in both countries remain a source of serious concern. In
Eritrea, there are more than 300,000 internally
displaced persons, some accommodated in camps and
others in host communities or scattered around the
country. In Ethiopia, some 350,000 people have been
displaced. The most critical obstacle to their safe return
and the resumption of normal life is the presence of
landmines and unexploded ordnance along the border.
It is therefore imperative to ensure early demining and
to conduct mine awareness programmes in these areas.
UNMEE, for its part, has begun to conduct demining
surveys. Both Governments have established national
commissions for de-mining. I hope the Council will
give these efforts its full and timely support.

We are continuing consultations with the
Governments on the status-of-forces agreements and
hope to conclude these as soon as possible. Both sides
have agreed to open, on 28 November, the first land
access route for the use of UNMEE's convoys and
other activities. This is a most welcome development,
since it is crucial that UNMEE enjoy freedom of
movement and early access to the future temporary
security zone. Further efforts will be pursued to
establish air access routes. We are making progress in
this regard and I will keep the Council informed.

The ceasefire has held since the signing of an
agreement in June under the auspices of President
Bouteflika of Algeria. Thus far, both parties have
shown a commitment to implementing this document.
That is a real achievement. The deployment of
UNMEE is designed to help maintain peace between
the two countries. The military observers on the ground
are developing the capacity to verify the situation and
discuss problems that might arise. This should help the
parties to reduce mutual mistrust.

One step that would contribute greatly in this
regard would be the establishment of the military
coordination commission, as called for in the
Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities. I am pleased to
note that both parties have agreed with UNMEE that
the first session of the commission could be held later
this month. We must sustain this momentum, not least
to gain additional support from the international
community for the development needs of both
countries.

United Nations agencies are ready to do their
part. Indeed, close coordination between UNMEE and
the humanitarian agencies will be essential, and for that
reason a system of civil-military liaison should be
established as soon as possible. I trust that both parties
will continue to cooperate with the mediators to the
proximity talks, Algerian Minister Abdelkader
Messahel and United States Special Envoy Anthony
Lake, with a view to resolving the outstanding issues
and achieving a comprehensive settlement. The United
Nations stands ready to assist and my Special
Representative is ready to take part in future talks in
his capacity as observer.

Allow me to conclude by noting that the
beginning of any peacekeeping operation is a very
sensitive time. The steps the United Nations takes send
signals about our intentions, our effectiveness and,
most of all, our resolve. At the same time, the steps
taken by the parties also offer indications about their
willingness to cooperate and about the level of trust
and political will. With our diplomats, military
personnel and civilian staff taking up their positions,
we have entered a period of higher stakes and
intensified scrutiny of our actions. The people of
Eritrea and Ethiopia, and many others beyond their
borders, are counting on us to help. Together, let us rise
to this challenge. I hope we will.

