Mr. Duval (Canada) (spoke in French): Mr.
President, I, too, would like first of all to thank you for
having organized this open meeting on the question of
East Timor which takes place more than on an
anniversary but actually at a very critical time for the
development of the security climate in that area. I
should also like to thank the Assistant Secretary-
General, Mr. Annabi, for his detailed briefing on the
situation in East Timor.

Canada, like all those who have spoken, is very
alarmed over the wave of violent incidents and the
general deterioration of security in East Timor. The
acts of violence perpetrated recently against the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) and the humanitarian personnel by the
militia favouring integration are disturbing and
unacceptable. Canada is particularly concerned and
saddened by the deaths of two peacekeepers in two
separate incidents that occurred last month as well as
by the aggression continuously perpetrated against
personnel of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Our
condolences go out to the families of the bereaved in
New Zealand and Nepal and Bangladesh, to which you
referred at the beginning of the meeting.

We have taken note of the decision of Indonesia
and UNTAET jointly to investigate the deaths of these
two blue helmets in order to prosecute those
responsible for the crimes. Perhaps, at the end of the
meeting, Mr. Annabi could tell us if any progress has
been achieved in that area.

The heads of the militias must respect their
commitment not to hamper the safe return of refugees.
We expect the Indonesian Government to play a
constructive role in that respect, notably by ensuring
that local and international humanitarian personnel
facilitating these returns does not live in constant fear
and that no harm will come to them. Mr. Annabi
referred to the efforts of the Indonesian Government to
restore order and security in these camps. Those
measures are essential. They must be continued
vigorously in close cooperation with UNCTAET, as has
been underscored by a number of previous speakers,
and my delegation would like the Council to be
informed regularly on progress achieved and
difficulties encountered.

Could Mr. Annabi perhaps confirm for us whether
the Indonesian Government has already done what ever
is necessary to begin separating the members of the
militias from the people in the camps?

We have taken note of the Indonesian
Government's plan to dismantle the refugee camps in
West Timor. We think that all returns must be voluntary
and that the question of responsibility for the security
of refugees will have to be resolved in advance. It
would be interesting to see if and how UNTAET will
deal with this matter.

We are also extremely alarmed over the other
problems that deter the refugees from returning home,
aside from the problems of militias and violence. It is
probable that few refugees will return home as long as
the problems related to possible options for their
resettlement, the lack of infrastructure in East Timor
and the withdrawal of officials have not been resolved.
We would like to know if UNTAET has taken measures
in that regard.
We would like to pay tribute to UNTAET for its
efforts to work closely with the Timorese in the
administration of their territory and for having tried,
through the National Council, to strengthen local
capacity in terms of security and government. The
Timorese must be included in the United Nations
administration, particularly as regards the security
needs the territory will face in order to properly
prepare for the withdrawal of the Mission.

The creative work undertaken by UNTAET in the
sphere of administration of justice has laid a solid
foundation in that country, and we hope that this work
will lead to closer cooperation between UNTAET and
the Indonesian authorities, with a view to prosecuting
those who are guilty of human rights violations. While
the Indonesian Justice Ministry continues its
investigation, we would encourage it to continue its
cooperation with UNTAET so as to ensure better
access to evidence and witnesses. In that respect,
Indonesia is an essential partner of the Council.

In conclusion, we think that it would be useful, as
the representative of the Netherlands has mentioned,
that the Council be informed opportunely of the
security situation from the military point of view.

