The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Italy.
I would first of all like to thank Ms. Nakamitsu,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and
Mr. Edmond Mulet for their briefings. They have the full
support of the Security Council in their undertaking,
which is crucial to upholding the international
security architecture.

We thank the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) for its seventh report (S/2017/904, annex), which is the result of an investigation that
was conducted in the framework of a very complex
security challenge and constraint. Italy supports the
work of the Joint Investigative Mechanism. We hold
its professionalism and independence in high regard
and trust.

Italy is deeply concerned about the findings of the
report, as they again affirm that chemical weapons have
been used in Syria. To date, the JIM. has verified four
chemical attacks by the Syrian armed forces and two
attacks by Da'esh. What happened in Khan Shaykhun
in April 2017 and in Umm Hawsh in September 2016 is
totally unacceptable and confirms the abysmal scale of
human suffering in the Syrian conflict. We condemn
it in the strongest terms. These episodes are a tragic
reminder that international law, including the Council's
resolutions, as well as the international non-proliferation
architecture, continue to be blatantly violated in Syria
by the Government and by the terrorists, further
eroding - as emphasized by the Secretary-General
in his latest report (S/2017/902) - the taboo against
chemical weapons.

As long as nobody is held accountable for those
acts, the risk of their recurrence will remain and even
grow. Allegations of new incidents involving the use of
sarin keep emerging, as examined by the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Fact-
finding Mission with regard to the incident in Ltamenah.
It is one more reason why fighting impunity, identifying
the perpetrators and holding them accountable must be
shared priorities of the Council. It is one more reason to
renew the mandate of the JIM, which will soon expire.

On the implementation of resolution 2118
(2013), we are disappointed that the recent high-
level consultations between the OPCW and Syria in
September were unable to achieve any significant
progress. As the global non-proliferation architecture
continues to face extremely serious challenges, the
Security Council has the responsibility of defending the
integrity and credibility of these crucial long-standing
norms of our collective security, and preserving the
means of prevention and pathways for accountability
in case of violations. The OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism is a critical tool in that respect,
and Italy fully supported the renewal of its mandate two
weeks ago, mindful of the need to preserve its expertise,
protect its independence and uphold the credibility of
its investigations.

We are committed to engaging with other
Council members to achieve consensus on such a
pressing objective, and we would like to thank the
penholder - the United States delegation - for its
constructive efforts in pursuing a consensual solution,
including through a draft resolution that we consider to
be a very good basis for discussions leading to preserve
the unity of the Council.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I gove the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

