Mr. Fulci (Italy): I shall begin by congratulating
you, Mr. Somavr'a, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of April. Your
broad experience, your command of the issues, your keen
insight and very prestigious academic background are
solid guarantees of the success of our work this month.
At the same time, I should like to thank your predecessor,

 

Mr. Legwaila, the Permanent Representative of Botswana,
for his excellent, lively and successful leadership of the
Council last month.

The picture of the situation in Afghanistan - a
country that, as the representative of France has just said,
we Europeans all love very much - that emerges from the
Secretary-General's recent report and from
Mr. Gharekhan's briefing of Thursday, 4 April is
unfortunately a matter of serious, deep concern. It is a
bleak picture, characterized by a military and diplomatic
stalemate. There seems to be only the firm intention of
pursuing a military solution at all costs.

The capital, Kabul - the beautiful city of Kabul -
is virtually under siege. Last winter, it suffered a disastrous
blockade of all commercial and humanitarian shipments. It
continues to be the target of almost daily shellings.
Moreover, it is threatened by a new attack that the
Secretary-General rightly calls

"a futile and reckless military exercise". (A/50/908, para. 11)

This attack will not decide anything, but will lead only to
further bloodshed for innocent Afghan civilians. The
situation is also precarious in the eastern part of the country
as a result of the threats to attack Herat being made by the
former governor of the city.

In the midst of all this, no direct, constructive dialogue
is even in sight. The opposition forces themselves are in
disarray amongst themselves as well, as is shown by the
recent talks in Islamabad in which the Taliban refused to
participate.

In these circumstances, Italy continues fully to support
the difficult, patient work of mediation of the special
representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mestiri. Allow
me to recall that a statement of support for Mr. Mestiri was
issued recently by the European Union. His task, as I said
earlier, is far from being easy, but his recent return to the
region, with the assistance of some new advisors, augurs
well - at least, that is our sincere hope. However, we must
never forget that the last word is with the Afghan parties
themselves. Unless they show the specific will to end the
conflict and to replace the logic of force with the logic of
peace and dialogue, any efforts at mediation will be useless.
Thus we appeal to them to collaborate in the creation of an
adequate mechanism for the transfer of power, in the form
of

"a fully representative and broad-based authoritative

council",

as indicated in paragraph 4 of General Assembly
resolution 50/88 B. The Secretary-General suggests that
an international conference on Afghanistan could be
conducive to this goal. The Italian delegation supports this
proposal.

The Secretary-General's report, and the recent
briefing by Ambassador Gharekhan, describe the
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan as very serious, if
not alarming. The international community can and must
intervene; its willingness to do so was made clear in the
resolution adopted in the fall by the General Assembly.
With its recent declaration, the European Union also
urged all the parties directly concerned to end the
hostilities immediately and to allow the free passage and
distribution of humanitarian aid to the Afghan civilian
population.

In our view, another question of fundamental
importance is economic rehabilitation and reconstruction,
after the immense harm caused by a very long and
ruthless conflict. However, the flow of international aid to
reconstruct and to relaunch the economy cannot begin
without a solid and credible political agreement opening
up reasonable prospects for the return of peace to
Afghanistan. For the international community it is equally
important that there be renewed respect for human rights.
Many - too many - violations of basic human rights
have occurred in this long, drawn-out conflict.

Like the rest of us, who have long lived in a world
of not so much independent as inter-dependent nations,
Afghanistan is not an entity isolated from the rest of the
world. In particular, it is a country that is part of a
delicate and complex regional reality characterized by
other conflicts, like the one in Tajikistan, for example. It
is in the interest of the neighbouring countries to abstain
from any interference that might help feed the conflict,
and to strive instead to patiently convince the various
Afghan factions that there can be no military solution, and
that they must settle their differences through peaceful
means. A peaceful Afghanistan on the way to economic
recovery - an Afghanistan that is ready and able to
reabsorb the millions of refugees that have resettled in
neighbouring States - would represent a factor of
stability, which is in the interests of all, starting with its
neighbouring countries.

 

The Afghan conflict is a legacy of the cold war, a
legacy, however, that unlike similar cases - such as the
conflict in Cambodia - has found in its complex historic,
ethnic and cultural reality sufficient fuel to outlive the cold
war. This is what makes it so necessary for all those
involved in the crisis to fully understand the responsibility
they have to reverse the situation, to renounce egoism and
divisiveness, to search in good faith for a solution
compatible with the interests and the needs of all. To be
helped by the international community, Afghanistan must
first and foremost help itself.

