Ms. Wolcott Sanders (United States of America): We are encouraged that this meeting
provides a forum for us to jointly reaffirm our
commitment to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. We reiterate that the primary responsibility for
protecting civilians lies with the parties to an armed
conflict, and that international efforts should
complement that function. However, in situations
where parties to an armed conflict are unable or
unwilling to protect civilians, the international
community has a distinct role to play. I would like to
touch on a few key elements of this topic that we feel
require particularly close attention and warrant full
Security Council support.

The recurrent use of sexual and gender-based
violence is arguably one of the most significant
protection challenges, due to its scale, profound impact
and tendency to be ignored. Sexual and gender-based
violence must be more effectively addressed. United
Nations peace support missions have a clear role to
play in preventing that violence and addressing its
impact.

In Burma, for example, there are widespread
reports of serious human rights abuses, including rape
by Burmese military personnel in conflict areas and
other ethnic minority areas. The Burmese army's
strategy of forced relocation to deny support to armed
insurgents reportedly has been accompanied by serious
human right abuses, including rape. Burmese refugees
newly arrived in Thailand and internally displaced
Burmese near the Thailand-Burma border report that
Government soldiers in the Chin, Karen and Karenni
states continue to rape women and girls there. Killings,
beatings, torture and rape by Government soldiers have
also been reported against Shan, Rohingya, Mon and
other ethnic minorities. The youngest rape victim was
only eight years old. Other abuses of civilians
reportedly perpetrated by Burmese military personnel
include forced labour, the recruitment and use of child
soldiers, seeding villages with landmines, using
civilians to clear mines and the destruction of homes,
granaries, animals and other civilian property.

In Darfur, as in other cases where rape has been
used as a tool of armed conflict and/or of political
oppression, rape by Government soldiers and/or their
allied militias is widespread and systematic, and is
typically committed in ways that appear designed to
humiliate and demoralize not only the victims but also
the communities of which they are members. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights recorded in April 2007 that there was
"widespread sexual violence during attacks by
Sudanese Government forces and allied militia last
December".

Where necessary, the protection and creation of
secure environments for displaced populations should
be a primary objective for peacekeeping. We reiterate
that the Emergency Relief Coordinator and his Office
should be engaged in the planning of United Nations
peacekeeping efforts from the earliest stages.

The protection of internally displaced persons
remains one of the biggest challenges facing the United
Nations and the international community. It is
important to state that internally displaced civilians
living in camps are not always protected from serious
human rights abuses. We applaud the work done by the
Inter-Agency Standing Committee under the leadership
of Under-Secretary-General Holmes in continuing to
develop leadership and accountability in the protection
sector. We strongly feel that this approach has the
potential to strengthen the United Nations response
capacity in humanitarian assistance and protection,
providing a critical point of coordination, ensuring the
efficient use of resources and maximizing impact.

Let me now turn to a few current situations of
particular concern.

In the Sudan, attacks on civilians and deliberate
displacement have been used as tactics of war, in
flagrant violation of international law. While large-
scale attacks on civilians have decreased in some areas
of Darfur, grave protection concerns persist throughout
the region. The briefing by Under-Secretary-General
Holmes to the Council following his mission to the
Sudan (see S/PV.5655) painted a stark picture of a
humanitarian situation on the brink of an even larger-
scale catastrophe. The situation in Darfur illustrates
clearly the urgent role that the international community
must play to ensure the safety of civilians, including

those who are internally displaced, when traditional
means of protection have broken down.

Due to the continuation of violence and the
tenuous security environment in Darfur, both those
civilians affected by the conflict and those trying to
provide humanitarian assistance are under direct threat.
We continue to receive reports of attacks deliberately
targeting United Nations and other humanitarian
personnel. We stress the responsibility of the
Government of the Sudan to hold those responsible
accountable.

We further call on all parties to cease hostilities
and to cooperate with the international community to
advance a peaceful resolution of the crisis, including
by facilitating the deployment of an effective hybrid
peacekeeping force, easing the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and supporting a viable United
Nations/African Union-led peace process.

We reiterate the recent appeal by the International
Contact Group for Somalia for an immediate cessation
of hostilities, and we continue to call on all parties to
facilitate humanitarian access for the delivery of life-
saving aid. We expect the Transitional Federal
Government to facilitate the critical work of the United
Nations and humanitarian non-governmental
organizations. We remain committed to supporting
humanitarian assistance in Somalia.

The suffering of the Iraqi people, and the many
innocent lives lost due to the violence in Iraq, is
deplorable. Multinational forces in Iraq and
Afghanistan are conducting military operations. At all
times during such operations, the multinational forces
strive to minimize any collateral damage and to avoid
harm to the civilian population.

We all recognize the profound tragedy of civilian
casualties during times of armed conflict. Insurgent
activity that is aimed at civilians and that selects
civilians as targets is an entirely different matter. It is
an abomination and should be summarily condemned.
It is inappropriate to equate any such deliberate
targeting of civilians by terrorists to the operations of
multinational forces in Iraq and Afghanistan aimed at
restoring security and stability for the people of those
countries.
We also remain deeply concerned about the
numbers of internally displaced persons and refugees
who have fled their homes due to violence and unrest

in Iraq. We have strengthened and expanded our own
programmes that address this humanitarian issue, and
we urge broad international involvement. In particular,
we urge the United Nations agencies currently in
Amman to consider increasing their presence in Iraq.
United Nations involvement will be critical to helping
this vulnerable population, including through support
to the Governments of Jordan and Syria to help them in
providing education of displaced Iraqi children
currently in their countries.

As we once again reaffirm our commitment to
strengthening and reinforcing the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, let us ensure that our words
and intentions become real action.

