Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation, Sir, is pleased
to see you presiding over another meeting of the Security
Council. We also welcome the presence at this important
meeting of the Minister for External Relations of Angola,
Mr. Miranda.

We would like to thank the Canadian delegation, in
particular Ambassador Robert Fowler, for its outstanding
efforts to spearhead the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 864 (1993). There has been a
tremendous shift in the international focus following the
commissioning of the Panel of Experts established by the
Security Council pursuant to resolution 1237 (1999), and
the issuance of its report in document S/2000/203 of 10
March 2000.
We commend Ambassador Fowler for his strong
commitment and tireless efforts in transforming the
sanctions Committee into an active and robust body, one
which is very much at the forefront of the Organization's
attempts to cripple the war-making capability of UNITA.

We once again welcome the report of the Panel of
Experts and take note of the conclusions and
recommendations contained in it. The report puts forward
a set of 39 bold and far-reaching recommendations for the
consideration of the Council.

Following on from our deliberations at the open
meeting of 15 March 2000, substantial work has been put
into the draft resolution before us today, which would
give effect to the large majority of the Panel's
recommendations. The draft resolution before us is a very
important one. It has the aim of strengthening control of
the sanctions against UNITA. It targets UNITA and
others found to be in violation of the measures imposed
by the Council. In that regard, my delegation fully
supports the proposed establishment of a monitoring
mechanism composed of up to five experts for an initial
period of six months in order to collect additional relevant
information and to investigate relevant leads concerning
violations of the measures contained in resolutions 864
(1993), 1127 (1997) and 1173 (1998). We agree that the
monitoring mechanism should report periodically to the
Angola sanctions Committee, and we look forward to the
submission of a written report by 18 October 2000. It is
our hope that the Secretary-General will be able to
appoint the experts expeditiously.

With regard to the trade in arms, the draft resolution
encourages States to exercise all due diligence in order to
prevent the diversion or trans-shipment of weapons to
unauthorized end-users or unauthorized destinations, if
such diversion or trans-shipment risks resulting in the
violation of measures contained in resolution 864 (1993).
This is particularly important given that the Panel's report
highlights UNITA's military ability successfully to
procure weapons with the help of international arms
brokers. We agree that stringent measures with regard to
proper documentation for the export of weapons are
necessary in order to check the flow of illicit arms to
UNITA and to help bring an end to its capacity to wage
war. Further, we also view positively the invitation to
hold conferences of representatives of countries that are
manufacturers or exporters of weapons to develop
proposals to stem the illicit flow of arms into Angola.

In that regard, it is especially important that the
countries of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) be invited to participate in such
meetings. In addition, we believe it is important that
SADC countries be provided with both financial and
technical assistance by the international community in
implementing the relevant recommendations of the Panel
of Experts.

With regard to the trade in diamonds, we support the
call on States hosting diamond markets to impose
significant penalties for the possession of rough diamonds
in contravention of the measures contained in resolution

 

1173 (1998). My delegation wishes to state that it would
have preferred the inclusion in the draft resolution of
language regarding exploring the lawful seizure of the
rough diamonds in question as well as any collateral assets
used in the transport of such goods; such language is not
included in the draft resolution before us. We would also
express support for a call on States to make dealing in
illegal rough diamonds a criminal offense; this too is not
included in the final text of the draft resolution.

In that connection, we particularly welcome the
introduction by the Government of Angola of new control
arrangements involving redesigned and reconcilable
certificates of origin. Details of this scheme should be
provided to Member States; we look forward to a briefing
by the Government of Angola on this regime in due course.

Diamonds remain a principal source of funding for
UNITA. It is therefore imperative that UNITA's lifeline be
severed.

While supporting the draft resolution's aim of giving
teeth and meaning to the Council's sanctions, my delegation
would like to reiterate its view that any further steps or
measures to be meted out to sanctions-busters should be
considered very carefully and should be weighed against the
seriousness of an alleged breach. We believe that those
named in the Panel's report should have the right to
respond to the allegations and to clarify their own roles in
the alleged sanctions-busting activities. If those
clarifications are not plausible and are not borne out by the
facts, the international community and the Council will
doubtless draw their own conclusions and take appropriate
action.

Nevertheless, we would like to stress our conviction
that the Council must act only when it has conclusive
evidence of such breaches. We support the 18 November
2000 deadline for an initial Council decision on the matter.
That would give ample time for those named to respond to
the Panel's allegations.

For far too long, UNITA has been left to its own
devices, violating the measures imposed by this organ with
impunity. Essentially, Savimbi knew that the Council
seriously lacked the will to enforce the sanctions regime.
Those days, we believe, are now gone. With the Panel's
bold report and robust recommendations, and with the
adoption later today of the draft resolution before us, those
responsible for breaches and transgressions of the sanctions
regime will no longer go back to doing business as usual.
Malaysia will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution.

