Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): My delegation is grateful to you,
Mr. President, and to other colleagues for the kind
words addressed to Ambassador Churkin, Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation, and to the
Russian delegation on its presidency of the Security
Council in January. We would also like to wish you
success, Sir, in your important post as President. You
can rest assured of the support and cooperation of the
Russian delegation.

We are also very pleased to welcome to this
meeting today the Prime Minister of Timor-Leste,
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta. We listened carefully to his
analysis and assessment of the situation in the country
in the context of the ongoing peacebuilding processes.
We are also grateful to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Khare, for his briefing and
for presenting the Secretary-General's report on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

The Russian Federation commends the efforts of
the leadership of Timor-Leste in promoting national
dialogue and reconciliation, reforming the security
sector and the justice system, combating impunity and
ensuring the return of temporarily displaced persons to
their homes.
Although the situation in Timor-Leste has
recently stabilized, it continues to be precarious. That
was stressed today by Mr. Ramos-Horta, Mr. Khare and

other speakers. The flare-up in violence that took place
in the capital in January and that, unfortunately, led to
the loss of human life shows the need to continue to
provide Timor-Leste with integrated international
support in order to strengthen State institutions and
carry out socio-economic reforms. We hope that, with
the support of UNMIT and other international
structures and regional partners, the Government of
Timor-Leste will be able to successfully address the
problems facing the country.

On the eve of next April's planned presidential
elections, it is particularly important to ensure security
in the country. We support the efforts of UNMIT aimed
at providing multifaceted assistance to the Timorese
authorities in preparing and organizing those elections,
as well as ensuring the necessary security in the
country. We have taken note of the request of the
Timorese leadership to dispatch an additional police
unit in order to beef up security during the preparation
period for the elections and during the post-election
period.

In general, we suggest that it is important to take
account of the preferences of the Timorese side with
regard to the future activities of UNMIT while taking
account, of course, of how the situation in Timor-Leste
evolves.

