The President: I thank Ms. Londofio for
her briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Prime Minister of Sweden.

First, I would like to thank Special Representative
Gamba and Executive Director Fore for their important,
and at times difficult-to-listen-to, briefings to the
Security Council. Let me also thank Yenny Londofio for
sharing her inspirational story and adequate demands.

Childhood is not just the start of our life, it
is the foundation of it. It is the base from which we
reach our full potential and the base for peaceful
and prosperous societies. Put simply, ensuring the
care, safety and protection of children today prevents
conflicts tomorrow.

Yet we are not doing nearly enough to protect
our children. Approximately 350 million children are
affected by armed conflict today. They are at risk of
being killed, or maimed. They are at risk of becoming
victims of sexual violence. They are at risk of having
no other school than what war teaches them: loss, fear,
hatred and revenge.

While the need to do more is clear, our concerted
efforts are having an effect. Over the past two decades,
130,000 children have been released from armed
groups. In the last two years, more than 12,000 children
received United Nations assistance for reintegration.
With today's unanimous adoption of resolution 2427
(2018) we not only strengthen the children and armed
conflict agenda more broadly, but we also further the
prevention agenda. Let me highlight a few ways by
which that is done.

First, children's needs are often overlooked when
peace is negotiated. Indeed, universal concern for
children may sometimes open the door to finding
new solutions. Today's resolution emphasizes how
the children and armed conflict agenda is integral to
conflict prevention and sustaining peace.

Secondly, the resolution sets out a framework for
the reintegration of children associated with armed
forces or armed groups. Successful reintegration is in
the best interest of the child, but also in the best interest
of societies. The resolution places children as part of
the solution, not part of the problem.

Thirdly, the resolution recognizes that access
for all girls and boys to education and health care,
including mental health, in conflict is essential. Also,
for the first time, the resolution distinguishes between
girls and boys and makes the point that their needs and
vulnerabilities are different.

Fourthly, the resolution links the children and
armed conflict agenda to the Sustainable Development
Goals. To achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, we can leave no child behind.

Fifthly, for the first time in a Council resolution,
it states the central principle that children in armed
conflict should be treated primarily as victims.

Sixthly, the resolution stresses accountability for
all violations and abuses against children - not just
the gravest crimes - thereby setting a new standard for
the prevention of human rights abuses and violations
of international humanitarian law. There can be no
exceptions to humanity, and there can be no exceptions
to international humanitarian law.

Finally, the resolution addresses the need to also
consider the views of children. We must listen to
children and hear their perspectives, as well as their
proposals for solutions. In that vein, Sweden, together
with UNICEF and civil society partners, organized a
series of child consultations around the world focusing
on children as refugees and agents for peace, as well
as the reintegration of former child soldiers. We also
organized consultations in Sweden. All that resulted in
recommendations where the messages from children to
us, as decision makers, are clear: provide security and
safety; put food on the table; ensure education; provide
care for the sick or injured; and, above all else, end war.

We have agreed on today's resolution; now we must
implement it. Special Representative Gamba is working
with partners to develop practical guidance and tools to
integrate child protection issues into peace processes.
Our responsibility for us in the Council is to consider
the effect of conflict on children in all our work and

in the renewal of mission mandates by ensuring every
mission has child protection advisers and by including
children's perspectives in our discussions.

I can think of no better way to address the root
causes of conflict than by giving children a loving and
safe childhood and protecting them from the scourge
of war. It is up to us to live up to our responsibilities
and to deliver on the children's demands. It is up to
us to prevent the conflicts of tomorrow by protecting
children today.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I call on the Prime Minister of Aruba, Kingdom of
the Netherlands.

