Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
holding this monthly wrap-up session, which affords us
to look back on the issues and the work undertaken by
the Security Council in the period under consideration,
making it possible to chart a course for future meetings.
In that regard, allow me to commend the leadership
and wisdom that you have shown throughout your
outstanding presidency of the Security Council.

The glimmers of hope that have come from the
regularly held and peaceful elections in West Africa,
the establishment of a national unity Government
in Libya, significant progress in the Cote d'Ivoire
towards a successful transition and the positive course
of talks in Colombia and Cyprus have partly offset
the particularly disastrous humanitarian effects and
myriad consequences of the violence in Syria, the
lethargy of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process and
the continuation of terrorist attacks throughout nearly
the entire world. We are fortunate, Sir, that you called
for two important open debates on the ministerial level
(see S/PV.7606 and S/PV.7610) - on the protection of
civilians and on the situation in the Middle East and
the question of Palestine - which afforded us a deeper
understanding to more efficiently direct our action.

The report of the Regional Office for West and
Central Africa illustrates how, through preventive,
proactive and better coordinated diplomacy and with the
support of the United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations can make conflict prevention a reality.
From Nigeria to Togo to Burkina Faso to the Republic of
Guinea and to Cote d'Ivoire, successful elections have
attested to the continued and tenacious engagement
on the part of the Economic Community of West
African States - which my country has the honour of
chairing - and the ideals of peace, democracy, liberty
and the rule of law. That positive impetus deserves to
be supported and strengthened with a View to future
elections in many countries in the subregion.

Another example of the positive results coming out of
your presidency, Sir, was the unanimous co-sponsoring
and adoption of resolution 2261 (2016), through which
the Council, following the request on the part of the
Government of Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed
Forces of Colombia, decided to create a special political
mission to monitor the peace process under way and the
surrendering of weapons, after the conclusion of a final
agreement to a conflict that has lasted nearly 50 years.
That mission reflects the commitment of the parties to
negotiated solutions and attests to the immense hope
invested in the United Nations, which the Senegalese
delegation strives to maintain. The same can be said of
the formation of a national accord Government in Libya
and of the positive events that we have seen driven by
the Cypriot, Greek and Turkish communities with the
view to resuming peace negotiations, with the support
of the United Nations.

Those significant advances on the path to peace,
however, must not hide the sad reality that millions of
civilians are living in disarray Africa and in the Middle
East. In that respect, allow me to dwell on several of
those situations.

The litany of terrorist attacks that occurred this
month shows the acuity if not the scale of a phenomenon
against which we continue to fight untiringly, but it also
represents the greatest threat to our security and the
ideals that constitute a model world. That leads me to
reiterate the overriding need to effectively implement
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel
with a view to a pre-emptive holistic approach, which is
the only approach capable of reaching lasting solutions.
As we have heard at length, that applies to the situation
in the Middle East, on which I will not dwell.

With regard to the Horn of Africa and the difficult
situation in Somalia, on which we held rather intense
consultations yesterday, I would like to relaunch
the appeal that I made then for the international
community, individual States and international
organizations to continue their financial support at
this critical moment in Somalia's history. We are now
seeing positive signs, particularly with regard to the
electoral process and the progressive return of Somali
expatriates - who are investing and believing in the
future of their country - all of which are elements that
merit the support of the international community.

Lastly, to in conclusion, I would like to express to
you, Sir, how pleased the delegation of Senegal is to
participate at your side and, especially during the open
debate on the protection of civilians, which remains the
very essence of the commitment of Senegalese troops
in theatres of operation as they try to bring about
security throughout the world. I assure you of the full
cooperation of the Senegalese delegation on that issue.
We also eagerly await the Venezuelan presidency,

