Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): Let me begin by thanking
the Kingdom of Morocco for its condolences on
yesterday's tragic air crash in Pakistan.

Pakistan welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2043 (2012), which builds on resolution
2042 (2012) and earlier agreements of the Council.
Today we have taken another significant step forward in
the process that we hope will lead to a peaceful
resolution of the crisis in Syria. It is also another
reaffirmation of the Council's united backing of the
efforts of the Joint Special Envoy, Kofi Annan. The
continuing spirit of accommodation exhibited by all
Council members in this regard is highly appreciated.

With this resolution, the Council has authorized
the establishment of the United Nations Supervision
Mission in Syria to monitor the cessation of armed
violence in all its forms by all parties, and to monitor
and support the full implementation of the six-point
proposal of the Special Envoy. By authorizing the
Mission, we hope that the dynamics on the ground will
change, resulting in a complete cessation of violence
and creating conditions conducive to an inclusive,
Syrian-owned and Syrian-led dialogue process. It
would thus lead to achieving the overall objective of
the Council of promoting a peaceful political solution
to the situation in Syria, with full respect for its unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

We call upon all sides in Syria to fully cooperate
with the Mission so as to enable it to carry out its
mandate effectively and in full safety and security. All
sides, particularly the Government of Syria, must fulfil
their responsibilities and commitments.

We also expect the Mission to undertake its work
with the utmost neutrality and objectivity. At the same
time, we would like to recall and caution that any steps
or efforts that could undermine the work of the mission
or the Special Envoy must be avoided.

Finally, let me reiterate Pakistan's continued
support for all efforts towards the fulfilment of our
common objective of a peaceful political settlement of
the Syrian crisis. It is that spirit that we decided to
co-sponsor the resolution.

