Mr. Awad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to express my gratitude to the Italian
presidency for having convened this briefing. I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
implementation of resolution 2347 (2017) (S/2017/969).
And I thank all the briefers for their valuable statements.
I would like to congratulate Ms. Azoulay on the
assumption of her new post.

The importance ofresolution 2347 (2017) lies in its
reaffirmation of the protection of cultural heritage from
destruction, looting or misuse for terrorist ends. That is
a very sensitive topic, since it is closely linked to sites,
property, museums or objects that are directly related to
the history and identity of peoples and countries. Egypt
is aware of that fact. We possess invaluable cultural
heritage that garners the respect and appreciation
of all. Secondly, we enjoy a geographical location in
a continent and a region that is home to the majority
of the world's cultural heritage. Egypt is therefore
aware of the importance and sensitivity of the topic of
protecting cultural heritage from destruction or looting
by terrorist groups in situations of armed conflict.
Despite the relatively short time since the adoption
of resolution 2347 (2017) and the publication of the
Secretary General's report, the report nevertheless
managed to adequately take stock of the efforts made
to implement the resolution - from all legal, judicial,
legislative, institutional, procedural and operational
aspects, in addition to those related to international
cooperation and raising awareness. Aware as we are of
the importance and sensitivity of the issue of protecting
cultural heritage from the dangers of terrorism, Egypt
would like to highlight five important considerations
that must be taken into account.

First, we stress the primary role of every State
to protect its own cultural heritage. Efforts to protect
cultural heritage in armed conflicts must be aligned
with Charter of the United Nations and international
law. Respect for State sovereignty and non-interference
in the internal affairs of States are principles that
must be upheld. In that regard, we affirm that the
protection of cultural heritage, including the possibility
of establishing safe havens for such heritage, cannot
be achieved but through the State having control over
cultural heritage within its territory. In other words,
Egypt categorically objects to any interference in the
internal affairs of any country under the pretext of
protecting cultural heritage. We refuse categorically
the transfer of cultural heritage owned by any country
to another State beyond its territories under the pretext
of protecting or preserving it in safe havens.

Secondly, we stress the need for UNESCO, in
its capacity as the specialized agency on the issue of
cultural heritage, to continue providing all types of
assistance to States, at their their request, to enable
them to protect their cultural heritage. The Security
Council must not address the topic of protecting
cultural heritage except in cases that pose a threat to
international peace and security, namely, in the context
of combating international terrorism or addressing
international conflicts that are on the agenda of
the Council.

Thirdly, States must take the necessary steps to
avoid and prevent the illicit trafficking and smuggling of
cultural objects or properties, especially from conflict
zones - and more specifically via terrorist groups.

Fourthly, States must prepare lists of their cultural
properties that were transferred from their original
sites illegally during armed conflicts. In that regard,
cooperation and coordination is needed with United
Nations entities and other relevant international actors
to ensure the secure restoration of such objects.
Fifthly, we must ensure that peacekeeping
operations include a component that assists the countries
concerned, at their request, to protect their cultural
properties from destruction, looting or similar offences.

In conclusion, while Egypt underscores that
protecting cultural heritage is a commendable goal, we
nevertheless believe that the real lesson to be learned
concerns the need for States to implement Security
Council resolutions, and for the Council itself to ensure
close follow-up in the implementation of its resolutions
and guarantee that States comply wiht their provisions.

