Ms. Wallstrom (Sweden): Sweden aligns itself
with the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union, but I would like to make a few additional
remarks in my national capacity.

Let me first thank the Russian presidency for
organising this ministerial meeting on countering the
terrorist threat in the Middle East and North Africa.

I would like to focus on two issues of particular
concern to us. First, we must intensify our efforts to
find political settlements to end the civil war in Syria
and the violence in Iraq. In the case of Syria, it is
unacceptable that the conflict is now in its fifth year.
The Security Council has to take its responsibility in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. This
bloodbath must end. Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura
deserves our support in his efforts to find a political
solution and urgently implement the 2012 Geneva
communique (S/2012/523, annex).

The Security Council should endorse the
establishment of an international contact group in
support of Mr. De Mistura's four working groups. I
encourage key actors, including the United States,
Russia, Saudi Arabia and Iran, to participate. The
European Union should also be actively involved. The
ultimate goal is a genuine political transition that meets
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people, including
the women of Syria, and that enables them to determine
their own future independently and democratically.

In the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) and terrorism, the Syrian regime
must contribute by ending its attacks on civilians
and committing to a genuine political transition. Let
us not forget that the Syrian regime is responsible for
the overwhelming part of the atrocities committed in
Syria - atrocities that may constitute war crimes and
crimes against humanity, and that cannot be tolerated
by the international community.

In Iraq, military and stabilization efforts should
be underpinned by a political process of national
reconciliation and inclusive politics. Prime Minister
Al Abadi has taken bold steps to include the Sunni
community and all other groups in the governance of
Iraq. Sweden will continue to play an active role in the
coalition against ISIL in Iraq. We are participating in
the group on stabilization, which is key to a democratic,
stable and unified Iraq. Yesterday my Prime Minister
pledged $4 million to the United Nations Development
Programme stabilization fund for Iraq. We are a major
donor of humanitarian aid, and we are participating in
the coalition's military training efforts in northern Iraq.

Secondly, we need to counter the widespread and
systematic violence being committed against women
and children. By using girls and women as sex slaves,
and rape as a method of warfare, the Syrian regime and
terrorist groups such as ISIL have committed flagrant
human rights abuses and violations of international
humanitarian law.

This matter is not new to me, and, I think, not to
anyone here either. When I briefed the Security Council
previously in my capacity as the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, I highlighted the fact that my visits to the field
taught me that sexual violence was often considered
either as something inevitable or unspeakable, or as a
lesser crime.

Now the use of sexual violence has been taken to
horrific new levels, where it is not only condoned but
openly commanded as a method of warfare. This issue
should be kept on the agenda of the Security Council,
as it is a matter of international peace and security.
Sweden welcomes the announcement made by the
Secretary-General yesterday on the presentation of a
comprehensive plan on countering violent extremism
and terrorism. Iurge fellow States Members of the United
Nations to support Special Representative Bangura's
efforts. Sweden is committed to strengthening our
support for victims and survivors of sexual Violence.
There must be accountability for sexual violence and
an end to impunity.

If we look at the broader Middle East, there are also
other conflicts, in Libya and in Yemen, that require,
of course, urgent political solutions. Today we are
addressing the immediate threat from ISIL. If we also
look beyond, we have to address the broader security
challenges of the region. It is necessary to revive the
Middle East peace process, support good governance,
strengthen post-conflict restoration and peacebuilding,
as well as tackle climate change and find solutions to
water-management issues.

In conclusion, let me say that the values of
democracy, human rights and equality remain our best
defence against terrorism. They can be achieved only
through political settlements based on reconciliation
and inclusiveness.

