The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I shall recap the questions that have been posed and
invite the briefers to respond to those questions.

As President, let me thank everyone for asking so
many questions. There are too many, in fact, for the
briefers to respond to all of them at this meeting today.
Let me therefore extract from the discussion the three
overarching themes of the questions, and ask our briefers
to respond accordingly. The first theme has to do with
the cooperation within the Missions among the police
and other components as it relates to the protection of
civilians. The second is the institutional framework,
including our own role in the Security Council, for
supporting policing as part of peace operations. The
third relates to resources and capabilities for policing,
including, crucially, the role of women in policing. Let
me say a little more about each theme.

Under the first theme, several of the questions are
an important follow-up to the Secretary-General's June
report (S/2015/453) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. I hope those questions will also be a
key part of the upcoming independent police review.
For instance, how effective is cooperation between
police and other force components when dealing with
the protection of civilians? Are the rules of engagement
clear? Do they differ between the police and the force?
To what extent do police components coordinate with
political affairs sections within missions, in particular
on issues such as electoral violence?

With regard to the second theme 4 the institutional
framework - the starting point is that the police
component of peacekeeping is quite often neglected as
compared to others. We should therefore think creatively
about the part that policing can play in resolving
instability. Is resolution 2185 (2014) fully effective?
What more do the heads of the police components
need from the Council? What more needs to be done to
ensure that the mission leadership understands the role
of United Nations policing? There is a lot of support for
having this briefing every year, and we look forward
to working with the presidency of Senegal at this time
next year.

Many questions were also raised about resources
and the capabilities of policing. Some were directed at
specific Commissioners, which I will not recap now; I
will leave the Commissioners to respond to them. There
were alaso a number of questions about the important
role ofwomen in policing, as well as comments about the
strategic guidance framework. Finally, some questions
were about the use of technology, other equipment and
management.

I will now give the floor to the briefers for responses
to the questions posed and for any other remarks that
they may wish to make.

I give the floor first to Mr. Ladsous.

