Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We wish to
congratulate the delegation of Brazil for organizing this
debate on the maintenance of international peace and
security focusing on interdependence between security
and development. We welcome His Excellency
Minister Antonio Patriota to the Council, and are
pleased to see him presiding over this meeting. We
acknowledge the presence and participation of the
Foreign Ministers of India, Germany, Colombia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Portugal, and the Vice
Minister of Gabon at this meeting. Unfortunately, my
Foreign Minister, Ms. Nkoana-Mashabane, could not
be with us today. She sends her best wishes, and is
confident of the positive outcomes of this meeting.

We also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
the Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
His Excellency Mr. Eugene-Richard Gasana,
Permanent Representative of Rwanda, and the World
Bank Special Representative, Ms. Cliffe, for their
informative contributions.

We thank the delegation of Brazil for its concept
paper for this debate (S/2011/50, annex). My
delegation will focus on five key areas, namely, the
changing nature of conflicts and the nexus between
security and development, the role of regional
organizations, South-South cooperation, integrated
approaches, and resource mobilization and
coordination.

Since 1945, the United Nations has been seized
with the task and responsibility of addressing the
critical issues of peace, security, human rights and
development within the framework of the
Organization's Charter.

The United Nations report "In larger freedom:
towards development, security and human rights for
all", highlighted that:

"Not only are development, security and
human rights all imperative; they also reinforce
each other [W]e will not enjoy development
without security, we will not enjoy security
without development, and we will not enjoy
either without respect for human rights. Unless
all these causes are advanced, none will succeed".
(A/59/2005, paras. 16 and 17)

In that context, South Africa is convinced that
peace and stability in the world will remain elusive if
we do not address the nexus between security and
development. As a result of that conviction, we see our
own development as inextricably linked to the peace
and security of the southern African region, the African
continent and the rest of the world.

The nature of contemporary conflicts reveals that
such conflicts are, to a large extent, precipitated by
dispute-related economic development issues,
including access to mineral resources, the
disproportionate distribution of wealth and power, bad
governance, the lack of people's participation in
democratic processes, and corruption, to mention but a
few. In the context of Africa, the illegal exploitation of
natural resources has contributed to the fuelling of
conflicts. As a consequence of that reality, it is
important to assist countries emerging from conflict to
manage and redistribute the revenues derived from
those resources in a manner that enhances people's
livelihoods.

Consideration of the interdependence of security
and development in the work of the Security Council
on the maintenance of international peace and security
does not necessarily mean the Council taking over the
developmental functions undertaken by other bodies
within the United Nations system. It simply means that
the Council should take social and development issues
into account in relevant deliberations within its Charter
mandate.

South Africa is of the view that it is vital to
integrate developmental aspects in international efforts
in the areas of conflict prevention, resolution and
management and post-conflict peacebuilding. In that
regard, we welcome the efforts of the United Nations
interdepartmental Framework Team on Early Warning
and Prevention and the ongoing review of the
Economic and Social Council.

We also welcome the work of other members of
the international community, including the
international financial institutions, in particular the
World Bank, as important and critical partners in
sustaining peace efforts with development in countries
emerging from conflicts. Equally, we emphasize the
importance of context-specific and nationally owned
interventions, such as the poverty reduction strategies.

In addition, the international private sector and
institutions should be involved in development efforts to
reinvigorate the lives of the populace by providing jobs,
especially for vulnerable groups, such as young people
and demobilized and demilitarized armed groups, in an
attempt to create sustainable livelihoods. In this
connection, the importance of building sustainable
social safety systems cannot be overemphasized.

Development requires a significant amount of
resources that most post-conflict countries do not have.
In light of this fact, we encourage the international
community to make available sufficient, timely and
predictable resources for post-conflict peacebuilding
and development programmes.

The establishment of the PBC in 2005 was a
recognition of the need to fill the gap between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, thus complementing
the interdependence between security and
development. Similarly, we welcome the recognition
by the Security Council of the link between peace,
security and development, which is reflected in the
integrated approaches to peacekeeping today. In this
context, we appreciate the fact that some United
Nations peacekeeping and political missions, including
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and others,
have civilian components that are structured under
development and security pillars.

The Council is unified in welcoming the outcome
of the historic Southern Sudan referendum. The
international community should be cognizant of the
huge development needs of a new, independent South
Sudan. A future successor mission to the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan will have to incorporate
a strong element of State-, institution- and capacity-
building in its mandate, while addressing issues of
security, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, and security sector reform, among others.

South Africa also calls for a strengthened and
enhanced cooperation and information-sharing between
the Security Council and other United Nations bodies,
such as the PBC, the Economic and Social Council and
the United Nations Development Programme, aimed at
concretizing the crucial interdependence between
security and development. My delegation strongly
supports the call for greater coherence, coordination
and interaction between various United Nations organs
and agencies.

We encourage the Council to seize the
opportunity and make optimum use of the advisory role
of the PBC in relation to socio-economic and other
peacebuilding matters. We also encourage close
coordination between all stakeholders, including the
inclusion of women and civil society in peacebuilding
and development issues.

Regional and subregional organizations have a
crucial role to play in efforts aimed at promoting the
nexus between security and development. The African
Union (AU) has, over the years, shown commitment to
resolving African conflicts and promoting
socio-economic development on the continent. In this
context, the stabilization of Africa needs to be
anchored in concrete socio-economic development
programmes. The AU has adopted the New Partnership
for Africa's Development as a key mechanism for the
achievement of this socio-economic development
paradigm.

Further, the AU has adopted a post-conflict,
reconstruction and development programme as one tool
to promote reconstructive development programmes in
countries emerging from conflict and to offer peace
dividends that hold better hope for anchoring peace
and stability. The creation of regional economic
communities at the subregional level and the
development of conflict-resolution mechanisms within
these structures are crucial steps towards sustainable
peace through sustainable economic development.

South Africa continues to work through bilateral,
trilateral and multilateral forums towards the
advancement of development as a long-term measure
for preventing conflicts. Within the South-South realm,
the India, Brazil and South Africa mechanism plays an
important development role through projects in Haiti,
Palestine, Guinea-Bissau, Burundi and Sierra Leone,
among other countries. Additionally, South Africa is
currently in the process of establishing a South African
development partnership agency, which will play a
significant role in supporting socio-economic and
human resource development in the countries of the
South, particularly in Africa, including through
trilateral cooperation with the countries of the North.

In conclusion, my delegation supports the
adoption of the draft presidential statement on this
crucial topic at the end of this meeting. We hope that
today's debate will highlight the importance of
development aspects in dealing with conflict situations
that the Council is seized with, and thus enhance the
work of this body.

