Mr. Benomar (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council has made every effort to support a peaceful,
negotiated transition in Yemen. Over the past three
years, I have repeatedly warned the Security Council
about the dangers facing the transition process. Today,
I deeply regret to inform the Council that the transition,
which was widely heralded as a model, is now in
disarray.

Over the past few weeks, Yemen has witnessed
dramatic events. I have already briefed the Council
twice in the past three weeks. I will therefore not repeat
what I have already said, but will instead provide
a factual account of events since my last briefing on
26 January.

I have continued exercising the good offices of
the Secretary-General by convening negotiations on
a daily basis involving 12 political parties, including
Ansarallah, with a view to finding a consensual
solution to the current political impasse. As mediators,
we must maintain both our unique access to all sides
and our principled position as framed by the Charter of
the United Nations and international law. Today we are
navigating multiple minefields. There have been ups
and downs. Nevertheless, reasonable progress has been
made, with all sides cognizant of the need to swiftly
find a solution to restore public confidence.

In parallel to the negotiations under way, Ansarallah
organized a large three-day gathering in Sana'a that
concluded on 1 February. The gathering ended with an
ultimatum to conclude the United Nations-facilitated
negotiations within three days or else revolutionary
committees would take action. The 4 February deadline
passed without incident, and the negotiations moved
ahead.

The United Nations-facilitated negotiations were
adjourned in essence late on the evening of 5 February,
with broad understanding among the parties on the
general contours of an agreement. The parties decided
to utilize the next day, 6 February, to resolve outstanding
issues through bilateral consultations and to enable
the United Nations to prepare a compromise text. The
plan was then to reconvene on 7 February with the aim
reaching a conclusion on an agreement.

However, on 6 February, in a surprising move,
Ansarallah took unilateral action. They organized a
gathering of their supporters at the Republican Palace
and made a so-called "constitutional declaration".
That declaration pronounced that Parliament would be
dissolved, a five-member presidential council would
be formed and that a supreme revolutionary committee
would run the country temporarily.

The unilateral declaration has created strong
backlash domestically and internationally. Major
political parties have rejected it. The prevailing
political uncertainty and heightened security risks
have prompted key diplomatic missions to close and to
withdraw temporarily from Yemen.

I have made it crystal clear that I deeply regret the
unilateral action taken by Ansarallah, in particular
when good progress had been made in the negotiations.
As a representative of the Secretary-General, I have
also made it clear to all parties, including Ansarallah,
that the current political impasse can only be solved
through peaceful dialogue and negotiations, based on
the Implementation Mechanism ofthe Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative, National Dialogue Conference
outcomes and the Peace and National Partnership
Agreement.

I consulted with the political parties. I also had
direct contact with Mr. Abdul Malik Al-Houthi, who
assured me that he welcomed a consensus-based
negotiated solution through United Nations facilitation.
I am pleased that all agreed to resume the negotiations.
Since the beginning of this week, we have been meeting
on a daily basis, and progress has been made. We are
still in the middle of delicate negotiations. Under
discussion are complex issues regarding governing
arrangements during the transition period, including
both executive and legislative authorities. The parties
are considering power-sharing measures in a new
Government of national unity and mechanisms and
arrangements for enabling State security institutions to
re-assume their responsibility. In addition, the parties
are debating the means of preventing an outbreak of
hostilities in Ma'rib, and undertakings to ensure the
protection of fundamental human rights, such as the
rights to peaceful assembly and freedom of expression,
among others.

The situation in the oil-rich province of Ma'rib
is very tense. Many Yemenis fear that confrontation
between the Houthis and tribesmen could break out
at any time. In the south, the situation is volatile.
Southerners, who have suffered from many years of
discrimination and marginalization, have become more
assertive, with many demanding separation.

The current instability is creating conditions
conducive to the re-emergence of Al-Qaida in the
Arabian Peninsula. Even more concerning is the prospect
that Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula might establish
a foothold in parts of Abyan, Shabwah, Hadramawt
and Ma'rib. Today, Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula
has seized control of the 19th Infantry Brigade camp,
which houses a large arsenal of ammunition and heavy
weapons, in Bayhan and Shabwah.

The political uncertainty has created serious
pressure on the local currency, the riyal. If no political
settlement is secured in the coming days, a real
possibility exists that the riyal may collapse. Serious
concerns exist that the Government may be unable to
pay salaries in the next two to three months. That, in
turn, could prompt either a default on payments or an
increase in money supply - that is, money printing that
would cause severe devaluation and hyperinflation.
Should that happen, the current poverty rate of
54 per cent would increase further, and private sector
activities would be severely affected. Indeed, many
donors already have halted development aid, and others
are considering such action. That, in turn, would cause
most capital expenditures to cease and basic service
delivery to be interrupted, and tens of thousands could
lose their jobs. That could further impact the security
situation, with those unemployed joining armed groups
for monetary and financial reasons, and contribute to a
worsening of Yemen's humanitarian needs.

An estimated 15.9 million people - or 61 per cent
of the population - need humanitarian assistance.
The humanitarian response plan for 2015 is being
finalized this week and will request some $748 million
dollars to meet the needs of 8.2 million people. Of that
requirement, $285 million is for urgent life-saving and
protection assistance to the most vulnerable Yemeni
people. Humanitarian partners are concerned about
a possible expansion of conflict and the impact that
would have on the civilian population. The increased
political instability and risk of conflict could also
complicate humanitarian efforts to develop durable
solutions and sustainable livelihoods and to facilitate
Yemen's progress towards recovery.

The transition has encountered serious obstacles in
the past, yet time and again Yemenis have managed to
forge ahead. Today, Yemen is at a crossroads: either the
country will descend into civil war and disintegrate, or
it will find a way to put the transition back on track. That
largely depends on the political will of Yemeni leaders.
They all bear responsibility for the current status of
affairs and for finding a way to pull the country back
from the brink.

Thepolitical,humanitarianandsecurityenvironments
pose serious challenges for United Nations operations.
Nevertheless, the United Nations will not leave Yemen.
The United Nations reaffirms its commitment to
Yemen as it seeks to complete its political transition. In
that regard, we have been consulting and coordinating
closely with the Gulf Cooperation Council and other
international partners.

Yesterday marked the fourth anniversary of the
start of the peaceful demonstrations demanding change.
It was the courage of the young demonstrators that
opened the way for Yemenis to start a path to democratic
transformation. Despite all the setbacks, failures and
obstacles, that dream is still alive. Yemenis can still
achieve it. The Security Council and the international
community have a responsibility to support them in
these difficult times.

