Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): The delegation
of Bangladesh thank the Swedish presidency for
organizing today's quarterly debate.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, who spoke on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, and with the statement to be delivered by
the representative of Uzbekistan, who will speak on
behalf of the Organization ofIslamic Cooperation.

This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the
illegal Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories.
This protracted situation has been a sheer affront to the
values and principles enshrined in the United Nations
Charter. There is every reason for the States Members
of the United Nations to collectively question and
re-examine this untenable status quo. As we witness
wilful provocations to further diminish the prospects
of a two-State solution, the urgency of reorienting
the political horizon towards resuming the Middle
East peace process cannot be overstated here in the
Security Council.

The International peace conference held in Paris on
15 January was a clear proof of the sense of urgency
held by the international community. The message has
been unequivocal. The quest for a just, comprehensive
and lasting solution to the Palestinian question must be
pursued earnestly, all the more so given the backdrop
of a volatile regional security situation. We could agree
more with the French Minister for Foreign Affairs
when, in an op-ed piece in the Israeli daily Ha'aretz,
he wrote,

"Thinking that the Middle East could restore
its stability without settling its oldest conflict is
unrealistic. This conflict, if not dealt with, will
continue to fuel frustration and will ultimately
only worsen the vicious cycle of radicalization and
violence. It will continue to give budding terrorists
excuses for enlisting."

A recent survey of a relatively small segment of
our population conducted in an online interface on
discontents giving rise to violent extremist attitudes
has revealed that the situation of Muslims under foreign
occupation and other forms of systematic discrimination
ranks first among the list of such discontents. For those
who wish to ignore the underlying root causes of the
recent rise of violent extremism across the globe, such
evidence-based findings should provide some food
for thought.

There is near-unanimity in the international
community that the continued expansion of Israeli
settlements constitutes one of the most blatant
manifestations of the injustice committed against the
Palestinian people and poses a serious impediment to
the resumption and pursuit of the peace process. The
adoption of resolution 2334 (2016) by the Security
Council last month has reaffirmed the illegality of the
settlements and prevailed upon the occupying Power to
halt further expansion of settlements and stop attempts
to give legitimacy to the existing ones. In fact, the wise
words of the Permanent Observer of the Observer State
of Palestine earlier today sums it all up:

"The will ofthe Council, and ofthe international
community as a whole, to stand by the resolution
and implement its provisions will be an indicator of
whether the two-State solution can be saved or not
and whether peace will be possible or not."

For its part, Bangladesh will continue to add its
voice in support of implementing resolution 2334
(2016) and for the moment of truth it ushers in for
peace, justice and the international rule of law. As
reiterated by our Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina during
her meeting with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Palestine recently, the Government and the people of
Bangladesh will remain steadfast in advocating in
favour of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including their right to return, self-determination and
an independent and viable State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

