The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Angola, in which she requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Coelho Da
Cruz (Angola) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola, document S/ 1998/838.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1998/850, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Kenya, Portugal, the Russian
Federation, Slovenia and the United States of America.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/ 1998/847, which contains the
text of identical letters dated 11 September 1998 from the
Permanent Representative of Angola to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and to the
President of the Security Council, transmitting the text of
a letter dated 10 September 1998 from the President of
the Republic of Angola addressed to the Secretary-
General.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as

resolution 1195 (1998).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.30 pm.

