Mr. Osuga (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking the German presidency for convening this
important meeting. I would also like to express our
appreciation to the German delegation for making their
best efforts in drafting the concept note (S/20ll/408)
consistent with the mandate of the Security Council by
taking into account the views expressed in the past in
the Council and in the General Assembly.

For climate change negotiators, global warming
is one of the most imminent threats facing humankind.
However, the anticipated time span for tackling this
issue is different from that for the threats of armed
conflict, which the Security Council has dealt with
traditionally. Today, most countries have no doubt that
climate change threatens human security and, in the
long term, would have indirect adverse effects on
national security as well. On the other hand, we need to
be careful in considering what role the Security
Council could play in addressing the adverse impacts
of global warming on international peace and security.
Based on this recognition, I would like to share the
views and actions of my Government in the area of
climate change and its security implications.

Mr. Naoto Kan, Prime Minister of Japan, in his
address during the general debate of the General
Assembly last September, emphasized that small island
developing States are in peril of being submerged in
future because of global warming. Saving these
countries from their predicament is one of the reasons
we should address the issue of climate change with a
greater sense of urgency.

 

Receding coastlines caused by sea-level rise
would affect territorial waters and borders in many
countries with low-lying coastal areas, not limited to
small island developing States, and thus could incite
disputes between States. Furthermore, sea-level rise
would aggravate the vulnerability of coastal areas to
natural hazards, resulting in internally displaced
persons, refugees and other unexpected population
dynamics, which could raise the risk of conflict. Not
only food security and a variety of natural disasters,
but also the distribution of water resources and global
health challenges would be affected by climate change.
These issues would, in turn, weaken the resilience of
communities, which might lead to conflict or hamper
efforts to resolve existing disputes.

It should also be noted that the poorest countries
and the poorest people and communities within a
country are most vulnerable to the negative impact of
climate change. Given that fact, my delegation
underscores the importance of the nexus between
climate change, development and security.
In order to address climate change, we need to
establish a fair and effective international framework in
which all major economies take part. At the same time,
we should build upon, step by step, the agreements
reached under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change. At the seventeenth
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, we should
try to reach a well-balanced agreement to
operationalize the Cancun Agreements. Japan will
engage in a constructive manner in the preparation
process towards a successful Conference.

In this context, I would like to point out the fact
that the emissions from the parties under obligation to
the Kyoto Protocol amount to less than 30 per cent of
the total emissions today. The extension of those
obligations would not lead to the effective mitigation
of emissions. With regard to setting the second
commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol, Japan's
position remains unchanged.

At the fifteenth Conference of the Parties, in
Copenhagen, Japan announced that it would provide
assistance to developing countries in the amount of
$15 billion up to 2012; and it had already implemented
$9.7 billion as of March 2011. We have been
promoting policy dialogue in cooperation with the

 

countries most vulnerable to climate change, including
African countries.

At the Pacific Islands Leaders Meeting interim
ministerial meeting, which was held in Tokyo last
October to follow up on the outcomes of the fifth
Pacific Islands Leaders Meeting, participants
confirmed the steady implementation of Japan's fast-
start financing on climate change. My Government
remains fully committed to providing assistance to
Pacific island countries, as pledged at the fifth
Meeting, in other areas as well, such as the
environment and human security, including health and
education.

With regard to African countries, the third Tokyo
International Conference on African Development
(TICAD) ministerial follow-up meeting was held in
Senegal to follow up on the Yokohama Action Plan,
adopted at the fourth TICAD meeting. At the meeting,
participants agreed to commence preparations for a
low-carbon growth and sustainable development
strategy in Africa.

Finally, I would like to touch on disaster risk
reduction. On 11 March, Japan was hit by an
unprecedented earthquake. It should be noted that more
devastating damage was caused by the tsunami than by
the earthquake itself, which highlights the gravity of
disasters to low-lying coastlines. In order to promote
global cooperation for disaster risk reduction, we need
to establish a new international strategy to succeed the
Hyogo Framework for Action 2005-2015. To contribute
to this endeavour, as announced at the third session of
the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction, held
in Geneva last May, Japan is willing to hold a third
world conference on disaster reduction. In preparation
for that conference, Japan will organize a high-level
conference on large-scale natural disasters in 2012. We
very much appreciate the active support of Member
States for our initiatives.

