Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing.

Chad welcomes the holding of presidential
elections in Ukraine on 25 May and its turnout of more
than 60 per cent. The Ukrainians were able to vote
freely and elect Mr. Petro Poroshenko in a transparent
manner, with 55 per cent of the vote in the first round.
We congratulate the Ukrainian people and their new
President-elect, Mr. Poroshenko. Despite the challenges
in the eastern part of the country, where the ballot
was disrupted by ongoing violence, the elections went
smoothly. Chad hopes that the elections, whose proper
conduct was attested to by all international observers,
will endow the new President-elect with the legitimacy
and authority necessary to establish trust among all
components of Ukrainian society and preserve unity of
the country while respecting its diversity.

The election of the new President-elect marks a
major step in the consolidation of democracy and starts
a new phase that should allow a process of stabilization
and economic recovery in the country to be initiated
through dialogue. The international community must
support the new Ukrainian authorities in meeting the
numerous challenges before them. While we welcome
the important step taken in the presidential elections
in Ukraine, Chad remains concerned by the situation
in the eastern part of the country. Chad condemns the
ongoing acts of violence in the east, which have led
to several deaths and the kidnapping of four monitors
from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), whose immediate release we demand
from their captors. Chad reiterates its call for the
immediate cessation of fighting and invites all the
parties to refrain from the use of force and to favour a
peaceful way out of the crisis through dialogue.

In that regard, the task of bringing peace and
reconciliation to all the Ukrainian people falls
principally on the new President-elect in his capacity
as President of all Ukrainians without exception. In
that context, we invite the armed groups to lay down
their arms and start direct negotiations with the new
Ukrainian authorities in order to restore peace and
preserve the country's unity. We believe that frank and
open dialogue is the best response to all expectations
and anxieties. Unilateral proclamations of independence
on a part of the Ukrainian territory will not call into
question the integrity and sovereignty of the country to
which Chad remains committed.

In that perspective, Chad recognizes the importance
of the mediation of the international community in
general, and of the United Nations, the OSCE and
Ukraine's neighbours in particular, in the search for a
peaceful result to the crisis in Ukraine. Chad gives its
full support to all good offices.

