Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation to the
presidency of the Security Council for convening this
open debate on the situation in Somalia at this
important juncture in the efforts of the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG), the region and the
international community to restore peace and stability
in brotherly Somalia. Allow me also to welcome the
high-level participation in this meeting on the part of
the TFG, as represented by Prime Minister Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed.
11-25878
I should like to express my delegation's sincere
condolences to, as well as our support for, the forces of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

The situation in Somalia has been the focus of
growing attention from the international community.
This is due to an awareness that the threats stemming
from this situation do not stop at Somalia's borders but
also affect the region and the world as a whole. This
situation has resulted from the absence of peace,
stability and development in Somalia. It has set the
stage for the humanitarian tragedy now experienced by
the Somali people and created a fertile environment for
the growth of terrorism and piracy.

The high-level meeting on Somalia that took
place during the sixty-fifth session of the General
Assembly illustrated the growing attention of the
international community. We look forward to that
continued attention.

During the recent period of the transition, the
TFG has played an effective role, despite great
difficulties. The TFG has made unremitting efforts,
with the support of AMISOM. and regional and
international partners, to expand the area under its
control, enhance security, extend State authority,
provide basic services to Somali citizens, enhance
transparency and broaden the scope of the political
reconciliation process on the basis of the Djibouti
Peace Agreement. The agreement reached between the
Transitional Federal Government and the Ahlu Sunna
Wal Jama'a group was a result of those efforts.

While we commend those efforts on all levels by
the TFG, Egypt also emphasizes that it is important that
they continue to be made in the coming months in
order to accomplish the outstanding transitional tasks,
in particular the drafting of the constitution. That will
require the Security Council and the international
community to enhance their support and formulate a
comprehensive strategy to support the TF G's efforts to
deal with the situation in Somalia. This strategy should
be based on respect for Somalia's unity and territorial
integrity and must build on what has already been
achieved during the transition period.

In that regard, Egypt stresses the importance that
any decision regarding post-transitional arrangements
should reflect the consensus of the Somali parties
themselves and that this consensus should stem from a
broad-based dialogue among the Somali parties in a
way that contributes to enhancing the reconciliation
process as well as the efforts to achieve peace and
stability in Somalia. Egypt calls upon the Somali
parties to respond to the efforts of Special
Representative of the Secretary-Genera Augustine
Mahiga in that regard.

Acts of piracy and armed robbery off the coast of
Somalia have contributed to attracting much more
attention from the international community to the
situation in Somalia than the situation had garnered
previously. However, international efforts so far have
dealt with only part of the problem, as the focus has
been on combating acts of piracy at sea instead of on
directing greater attention to the fundamental
underlying causes on the mainland. Egypt has warned
against such a partial approach and has always
emphasized - in particular through our participation
in the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia and its Trust Fund Board, as well as through
our chairmanship of Working Group 4 - the
importance of the international community adopting a
comprehensive approach that takes into account the
root causes of the problem and addresses its political,
security, economic and humanitarian dimensions, in
particular the two decades of the absence of State
authority, peace, stability and development. To achieve
that goal, Egypt underlines the importance of taking a
number of actions, including the following.

First, the TFG should enhance its efforts to
expand the scope of the reconciliation process,
building on the steps achieved in this area so far, and
continue to maintain its cohesion, promote
transparency in its work and enhance its credibility by
accomplishing the outstanding transitional tasks, in
particular the drafting of the constitution.

Secondly, the international community must
redouble its support to the TFG, led by President
Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, in order to support the
TFG's efforts to build the capacity of its institutions, in
particular in the security sector. In that context, all
parties must fulfil the commitments they made during
the Brussels Conference in April 2009 in support of the
Somali security sector and the African Union Mission
in Somalia.

Thirdly, the international community should
continue to provide support to AMISOM. in order to
enable it to reach its authorized strength of 12,000
troops, in accordance with resolution 1964 (2010), and
address the gaps in the financial and logistical support
extended to the Mission. Furthermore, the Security
Council should continue to consider the deployment of
a United Nations peacekeeping mission in Somalia.
Strengthening the capacity of Somali security
institutions together with continued support to
AMISOM. will contribute to creating conditions
conducive to the deployment of such a mission.

Fourthly, efforts to combat acts of piracy at sea
should be part of a comprehensive strategy that
benefits from the progress on the security and political
tracks in Somalia. Such a strategy should work to
promote an environment suitable for development and
create alternative employment opportunities for Somali
youth. In that regard, it may be appropriate to consider
holding a donors' conference designed to launch a
process for development in areas where the security
situation is improving, especially in the light of the fact
that the financial support during the transitional period
was not significant.

Egypt will continue to pay great attention to the
situation in Somalia, as it represents an important part
of the Arab, African and Islamic arenas. We will
maintain that attention and continue to support capacity
building for Somali institutions through educational
missions from Al-Azhar Al-Sharif, training
programmes for Somali security and coast guard forces
and training courses for Somali cadres, as well as
humanitarian and medical aid.

Finally, Egypt hopes that our discussion today
will contribute to the formulation of a comprehensive
vision on how to help Somalia achieve peace, stability
and development.

