Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): Let me begin by
expressing my delegation's sincere appreciation to the
sponsors of the draft resolution, as well as the members
of the United Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador
(ONUSAL), whose mandate will expire on 30 April 1995.

We recognize that since ONUSAL began its
operations in 1991 many positive developments have
occurred in El Salvador. For example, violations of
fundamental human rights have declined markedly. Most
important, ONUSAL played a crucial part in the
verification of the implementation of the Peace Accords.
Its accomplishments in transforming a society scarred by
violence after years of civil strife and initiating a process
of transition to peace and stability stand out as a premier
example of the role of the United Nations in maintaining
peace and security. Indeed, ONUSAL deserves our full
respect for its role in assisting the people of El Salvador
to stride away from a violent and closed society and
towards peace and reconciliation.

In this respect, my delegation wishes to highlight the
fact that among the various United Nations peace-keeping
operations around the world the United Nations Observer
Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL) has accomplished its
mission more than satisfactorily. The most important
lesson learned from the Salvadoran experience is
undoubtedly that reaching political agreement among the
warring parties on a firm and reliable basis is a crucial
element in ensuring the effectiveness and credibility of
any United Nations peace-keeping operation.

Most important, the mission in El Salvador is an
excellent demonstration that the role of the United
Nations in furthering peace and security is not only a
theoretical concept but also implementable in practice.
Furthermore, the capacity for effective conflict
management in El Salvador must be seen as a successful
regional effort supported by the international community.
This experience can provide a number of important
lessons which may be extremely useful for furthering
peace and stability in other countries and regions of
conflict.

However, as pointed out in the report of the
Secretary-General, much work remains to be done. For
instance, issues such as the increase in common crime,
the legitimacy and credibility of State institutions, and the
role of the military, intrinsically linked to the credibility
and authority of the National Civil Police, must be
addressed. This will also have a great impact on the

 

political system as a whole. We therefore believe that it is
crucial for the international community to guarantee that
after the dismantling of ONUSAL measures will be taken
to maintain the capacity of the United Nations to verify
compliance with those parts of the Peace Accords whose
implementation is still pending, so that the process of
building sustainable peace in El Salvador will continue. In
this context, my delegation would once again like to
express its support for the Secretary-General's proposal to
maintain the presence of a small team in El Salvador to
continue the work of the United Nations.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to pay tribute
to all the personnel of ONUSAL, both military and civilian,
for their dedication and perseverance and the exemplary
manner in which they have carried out the mandate
entrusted to them. They have spared no effort to restore
hope to the people of El Salvador and consolidate peace in
that war-torn country. We would also like to pay our
highest respects to Mr. Enrique ter Horst, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in El Salvador, and
his predecessors for their untiring efforts and contributions
towards the restoration of peace and stability in that
country.

We trust that the progress towards peace and
reconciliation in El Salvador, in accordance with the Peace
Accords, will continue and not only enable peace and
reconciliation to take hold in El Salvador, but also further
peace and stability in the entire region.

In the light of the foregoing considerations, we will
vote in favour of the draft resolution.

