Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): Let
me use this opportunity to praise your leadership,
Madam President, and that of your team. As
Ambassador Holbrooke told your Foreign Minister just
two weeks ago, it has been a very busy and productive
month - and for this we take our hats off to you.

The Council authorized you on Tuesday to
express its heartfelt condolences to the family of
Private Leonard William Manning, who was killed
earlier this week in the service of peace, the
international community and the people of East Timor.
Private Manning's untimely death reminds us of the
risks of peacekeeping and of the courage of the men
and women who make up the United Nations forces. I
note that New Zealand Permanent Representative
Michael Powles is in the Chamber today, and I take this
opportunity to convey to his Government and the
people of New Zealand our sympathy and our respect. I
am sure we all hope that UNTAET, New Zealand and
the Government of Indonesia can work together to
apprehend and bring to justice Private Manning's
killers.

As we heard from Assistant Secretary-General
Annabi this morning, the United Nations is doing an
important job in East Timor, and UNTAET's great
progress is aptly described in the Secretary-General's
report. As we heard from Sergio Vieira de Mello last
month, UNTAET is increasingly "Timorizing" its
administration, working with the East Timorese
leadership to develop a timetable to draft a
constitution, set elections and declare independence.
The Secretary-General's report contains important
benchmarks for UNTAET as it moves into the next
phase of its work. It underscores that East Timor will
require attention and assistance from the international
community even after independence. And despite
instability in the border area, the situation in the
eastern part of East Timor is calm and the United
Nations is correctly proceeding with a logical and
gradual diminution of UNTAET's troop strength -
which will result in a significant reduction by early
next year, without sacrificing overall security.

Despite UNTAET's great progress, problems
remain along the border, fuelled by the intolerable
situation in West Timor. The Government of Indonesia
is abrogating its responsibility to maintain law and
order in West Timor, especially in and around the
camps. Their failure to do so threatens the work of the
United Nations and the impressive progress made to
date. The Council for months has expressed concern
about the situation in the refugee camps. Yet the
situation continues to deteriorate, and UNHCR is
threatened by thugs and blocked from doing its vital
work.

For months the Council has called on the
Government of Indonesia to end cross-border
incursions, to disarm and disband the militia and to
prosecute those responsible for violence. But the
situation does not change. The Indonesian Government
and the security forces do not act, and violence and
instability continue in West Timor. The death of Private
Manning is the tragic result of these failures.

There have been many useful discussions
between President Wahid, Xanana Gusmao, and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Sergio
Vieira de Mello. These discussions are described in
detail in the Secretary-General's report. Important
agreements have been reached on cooperation, and
there have been Visits of openness, such as those by
West Timor Governor Piet Tallo and Baucau Bishop
Basilio Nascimento. Indeed, the sharing of information
occurring now between Indonesian and UNTAET
human rights investigators demonstrates what can be
accomplished with the right intentions. However, what
is needed urgently are tangible improvements on the
ground, especially in West Timor.
Indonesia must do more: it must live up to its
written commitments; it must live up to its
international agreements; and it must pave the way for
a future stable and friendly relationship between two
sovereign neighbours: the great, multi-ethnic Republic
of Indonesia and the new, fledgling State of Timor
Lorosa'e.

I understand that the delegation of the United
Kingdom has circulated a draft presidential statement.
We support the draft and stand ready to finalize it as
soon as possible. We do believe, however, that
additional language should be added to more accurately
reflect the serious problems experienced by UNHCR in
the West Timor camps, in particular the failure of the
Government of Indonesia to fulfil its responsibilities to
maintain law and order. We will come to the meeting
this afternoon with suggestions along those lines.

I would like to end my statement by touching on
an entirely separate issue, unrelated to East Timor. The
United States Government, as well as other
Governments and the Secretary-General, has expressed
concern to the Government of Indonesia over the
continuing violence in the Moluccas, which has
resulted in the death of thousands and a humanitarian
crisis affecting hundreds of thousands of Indonesian
citizens. Muslims are killing Christians, Christians are
killing Muslims. We have heard many alarming reports
over the last few months. For instance, just this
morning, we heard a report that members of the Laskar
Jihad are driving through the city of Ambon,
instructing all Christians to evacuate by 31 July or face
execution. Similarly, in Poso there are reports of
actions by Christians against Muslims. Unfortunately,
we cannot confirm these reports since the Government
of Indonesia does not allow us access, but given the
history of Rwanda and of Srebrenica, the international
community must speak out against this violence.

It is the responsibility of the Government of
Indonesia to act to end this crisis. The United States
calls on the Government of Indonesia to take steps to
restore law and order and basic services to all affected
communities, Christian and Muslim alike. The United
States further calls on the Government of Indonesia to
allow international humanitarian aid workers
immediate safe access to the region to provide urgently
needed assistance to its people. Jakarta must take
action immediately.

