Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and
Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga.

At present, the situation in the Abyei Area remains
generally stable. The political situation in the Sudan
and South Sudan has witnessed positive progress.
The two sides have strengthened their interaction
and cooperation on Abyei and have been actively
cooperating with the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA) in the performance of its
mandate. China welcomes such developments.

The Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2019/817) that the Abyei Area still faces many
challenges and that the security situation remains
fragile. The proper resolution of the issue of Abyei
is of vital importance to the stability of the Sudan,
South Sudan and the entire region. We must continue
to promote cooperation between the Governments
of the Sudan and South Sudan and seek a political
settlement to the issue of Abyei. The Security Council
should continue to fully respect the leadership role
of the Sudan and South Sudan on the Abyei issue,
listen carefully to the views of both sides, continue
to support regional and subregional organizations,
such as the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, and carry out good offices
in support of African countries providing African
solutions to African problems. The Governments of the
Sudan and South Sudan should continue to cooperate
on the establishment of administrative, judicial and
public security institutions in the Abyei Area as soon
as possible so as to ease intercommunal tensions. The
international community should give active support in
that regard.

We must continue to support UNISFA in
implementing its mandate. The mission has an
important role in maintaining the stability of the Abyei
Area. China welcomes the efforts of Ethiopia, as one of
the troop-contributing countries, notes the Secretary-
General's recommendation and supports the extension
of UNISFA's mandate.

On the issue of UNISFA's reconfiguration, the
Security Council should listen carefully to the views
of the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan,
the African Union and troop-contributing countries.
The Secretariat should strengthen communication and
coordination with relevantparties, give the peacekeeping
force a greater role and promote the proper settlement
of the Abyei issue. China stands ready to work with
African countries and the international community to
contribute to resolving the Abyei issue and promote
peace, stability and development in Africa.

