Mr. Ansay (Organization of the Islamic Conference): On behalf of the General Secretariat of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), I thank
you, Sir, for calling on me to address the Council on the
situation in Afghanistan.

At the outset, I should like to take this opportunity
to extend to you my warmest congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I am confident that your professional skills
and rich experience in the international arena will serve
you well in leading and directing the complex work of the
Security Council at this difficult time. I should also like
to take this opportunity to thank your predecessor,
Ambassador Cabral, the Permanent Representative of
Guinea-Bissau, for steering the work of the Council so
ably during the month of September.

At this meeting the OIC once again joins the United
Nations, as it is continuing to do at the field level, in
expressing its serious concern at the unfortunate turn that
the Afghan conflict has taken in the past few weeks, and
especially in the past few days, which have added to the
enormous loss of life, heavy injuries and colossal
destruction of property that the nation has endured since
its liberation. Throughout the years of civil war my
organization has focused unreservedly on endeavours to
promote a cessation of hostilities in Afghanistan so that
the necessary climate for a credible peace process leading
to the formation of a broad-based representative
government can be created.

In our contacts with the various Afghan leaders,
especially during OIC missions to that country, including
the two that I led in July and August 1995, we have
consistently tried to show them the futility of resorting to
the use of force and seeking a military solution instead of
negotiating a common workable settlement to their
present predicament. We have tried to help them to
realize, through the lessons of history, that the results of
a heroic struggle for liberation from foreign invaders are
normally very different from those of wresting the reins
of government from their own people, in their own land,
through means that are not lawful or peaceful. A solution
forced from the inside that does not carry the sincere
commitment of all, cannot last and, more often than not,
has a boomerang effect.

While we all continue, as we must, to advocate
neutrality and non-interference in the internal affairs of
other countries, we cannot remain oblivious to the fact
that the effects of instability and chaos in the country are

 

also felt beyond its borders. Let us recognize, therefore, that
what is happening inside Afghanistan cannot leave its
neighbours completely unaffected, and that the return of
peace and tranquillity to Afghanistan would bring relief, in
both political and economic terms, to the Governments and
peoples of those other countries, which have also been, in
varying degrees, the victims of, first, foreign occupation,
and now of civil war in Afghanistan.

To discourage the unstable conditions from continuing
and to prevent further escalation of the internal armed
conflict, we believe that it behooves all States to play a
constructive role by preventing the sale and supply of arms
to any and all factions in Afghanistan at this time. Their
role in preventing the harbouring and training of terrorists
and in eliminating the devastating drug traffic will also be
crucial to the containment of the present problem in
Afghanistan.

We in the OIC are complementing the United Nations
in our collective efforts to assist the diverse Afghan
leadership, to the extent that it is humanly possible within
our limited means, to bring back peace and tranquillity to
the country and to restore, among other things, the precious
human rights, including those of women and children, that
have been so trampled in the turmoil. Towards this end, a
number of high-level OIC missions have been sent to
Afghanistan. During these missions, discussions with
various Afghan leaders led to the proposal and active
pursuit of the idea of convening, in accordance with
relevant United Nations and OIC resolutions, a meeting of
representatives of all Afghan factions, from inside and
outside Afghanistan, to explore and develop a commonly
acceptable framework for addressing the country's political
and security issues, including a peaceful transfer of power.

While renewing the call for such a broad-based
meeting of Afghan leaders, we now believe, especially in
the light of the latest developments, that it might be useful,
as a preliminary and complementary move, to advocate the
convening of an informal meeting of representatives of the
interested Governments that would be in a position to assist
the Afghan leaders in their reconciliation process and in the
eventual rehabilitation of their country and its people. My
organization is prepared to work with the United Nations in
convening such an informal meeting of the representatives
of other interested States and, subsequently, a meeting of
the leaders of the various Afghan factions in any location
agreeable to the participants, in pursuit of the objectives to
which I referred.
 

I should like to take this opportunity to inform the
Council that a high-level OIC mission is about to visit
Afghanistan to complement United Nations efforts for
reconciliation that are currently under way. I shall be
joining that mission.

In conclusion, I should like to reiterate the numerous
calls of the Secretary General of the OIC, Mr. Hamid
Algabid, the most recent of which was voiced here in
New York only a few days ago, for the immediate
cessation of hostilities in Afghanistan by all States and
factions, for the prevention of the sale and supply of arms
to all factions in Afghanistan and for the immediate
introduction of confidence-building measures, including
an informal meeting of interested countries to assist in the
peace process. This would be followed by the convening
of a meeting of representatives of various Afghan parties
and personalities, and of important segments of Afghan
society, to evolve an agreed programme for promoting a
peaceful settlement of the Afghan problem.

I should like to reassure the Council of my
organization's full commitment to playing a constructive
role complementary to that of the United Nations in
facilitating the mission of the United Nations
representative, Mr. H011, and the overall peace process in
Afghanistan.

