The President: I should like to inform the
Council that l have received a letter from the
representative of Burundi, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nkingiye
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them the
fifth report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in Burundi, contained in document
S/2005/728.

Members also have before them document
8/2005/811, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2005/736, which contains the text of a
letter dated 23 November 2005 from the Charge
d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of
Burundi to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Security Council
is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
before it. If I hear no objection, I shall now put the
draft resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China,
Denmark, France, Greece, Japan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1650 (2005).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 6p.m.

