Mr. Mpundu (Zambia): On behalf of the
Zambian delegation, allow me to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency for the month of
February. My delegation has full confidence that your
immense experience and diplomatic skill will enhance
the efficiency and effectiveness of the work of this
supreme body of our Organization.

My delegation wishes to commend the Secretary-
General for his report on small arms, contained in
document S/2005/69.

The issue of small arms and light weapons should
not be viewed as a light one, as some suggest.
Although they are light in nature, small arms are
capable of inflicting enormous suffering on innocent
people and destroying property. The question of illicit
arms deals, therefore, must be tackled vigorously by all
Member States if the world is to attain meaningful
peace and security for all.

It is gratifying to note that Member States have
recognized that the world today is faced with this
common problem, which requires a common solution.
Governments have a collective responsibility to ensure
that peace and security prevail within and beyond their
borders by cooperating with one another. Zambia
shares the view of the rest of the international
community that concerted efforts at national, regional
and international levels can be most effective in

addressing the problem of small arms and light
weapons.

One of the most effective and practical ways in
which to deal with the menace of the illegal trade in
small arms and light weapons is through destroying
them. In that context, my Government has formulated a
deliberate policy in which it offers amnesty from
prosecution to anyone who surrenders an illegal
firearm or provides information leading to the recovery
of such a firearm to the police. In return, that person
receives payment of up to the equivalent of $55. Since
the amnesty was announced, my Government has seen
more than 3,000 firearms surrendered to the police.
Some of those firearms were burned at the ceremony
on 17 July 2003.

Since its independence in 1964, Zambia has been
a sanctuary to many refugees fleeing armed conflicts in
their countries, especially during the wars of liberation
in the Southern African region. Some of the former
combatants entered Zambia with their weapons and
later either sold their arms cheaply to criminals or
exchanged them for food. Subsequently, the weapons
were used in the commission of crimes.

As a result of that proliferation of arms, my
Government enacted a law to regulate civilian firearm
ownership, called the Firearms Act. The Act prescribes
strict control over the licensing of firearms and limits
the number of permits to civilians to 600 per year. It
also restricts dealers' sales of arms to licensed
Zambians alone and limits the amount of ammunition
they can sell to them at any given time.

At the regional level, Zambia has been active in
the Southern African Development Community's
programme on small arms and light weapons through
the Southern African Regional Police Cooperation
Organization (SARPCO), which was established in
October 1995. My Government continues to encourage
non-governmental organizations and civil society to get
involved in the dissemination of information in this
noble fight, which will enhance national and regional
security and ultimately the welfare and safety of our
people.

I should like to conclude by reaffirming Zambia's
commitment to the fight against the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons in all its aspects.
Although Zambia does not manufacture or export arms,
it has been a victim of fraudulent end-users at the
hands of international arms-dealer cartels. In that
regard, the Zambian Government calls for stronger and
more effective controls in the export, import, transit
and retransfer of small arms and light weapons. It is
our considered view that the manufacturing and
exporting countries are in a better position to control
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons than
the recipients.

