Mr. Reynders (Belgium) (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset to thank France for having organized this
open debate. I am delighted at the presence here of
Mr. Mubin Shaikh, who spoke here in New York two
years ago at an event that Belgium had organized.

My country associates itself fully with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union, that of the
Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict and
that of Norway on security in schools.

I should like to make the following comments in
my national capacity.

We welcome the publication of the latest report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2017/821), and I share the deep concern expressed
therein with regard to the extent and gravity of the
violations committed against children in 2016. It is
regrettable that armed conflict has continued to affect
children disproportionately - as evidenced by the
United Nations-confirmed figure of 1,340 children
victims in Yemen. The problem of children in armed
conflict is multidimensional. I would like to mention
two aspects in particular - the prevention of child
recruitment by non-State armed groups and the
reintegration and rehabilitation of children affected
by conflicts. Both of those aspects are at the heart
of the Paris Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, to
which Belgium has acceded. Belgium also signed on,
in March, to the Safe Schools Declaration. Children are
often recruited or abducted forcefully, but some have
joined non-State armed groups as a result of economic,
social or security-related pressure. There must be real
alternatives to children joining armed groups.

Prevention is the only lasting solution for resolving
the issue of children's participation in armed conflict.
It is essential that States develop prevention plans that
cover all aspects of that issue. Effectively preventing
the recruitment and exploitation of children requires
schooling that does not put children in harm's way. In
that regard, it is regrettable to see the increased impact
of Violent extremism on children. That phenomenon
results from a context whose root causes we must work
to understand if we are to effectively combat it. Our
fight against Violent extremism can be successful only
if we address the root causes, while fully respecting
human rights and fundamental liberties.
Moreover, I wish to stress the importance of
reintegrating and rehabilitating children affected by
armed conflict. The extreme experiences that those
children have lived through often have an adverse
effect on their ability to reintegrate into society. It is
crucial to work together to provide them tailored long-
term support.

In that spirit, Belgium and UNICEF held a parallel
event yesterday on the release and reintegration of
children linked to armed forces or armed groups. I
thank Ms. Gamba for her active participation at that
event, which is part of the follow-up to the high-level
meeting that Belgium organized last year in New
York - attended by our Queen Mathilde - which
enabled to us to share good practices regarding the
psychosocial rehabilitation and social integration of
children in armed conflict. Belgium is committed to
remaining active in addressing those issues.

Additionally, sharing experiences was the main
goal of the Brussels conference on the subject at
the beginning of this year. On that occasion, we
mentioned the good practices that had been developed
by various international and regional organizations
on the development and implementation of child
protection policies.

I join the Secretary-General in welcoming the
proactive approach and contributions of regional and
subregional organizations to child protection. I echo
his sentiments in calling on the Council to continue
to request the deployment of the necessary means to
protect children in United Nations peace operations. It is
essential that when mandates be reviewed, when troops
are drawn down or when funding for peace operations
decreases, child-protection adviser positions should not
be disproportionately reduced.

The theme of children in armed conflict is one that
is very close to my heart. I would like to conclude by
affirming our commitment to staying the course and
working even more closely with Council partners during
the 2019-2020 mandate, for which we are a candidate.

