Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing
this meeting. I would also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Holmes for his briefing, as well as
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2009/277).

As other speakers have noted, this year marks the
tenth anniversary of the first Security Council debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. In his
report, the Secretary-General cites some encouraging
actions that the Council has taken over that decade, but
he also lays out the many challenges that still lie ahead
if the international community is to take the steps
necessary to protect civilians and translate the
Council's actions into concrete improvements on the
ground. The Secretary-General has made several
recommendations that the Council should review
carefully in order to be able to better promote the
protection of civilians in armed conflict worldwide.

Civilian protection must be a core principle in all
military operations. The United States understands that
protecting civilians is a vital priority. In Afghanistan,
while Taliban and Al-Qaida forces deliberately employ
tactics designed to increase the number of innocent
civilian deaths, the international coalition continues to
fight those Taliban and Al-Qaida forces with as few
civilian casualties as possible. We deeply regret every
innocent civilian life that is lost. United States forces
serving in Afghanistan operate under rules and orders
designed to minimize civilian casualties. We will
continue to review them to improve their effectiveness.
As Secretary of Defense Robert Gates said recently, we
are making reduction of civilian casualties in
Afghanistan a priority. The new commander of the
International Security Assistance Force has made it
clear that he will move quickly to implement that
priority.

The United States believes that all nations must
abide by international humanitarian law. We are
determined to act to prevent violations of international
humanitarian law and committed to working with the
international community to defeat violence in a manner
consistent with our values, legal obligations and ideals.

At the 2005 World Summit, Member States
reached a mutual understanding that all nations have
the responsibility to protect their civilian populations
and that the international community has the
responsibility to protect civilians when States are
unwilling or unable to do so. The Security Council
reaffirmed that commitment in resolution 1674 (2006).
The Council has taken that principle into account, in
part, in its actions on the Sudan and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Resolution 1674 (2006) also reaffirmed another
principle, namely, that ending impunity for violations
of international humanitarian law is essential if a
society is to come to terms with its past, prevent future
abuses, establish accountability and promote
reconciliation. International and hybrid tribunals have
been successful in prosecuting crimes that involve
violations of international humanitarian law. But as the
Secretary-General rightly points out in his report, to
truly end impunity we must help to establish functioning
national judicial systems so that criminals may be tried
locally and senior leaders can be held responsible for
atrocities committed in their own countries.

We must take special note of the most vulnerable
populations in conflicts, including women and
children. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
sexual violence is widespread and sometimes used as a
weapon of war. We must redouble our efforts to
address the issue in all of its aspects, from prevention
measures that include efforts to change attitudes about
the status of women, to the treatment of victims and to
better accountability for perpetrators. In that regard, we
look forward to the Secretary-General's report on the
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008), which deals
with women, peace and security. The Council must
ensure that the provisions of that resolution, especially
those related to sexual violence, are implemented and
that there are clearly understood consequences if
individuals, including peacekeepers and relief workers,
are themselves found guilty of such crimes.

The compulsory recruitment of children as soldiers
is, sadly, still a reality. In armed groups such as the
Lord's Resistance Army and in a number of countries,
children continue to be exploited in that awful manner.
Now that the fighting has ended in Sri Lanka, we are
beginning to identify children who were forcibly
recruited into the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam.

We have witnessed too many instances in recent
months in which Governments and armed groups have
not allowed sufficient access to vulnerable populations.
The Secretary-General's report makes 15 specific
recommendations to address this issue. It includes an
annex detailing constraints on humanitarian access. We
are certain that the recommendations and annex will
become a useful tool in helping to ensure civilian well-
being.

In several instances, peacekeeping operations
have been asked to take on more robust mandates that
include the protection of civilians as a priority. But we
must ensure that peacekeepers have properly defined
and realistic mandates and the appropriate skills and
resources to fulfil their missions.

The Secretary-General's report states that a
protection-of-civilians mandate in peacekeeping
missions remains largely undefined, as both a military
task and as a mission-wide task. Given that conclusion,
we look forward to the upcoming study by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations on how best to
put into actual practice guidelines for protecting
civilians. We hope that the study will also provide
guidance that will help the members of the Security
Council when we consider renewing the mandates of
specific missions.
Finally, let me thank and commend the men and
women of United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations whose dedication to the cause of
protecting civilians amid crisis and strife is critical to
our ultimate success.

