Mr. Kalomoh: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to provide an introduction of the Secretary-
General's progress report on the recommendations of
the Security Council's mission to West Africa
(S/2003/ll47).

The progress report of the Secretary-General on
the recommendations of the Security Council mission
to West Africa, which is before the Council, points out
certain measures taken or envisaged in implementing
the Council's recommendations on Guinea-Bissau,
cote d'Ivoire, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The report
provides an initial assessment of how to address cross-
cutting issues identified by the mission in the
subregion. My briefing will also take into account
elements of some recent developments in the
aforementioned countries, which the mission visited
since the publication of the report.

As Council members will recall, the political
process in Guinea-Bissau for the preparation of
legislative elections is back on track after the junta-led
Military Committee handed power to the transitional
Government of national unity, made up of only civilian
leaders. The report of the Secretary-General notes the
declared commitment of the transitional Government to
restore constitutional legality and to hold legislative
elections on 28 March 2004, to be followed by
presidential elections in 2005.

Undoubtedly, those positive developments - and
one can only reiterate an earlier call by the Security
Council to the international community to remain fully
engaged with Guinea-Bissau - are, indeed, encouraging.
Financial resources for the legislative elections are in
place, and a number of Guinea-Bissau's partners have
provided assistance to address some of the critical
social and economic needs facing the country.

With respect to the situation in Cote d'Ivoire,
about which the members of the Council heard a
comprehensive briefing by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) last week, the report
indicates that implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement continues to be hampered by the parties'
unwillingness to abide fully by the spirit and the letter
of the Agreement. But encouraging progress has been
made, and due recognition must be given to that
progress. The peace process was stalled from
September to early December 2003 due to a stand-off
between the Government and the Forces nouvelles over
the procedures used in the appointment of the Ministers
of Defence and National Security. However, it is
encouraging to note in early December 2003, the
Ivorian parties recommitted themselves to the
implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement,
and the ministers of the Forces nouvelles have since
returned to the Government and resumed their posts in
the Government of National Reconciliation. The fact
that the peace process is back on track clearly
demonstrates the sustained commitment of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the international community, including
the recent DPKO-led assessment mission to cote
d'Ivoire to prepare recommendations on how the
United Nations presence in the country could be
reinforced and enhanced. To that end, the report
welcomes the news that the Security Council is
considering a full-fledged peacekeeping operation for
an initial period of 12 months. That is still under
consideration by the Council.

On Liberia, the report of the Secretary-General
indicates that early and determined steps in the
implementation of the peace process would augur well
for Liberia and would also contribute to the
consolidation of peace in neighbouring Sierra Leone
and the entire subregion of West Africa. As members
are aware, the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) is yet to attain its full troop strength, and the
report calls upon those Member States that have
promised troops to redeem their pledges as soon as
possible. We are confident that in the shortest possible
time - perhaps in the next month or two - UNMIL
will have acquired a substantial troop strength in the
country in order to begin the process of demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration. That deployment would
no doubt help enhance the security conditions in the
country, thus opening up the country for humanitarian
and other assistance to vulnerable populations. The
report also expresses the hope that the international
community will continue to demonstrate its full
engagement in Liberia by creating the necessary
conditions to ensure the success of the forthcoming
donor conference on the reconstruction of Liberia,
scheduled to take place here in New York on 5 and 6
February 2004.

On Sierra Leone, the report notes that progress is
being made in consolidating the peace in the face of
some remaining challenges. Those challenges include
the resource constraints of the security forces.
However, much remains to be done to ensure that the
planned withdrawal of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) takes into account the
Government's ability to assume primary responsibility
for national security. Recently, members of the Security
Council approved the Secretary-General's
recommendation contained in his twentieth report to
the Security Council on UNAMSIL (S/2003/l201) to
send an assessment mission to Sierra Leone in
February 2004 concerning a residual presence of the
United Nations and the nature and scope of that United
Nations presence after the withdrawal of UNAMSIL
from Sierra Leone.

Some recent developments contributing to the
consolidation of the peace process include the official
completion of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process and the successful ending of the
work of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission at
the end of last year.

Let me briefly turn to the cross-border issues, which
remain at the centre of the instability of the West African
subregion. As a follow-up to the recommendation of the
Security Council mission to the region, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa is in regular consultation with United Nations
political, peacekeeping and development missions in
the region in order to develop a holistic strategy to
address the cross-border problems afflicting the
subregion. In this regard, the Secretary-General will, in
coming weeks, submit a report to the Security Council
on cross-border and cross-cutting issues, with
recommendations on how best to address them and
minimize the recurrence of instability in the region.

In conclusion, by and large, one can conclude that
appreciable progress continues to be made in
implementing the recommendations of the Security
Council mission. Having invested so much already in
the subregion in terms of capital and resources, it is
important that the Council remain engaged there, to build
upon the progress being made in the afore-mentioned
countries and to address the cross-cutting regional issues
relating to peace and security and governance. I should
mention that the mission of the Security Council to the
subregion was highly welcomed both by Governments
and by the countries visited and contributed greatly to
the operations of the United Nations and to cooperation
between the United Nations and the parties in the
countries that the mission visited.

