Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa
expresses its appreciation to Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his briefing to the Council. We also
thank the Permanent Observer of Palestine and the
Permanent Representative of Israel for their statements.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered later today by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The past 18 months have seen dramatic
developments in North Africa and the Middle East.
Those developments have been brought about by the
unwavering will of people to demand their legitimate
rights. What is clear from what we have witnessed is
that the status quo that has allowed the rights of people
to remain unfulfilled for decades cannot continue.

In that light, the longstanding Palestinian-Israeli
conflict must be resolved. We cannot have a six-
decade-long conflict continue and allow generations of
people from both sides to be denied the opportunity to
live in peace and security and within internationally
recognized, secure borders.

South Africa remains disappointed that, since
23 September 2011, when the Quartet committed itself
to assist the parties to make progress in the peace
process, tangible progress is yet to be registered.
Instead, despite commendable efforts by some
important stakeholders, such as the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, there has been stagnation on the
political track. Additionally, the security and
humanitarian situation has worsened, particularly in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem. The most dramatic negative development
has been the continued building of illegal settlements
by Israel, which undermines the very foundation of a
viable, independent Palestinian State to exist alongside
the State of Israel.

We note the statement issued by the Middle East
Quartet in Washington, DC. on 11 April (see SG/2182). While we appreciate the efforts of the
Quartet to revive the political process and assist the
Palestinians with their institution-building efforts, we
once again raise the questions that we asked in the
Chamber at our debate three months ago (see S/PV.6706). Is it not time to assess the effectiveness of
the Quartet model? What more can the Security
Council do to help the parties resume negotiations and
find lasting peace?

The Quartet continues to meet periodically, yet it
has not shown the political will to follow through on its
decisions. Its road map, which is almost 10 years old,
has not been complied with, nor has its most recent
request for the parties to begin direct negotiations
immediately and without preconditions, or the
submission of proposals on borders and security.

The role of the Security Council in addressing
this matter should be reinvigorated. The Council is
responsible for international peace and security, and it
cannot absolve itself of responsibility on this crucial
matter. Ignoring this conflict affects the Council's
credibility. My delegation believes that a visit to the
region by the Council would be beneficial.

Additionally, we should consider the views of
relevant regional organizations on this matter. The
international community has been willing to take into
account the Views of relevant regional organizations,
such as the League of Arab States (LAS), in other
conflicts in the region. In that vein, the views of the
LAS should also be taken into account in resolving the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, which has directly affected
so many of its members.

We commend Palestinian President Mahmoud
Abbas for having taken the initiative to write to Israeli
Prime Minister Netanyahu, in an attempt to resume
credible negotiations. If the opportunity for restarting
credible, direct negotiations is not seized, the viability
of a two-State solution will slowly fade away.

What is of concern, however, is that despite
attempts to resuscitate the negotiations, the prospect
for direct talks seems low, as the Israeli Government
continues with its actions that militate against a
peaceful resolution of the conflict. Aside from the
ongoing illegal settlement construction, it persists with
home demolitions, illegal excavations of religious sites
and restrictions on access and movement on the
Palestinian people, while also maintaining its hold on
Gaza and not preventing settlers from attacking
Palestinian persons and their property.

In January, the Council was able to agree to
receive a briefing from Under-Secretary-General
Valerie Amos on the humanitarian situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, which served as
confirmation of the deteriorating situation in all of its
respects. Since then, the situation has not improved.
We look forward to receiving further briefings from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
regarding the situation.
The recent escalation of tensions in Gaza is of
particular concern. Its impact on the children of both
sides should be underscored. On 12 March, UNICEF

issued a statement in which it expressed deep concern
about the impact on children of the recent escalation of
violence in the Gaza Strip and Israel. A rocket fired
into Israel last month hit a school, which, fortunately,
was empty. The Israeli attacks into Gaza have left some
children not as fortunate. UNICEF has reported on the
death and injury of Palestinian children as a result of
those attacks. It has stated that, over the past year, 20
Palestinian and 5 Israeli children were killed, and
another 448 Palestinian and 2 Israeli children were
injured because of the fighting.

As the Council has shown commitment in
addressing issues related to children in armed conflict,
perhaps we should consider including that matter on
the agenda of the Working Group of the Security
Council on Children and Armed Conflict.

Finally, regarding the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, South Africa welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2043 (2012) by the Council,
providing for the deployment of the United Nations
Supervision Mission in Syria (UNSMIS). We urge all
sides to ensure the effective operation of UNSMIS by
facilitating its work and guaranteeing the safety of its
personnel.

We welcome the news that the advance team has
been able to visit key hotspots of the conflict,
including Horns, and that they have observed calm and
a halt to major hostilities. The deployment of the
advance team has already proved to be a calming
influence, as Violence has decreased during their
presence. That marked decrease in violence should now
be sustained.

The deployment of UNSMIS will be important to
ensure that the six-point proposal of Joint Special
Envoy Kofi Annan is implemented, and will likewise
play a crucial role with regard to the goal of ensuring
that all sides commit to a peaceful dialogue in order to
promote an all-inclusive process of negotiations that
leads to a political outcome that responds to the
legitimate aspirations of all Syrian people.

It is equally important that all members of the
international community give the resolution and the
Arman proposal the chance to succeed, and uphold and
respect the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Syria and the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
In conclusion, we reiterate that the current
developments in the Arab world undoubtedly have a
bearing on the future of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
and the broader Arab-Israeli conflict. In attempting to
resolve and address the challenges in the Middle East,
we should not lose sight of our efforts aimed at a
holistic resolution to the Middle East crisis, including
the Israeli-Palestinian, -Lebanese and -Syrian tracks.

