Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Mr. President, I thank you for convening today's
meeting and congratulate the Security Council's new
members. I welcome the Foreign Minister of Indonesia's
participation in this important meeting.

I align myself with the statements made on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the
Organization ofIslamic Cooperation.

We welcome Palestine's assumption of the
chairmanship of the Group of 77 and China and call for
its full membership in the United Nations.

Palestine's situation deteriorated last year. Israel
killed at least 295 Palestinian civilians and injured
more than 29,000. Many of the dead and about 7,000
of the injured were under 18 years old. That is a clear
example of war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Also in 2018, more Palestinian homes were demolished
and more illegal Israeli settlements built in blatant
violation of international law. And there are more new
plans to demolish more Palestinian homes, confiscate
more Palestinian lands and build more illegal Israeli
settlements, which will mean the forced displacement
of even more Palestinian families.

Last year, Israel also intensified its decade-long
illegal inhumane blockade of Gaza, whose continuation
will drastically worsen the already grave humanitarian
situation. In 2018, by enacting a law designed to ensure
Jewish supremacy over its other citizens, Israel legalized
racism. Very recently, it inaugurated an apartheid
highway that features a large concrete wall, one side
of which is open only to Israeli vehicles and the other
only to Palestinian vehicles. That is not surprising.
Racism is in the very nature of the Israeli regime. First,
it constructed a racial segregation wall, then it enacted
a racial discrimination law, and it has now constructed
an apartheid highway. That is extremely shameful. It
must be condemned in the strongest possible terms.

We should also strongly reject and condemn the
recognition of Al-Quds Al-Sharif as the Israeli capital
as well as the continued occupation ofparts of Lebanon
and the Syrian Golan by Israel. Such acts are material
breaches of international law and the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly.

Last but not least, let us revisit the main question:
why has the systematic violation of the inherent rights
of Palestinians continued unabated over the past 70
years? The answer is simple: by shielding Israel, the
United States has rendered the Council completely
ineffective with respect to Israel. Consequently, Israel
has been emboldened by impunity. Instead of facing
punishment, it has been rewarded to continuously and
brazenly commit all international crimes.

That is why, during its short lifespan, Israel has
waged more than 15 wars, occupied the territories of
Arab countries, invaded all its neighbours without
exception, attacked other countries in the region and
beyond, from the Middle East to Africa, and possessed
every kind of weapon of mass destruction. The list
goes on.

In recent years, Israel has repeatedly attacked
countries in the region and brazenly assumed
responsibility. What action has the Council taken
against such material breaches of the Charter of the
United Nations? Have we heard anything from the
United States except biased statements in support of
Israel? Have those breaches been condemned by certain
Western members of the Council?

Israel has been emboldened to the extent that
very recently, it stated that it had developed offensive
missiles that could reach anywhere in the area and any
target, thereby implicitly threatening all countries in
the region. Likewise, some time ago, Israel threatened
Iran with nuclear annihilation. That is, of course, a
wishful dream.

The gross and systematic violation of the territory
and sovereignty of countries in the region by Israel must
stop. That country must be held accountable for all such
breaches. Recalling Article 51 of the United Nations
Charter, we stress that all countries in the region have
an inherent right to defend themselves against any
armed attack by Israel. No one can deny or suspend
that right. They will decide how and when to exercise it.

The only option now is to put an end to such
impunity by holding Israel accountable for its crimes
against the Palestinians. That can ensure the application
of international law and deter its future violation. That
is why we believe that the world should continue to
support the realization of Palestinian rights and reject
any further occupation, aggression, oppression or
intimidation. We will continue to do so.

