Mr. Ould Abdallah: Last week, Somalia's
Transitional Federal Government announced its
reconciliation strategy, which involves local
peacemaking within the country and talks with the
external opposition. That was widely welcomed. The
Government's plan called for me to lead that process,
and I am fully committed to helping the various parties
come together for preliminary talks. I hope to
determine the timing and location of those discussions
soon.

In that connection, I would like to congratulate
the Somalis themselves, my fellow diplomats in charge
of Somalia and the members of the International
Contact Group. When I addressed the Security Council
last December, I called for an end to the costly 17 years
of a business-as-usual policy that has yet to bring
peace to the country. Since I made that speech, there
has been a new approach to addressing the conflict and
some indications of progress both inside and outside
the country.

In full agreement with President Yusuf, Prime
Minister Hussein has chosen a new and leaner Cabinet,
half of whose members come from outside the
parliament. It was welcomed both nationally and
internationally. In another sign of progress, the
Government moved to Mogadishu in January.

I spent three days in Somalia recently and held
joint discussions with the President, the Speaker and
the Prime Minister, who assured me of their
commitment to reconciliation. I addressed the
parliament, which is backing the peace initiative. I also
held meetings with the Alliance for the Re-Liberation
of Somalia. I am continuing to engage in regular
contacts with all sides. I visited Brussels, Cairo and
08-27826
Addis Ababa for consultations with Governments and
international organizations. I will soon go to other
countries, including the United Republic of Tanzania,
which is chairing the African Union.

Up until now, international attention has
essentially focused on Somalia's failings. In order to
do justice to the people's resilience and courage, I
broadened the agenda by organizing a conference of
Somali and international businesspeople in January, to
discuss how the private sector can help move the
country from a wartime to a peacetime economy.
Building on the success of that conference, I am
convening a larger follow-up summit later next week,
which will be opened by the Somali Prime Minister
and attended by international figures.

We need to recognize and encourage the efforts
made by Somalis themselves in terms of trade,
telecommunications and infrastructure. They are
encouraging developments, but they are not enough.
While more people are now talking about Somalia,
there is little action to stop the violence and
opportunism. I believe that Somalia remains a prisoner
of the past, never having been forgiven for the violent
actions carried out against the international community
in the 1990s. There is, it seems, either a reluctance to
go back there or a deliberate decision to punish all
Somalis, many of whom had not even been born when
the last international intervention occurred.

What is needed now is engagement by the
international community. I am not asking outside
countries to become active for moral or altruistic
reasons. They have a clearly mandated responsibility to
become involved in a country where there are
widespread violations of human rights and
humanitarian law. The concept of the responsibility to
protect was adopted at the 2005 World Summit of
leaders and later endorsed by the Security Council.

Indeed, today too much time is spent collecting
numbers and statistics concerning the suffering of the
Somali people. The real battle to be won is the battle to
be close to and to protect the victims of armed
violence, human rights abuses, drought and famine.

In my last speech I called for simultaneous action
on the political and security fronts. Those two tracks
are undoubtedly closely intertwined. Today we have
some progress on the political front with the
Government reconciliation plan. As the two tracks
should advance together and reinforce each other, there
08-27826
is a need for similar action on the security front. Acting
only on one of them - the political front - is like
limping along on one leg.

The Ugandan and Burundian troops are doing an
excellent job, which is clearly the responsibility of the
whole international community. They deserve our
thanks. Indeed, as indicated in the letter of
20 September 2007 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council, the security options
should not be limited only to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) or United Nations
troops. A strong interim multinational presence could
also be an option. This would involve the friends of
Somalia contributing political support, funds and
troops to stabilize the situation, preferably under a lead
country. I will continue my efforts in that direction.

More can be done to protect ships carrying
humanitarian assistance, as initiated by France last
December. Denmark has now taken over the same task
of escorting ships, and I understand that the
Netherlands has volunteered to continue the work. I
believe that such protection should be expanded into a
United Nations task force, the mission of which would
be to protect United Nations humanitarian supplies,
deter human smuggling, reduce piracy and support the
arms embargo. I have just engaged the services of a
retired general to prepare a paper on piracy off the
Somali coast.

For our work to be truly credible, we need to
deploy many more international staff inside the
country. That concerns the whole United Nations
country team - and, indeed, my office - and would
follow the example of the respected International
Committee of the Red Cross in Mogadishu. Being far
more visible inside the country would allow all of us to
closely engage with Somalis, identify their needs,
assist them and restore the reputation of the United
Nations. No other institution would benefit more from
such a move than the Security Council, which, in my
opinion, should visit Somalia this year.

To facilitate those efforts to improve stability and
encourage increased the numbers of international staff
in Somalia, we will need to accelerate security sector
reform and the training of the police force.

I see all the measures I have just mentioned as a
series of peacebuilding steps that can be undertaken in
the short term and would help stability.
3
The international community also needs to
address the question of impunity. Countless lives have
been lost and thousands forced from their homes.
Those responsible for the violence continue to profit
from the misery of others. We have appeased the
warlords, the extremists and the spoilers for too long
by wielding the carrot but not the stick. Those who
have carried out war crimes and crimes against
humanity need to be brought to account through the
International Criminal Court or another international or
local body. There could be a commission of inquiry to
look into the most serious crimes. The independent
expert could also be more involved in addressing the
issue of human rights.

Those solutions cannot all be imposed from
outside. Somalis themselves need to change their
approach. The "winner-takes-all" attitude, which leaves
no room for power-sharing, has destroyed the country
and its reputation. Compromise in negotiation, as
demonstrated in the Agreement of Al Hudaibiyya -
which is very important in Muslim countries -
between the Prophet Mohammed and the people of
Mecca, would benefit everyone. Reconciliation will
profit all, from businessman and farmers to politicians
and warlords.

Obviously the situation in Somalia is very
complex. Our analysis should therefore not be based on
partisan or inaccurate news reports, which are
particularly popular with computer users. To enable us
to make the right decisions, a level-headed analysis
should be based on firsthand information and expertise
on the issues and in the field. An ideological or
dogmatic approach should give way to continued
flexibility and due respect for the basic United Nations
principles of caring for populations and maintaining
peace.

In conclusion, Mr. President, in the past, your
country has helped Somalia, in particular with building
airports, which we still use today for travel to the
country. Under your presidency, it would be symbolic
if the whole Council could agree on concrete steps to
show the same compassion for Somalia and its people
as it has demonstrated elsewhere in Africa.

