Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): I wish to express my
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his monthly
report to the Council (S/2015/264) and to the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Baroness Valerie Amos,
for her briefing to the Council on the humanitarian
situation and the implementation of resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) regarding
humanitarian assistance and access into Syria. I also
wish to thank the Executive Director of the World Food
Programme, Ms. Ertharin Cousin, for her briefing
on the work of the WFP and its partners regarding
its monthly food assistance programme in Syria. I
further thank the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, Mr. Antonio Guterres, for his updates to
the Council on the situation of the Syrian refugees in
neighbouring countries.

We are also very privileged to have heard a briefing
by Ms. Angelina Jolie Pitt, the Special Envoy of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, who
has devoted much effort to raising the international
community's awareness of the plight of the Syrian
refugees. We share Ms. Jolie Pitt's concerns that too
many innocent people are paying the price of the
conflict in Syria and that the international community
must step up and do more.

Despite the international community's efforts
to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people, the
on-the-ground humanitarian situation has, we deeply
regret to say, deteriorated significantly. Indiscriminate
attacks and the deliberate targeting of civilians and
civilian infrastructure by both Government and armed
opposition forces have continued without respite. We
are perplexed that the parties to the conflict, each
claiming to be representing or fighting for the Syrian
people, are seemingly oblivious to the suffering and
destruction that they are inflicting on the Syrian people.
The ever-increasing numbers of civilian deaths and
injuries, displaced persons and refugees are evidence
of the destructive toll inflicted by this conflict.

While the humanitarian statistics may speak for
themselves, the Council must continue to speak for
the victims of the conflict, namely the millions of
Syrians who continue to suffer. The strategy by the
parties to the conflict of besieging and starving entire
cities, designed to ensure the submission and surrender
of whole populations, has added another horrifying
dimension to the Syrian conflict. It is appalling that
the parties to the conflict have increasingly employed
this practice as a strategy of war, one that we condemn
unequivocally.

The barbarity of such strategies is unprecedented
and unparalleled in modern history. Entire populations
not only face death and injury, they are also subjected to
inhumane and horrific conditions in the course of their
daily survival. When we think about those physically
trapped and besieged in cities and deprived of and
denied basic essentials such as food, water, health
care and medicines, it is beyond our imagination to
comprehend the daily struggle and hardship they have
to go through in order to survive.

Despite the adoption ofresolutions 2139 (2014), 2165
(2014) and 2191 (2014), we are deeply concerned that the
delivery of humanitarian aid, especially when it requires
access across borders and combat lines, continues to
encounter security and administrative obstacles. While
we acknowledge the Syrian Government's cooperation
in facilitating the delivery of humanitarian aid, we
believe that the continued administrative obstacles it
places in the way of lifesaving humanitarian aid are
becoming increasingly unsustainable. The prohibition
against bringing in medical and surgical supplies
intended for the treatment of the already suffering
Syrian population is unacceptable. The international
community cannot tolerate such obstacles any longer.
Such humanitarian aid and supplies must be allowed to
reach their intended destinations and recipients.

We commend the work of the United Nations
humanitarian agencies and other humanitarian partners
to ensure the delivery of aid to the Syrian people in the
face of an extremely challenging security environment.
The dedication and commitment of their personnel is
highly admirable. In the light of the obstacles put in
the way of the delivery of humanitarian aid and relief,
intentionally or otherwise, we are of the view that
the international community's concerns should be
reflected in continued monitoring by the Council in
order to ensure the delivery of humanitarian aid. The
Council can ill afford to sit back and simply hope that
the parties to the conflict will respect international
law, international humanitarian law and the relevant
resolutions.

The escalation ofthe situation in besieged Yarmouk,
near Damascus, has further sensitized the international
community to the humanitarian situation of those in
besieged cities. In what was once a refuge and safe
haven for more than 160,000 Palestinian refugees, the
worsening conflict has now trapped the approximately

18,000 Palestinians remaining in Yarmouk. It is
deeply disheartening for those who had sought refuge
in Syria to now be embroiled in and directly affected
by the conflict. But this is not unique to Yarmouk, as
many other cities throughout Syria are facing similar
situations. We cannot in good conscience continue
to allow the people in these besieged cities to suffer,
whether in Yarmouk, Aleppo, Horns or elsewhere in
Syria. We recognize that the Government of Syria
has the primary responsibility for the protection of its
people. We hold the view, however, that in the light of
the Government's continued inability, unwillingness
and failure to fulfil its obligations, the Council has
an imperative to ensure that civilians are protected
and that efforts undertaken to enable the organization
of humanitarian pauses for the delivery of aid, the
establishment of humanitarian corridors and the safe
passage of civilians out of besieged areas.

We fully acknowledge that the humanitarian
situation in Syria is intrinsically linked to a political
settlement of the conflict. We therefore remain hopeful
that the parties to the conflict will positively consider
the freeze proposal made by Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
the Secretary-General's Special Envoy for Syria.
Nevertheless, there is mounting frustration in the
international community about the fact that, despite
its efforts, the parties to the conflict have remained
obstinate about finding a sustainable solution to the
conflict. Malaysia reiterates its View that there can be
no military solution to the Syrian conflict. We believe
firmly that the future of Syria should be determined
by the Syrian people themselves through a Syrian-led
political process. In that regard, we are supportive of
efforts to support, promote, encourage and facilitate
an inclusive political transitional process aimed at
fostering national reconciliation in Syria.

We cannot allow our humanity to be lulled or
desensitized by the horrors of the Syrian conflict.
Neither can we allow our humanity to be corrupted
by accepting that such horrors are corollaries of or to
be expected in the course of conflict. In the light of
the ongoing and worsening humanitarian situation in
Syria, we have an imperative, in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, to ensure
that international law, international humanitarian law
and the relevant resolutions are respected by the parties
to the conflict.

