Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): At the outset, please allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I am convinced that,
given your outstanding talent and rich diplomatic
experience, you will guide the Council to success in its
work this month. I also wish to take this opportunity to
thank your predecessor, Ambassador Martinez Blanco of
Honduras, for his outstanding contributions to the
complete success of the Council's work last month.

Encouraging progress has been made in the peace
process in Angola since the adoption of Security Council
resolution 976 (1995). President dos Santos and UNITA
President Savimbi held a direct meeting in Lusaka in May
of this year. The Angolan Government and UNITA have
since increased their contacts and have reached an
agreement on the adjusted timetable for the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. All this has
undoubtedly laid the groundwork for its comprehensive
implementation. However, there are still many disturbing
problems to be resolved properly in the peace process,
which include, inter alia, the formation of the new armed
forces, the acceleration of the demining process and the
exchange of prisoners.

Security Council resolutions on the question of
Angola are aimed mainly at advancing the Angolan peace
process so as to bring about genuine national
reconciliation in Angola, restore peace and stability in the
country and enable its people to embark on the road of
reconstruction and rehabilitation. The United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) has played
an important role in securing humanitarian assistance,
consolidating the cease-fire between the Angolan parties
and facilitating national reconciliation. Therefore, the

 

Chinese delegation supports the Secretary-General's
proposal to extend the mandate of UNAVEM. III and will
vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.

The Chinese Government has unswervingly supported
the peace process in Angola from the beginning and deeply
sympathizes with the Angolan people in the sufferings
caused them by frequent wars. It has provided Angola with
humanitarian assistance and production facilities. We will
work together with the international community to
contribute further to peace and stability in Angola.
Peace and stability are the foundations of nation-
building in the interests of a people. It is in keeping with
the long-term fundamental interests of the Angolan people,
as well as with the common aspiration of the international
community, that the two sides in Angola should resolve to
lay down their arms and embark on the road to national
reconciliation. We sincerely hope that the Angolan
Government will continue to cooperate closely with the
parties concerned in a joint effort towards the smooth
advancement of the peace process in Angola. Angola is a
richly endowed country with industrious people;
achievement of its national reconciliation will give a major
impetus to peace and stability in southern Africa as a
whole.

