Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I speak in my capacity as Security Council
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), which endorsed the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA). I would like to begin by thanking
the Secretariat for its valuable support in the discharge
of my duties.

Throughout my mandate, my mission has been to
support the implementation of the resolution on behalf
of the Security Council, with a special focus on three
particular areas, namely, dialogue, transparency and
the maintenance of the procurement channel. Of course,
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is currently
faced by many challenges.

I now turn to the eighth report of the Facilitator
(see S/2019/952/Rev.1). The report has been approved
by all the members of the Council, whom I would like
to thank for their constructive contributions. The report
of the Facilitator is essentially a factual account, the
objective of which is to inform the Council, in parallel
with the reports of the Secretary-General (S/2019/934)
and of the Joint Commission (see S/2019/925), of the
activities that took place in the 2231 format. The report
covers the activities that took place between 16 June
and 16 December 2019, some of which gave rise to
disagreements within the Council and are presented
as such. As the text is rather technical in nature, I
will not review all its constituent elements. My report
is at Council members' disposal for reference and
information. Nevertheless, allow me to highlight the
following three points.

First, I would like to recall the two meetings of the
Council held in the 2231 format during the reporting
period. On 26 July, members of the Security Council
discussed a proposal by the United States to maintain
and update the individuals and entities on the list
established pursuant to resolution 2231 (2015). That
proposal led to disagreements relating to the procedures
for updating the list. On 13 December, the members of
the Security Council discussed the conclusions and
recommendations contained in the eighth report of the
Secretary-General on resolution 2231 (2015), prior to
its public release.

Secondly, in my role as Facilitator, I also held
several bilateral consultations with Member States and
their representatives, including the Islamic Republic
of Iran, to discuss issues related to the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). Informal consultations with
the members of the Security Council concerned were
also held with a view to reaching consensus on the text
of my report. I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the members of the Council for their flexibility
in that regard.

Thirdly, there are references in my report to
the two regular quarterly reports issued by the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) during
the reporting period, in August (see S/2019/737) and
November (see S/2019/901). The six additional reports
issued by the Agency during the period are also listed
(see S/2019/952/Rev.1, para. 12). Those reports cover
the latest developments in the implementation by the
Islamic Republic of Iran of its nuclear commitments,
notably in the following areas: enriched uranium
stockpile; enrichment activities; centrifuge research
and development activities; activities related to the
Fordow Fuel Enrichment Plant; and heavy water
inventory. I cannot overestimate the central, impartial,
factual and professional role played by the Agency in
the implementation of the JCPOA as it continues to
carry out its verification and monitoring activities in
the Islamic Republic of Iran in line with resolution 2231
(2015).

More generally, I have to conclude that the JCPOA
is at a crossroads. The various letters circulated within
the 2231 format reflect the state of the discussions
among the parties. The communications are listed
and summarized in detail in my report, including
the responses from the Permanent Mission of Iran.
The points of disagreement regarding the restrictive
measures outlined in annex B to resolution 2231 (2015)
are also indicated.

First, concerning Iran's activities related to missiles
and space launchers, I note the various letters sent by
several Member States describing those activities as
incompatible with annex B, on the one hand, and Iran's
counter-arguments, which are based on a different
reading of paragraph 3 of that annex, on the other.
The differences in the interpretation of paragraph 3
are a recurring issue. Other letters focused on possible
Iranian arms transfers in the region, which are another
source of disagreement.

The current context of compliance with the entire
JCPOA obviously affects activities in the 2231 format.
I note the concerns that have been expressed following
the strengthening of the economic sanctions imposed
by the United States since its withdrawal from the
plan, and more recently the end of nuclear exemptions,
which has had an impact on compliance with resolution
2231 (2015), originally adopted unanimously by the
Council. Those concerns also extend to the successive
disengagements announced and implemented by Iran
and duly reported by the IAEA.

Lastly, I note that no proposals were submitted
through the procurement channel for the Security
Council's approval during the reporting period. The
procurement channel is definitely at the heart of
the JCPOA and must be able to continue operating
effectively and efficiently in order to fulfil its role.

In conclusion, I join with the other bodies
responsible for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), the Secretary-General and the Joint Commission
in deploring the deterioration of the current context,
which affects compliance with resolution 2231 (2015)
and the JCPOA. Matters of international peace and
security require collective responses, which is the
raison d'etre of the Council. The JCPOA and resolution
2231 (2015) constitute one ofthose responses and enjoy
the support of the international community. In reference
to paragraph 2 of resolution 2231 (2015), I therefore call
on all

"Member States, regional organizations and
international organizations to take such actions as
may be appropriate to support the implementation
of the JCPOA, including by refraining from
actions that undermine the implementation of
commitments under the J CPOA."

