Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I congratulate
you, Mr. President, and your fantastic Rwandan team on
a successful presidency for the month of July. You have
led the Council with great stewardship and diplomatic
skills in dealing with an unusual number of difficult
issues. We also welcome your initiative in conducting
this wrap-up session in a public briefing format.

To our frustration, July has been marred by the loss
of a great number of civilian lives in conflicts, as well
as ongoing humanitarian crises in many parts of the
world.

Faced with the escalation of the situation in Gaza,
the Council has met in four emergency meetings and
an open debate on the Middle East (see S/PV,7222).
We commend Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
tireless efforts to engage the region's leaders through his
visits. The Republic ofKorea deplores the intensification
of hostilities, as well as the tragic loss of life, and urges
the parties to immediately engage in efforts to achieve
a durable ceasefire. In the meantime, the international
community must expedite its humanitarian assistance
to the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip. In that
regard, the Republic of Korea has decided to contribute
$1 million to assist the Palestinian people.

As for Syria, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2165 (2014), regarding cross-line and cross-
border humanitarian assistance to Syria. The adoption
represented modest yet meaningful progress. However,
the meaningfulness of the resolution should be judged
not by the unanimity of its adoption but by the degree
of its implementation. The Council must fulfil its
commitment to taking further measures in the event
of non-compliance with resolution 2139 (2014) or
resolution 2165 (2014). We welcome the appointment of
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and look forward to
his efforts to revive the stalled peace negotiations.

The downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17
was also one of several issues at the top of the Council's
agenda this month. By unanimously adopting resolution
2166 (2014), the Council spoke with one voice to ensure
that the tragedy would be fully investigated and that
the victims would be afforded the respect they deserve.
While it is encouraging that there has been progress
in recovering bodies since the resolution was adopted,
we remain concerned that the crash site has yet to be
properly investigated. We reiterate that all concerned
parties must comply with their obligations under
resolution 2166 (2014) and must cooperate with the
international investigation.

Last but not least, on 17 July the Security Council
issued a strong and unequivocal warning against
the continued launching of ballistic missiles by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Despite that
solemn warning, however, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea launched another ballistic missile
on 26 July. We condemn the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's unrelenting provocations as
violations of Security Council resolutions and as clear
acts in defiance of the authority of the Council itself.
We strongly urge the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to desist from any acts that could further disrupt
the peace and stability of the region and beyond. In
that vein, the Republic of Korea welcomes the recent
progress made in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea sanctions regime as a result of the Chong Chon
Gang case. That is an example of the United Nations
sanctions regime working properly in response to
serious violations.

We congratulate the Rwandan presidency once
again on its achievements in July, and look forward
to another fruitful month of work in August under the
presidency of the United Kingdom.

