Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, allow me, at the outset, to extend my
congratulations to you and your friendly country,
France, for your presidency of the Council this month.
I wish to pay tribute, at the same time, to the
Permanent Representative of the People's Republic of
China for his presidency of the Council last month.
Allow me also to welcome the Secretary-General of the
United Nations to this meeting.

At dawn, on 22 March, Palestine time, Israel, the
occupying Power, committed a new war crime by
assassinating Sheikh Ahmed Yassin. Israeli helicopter
gunships shot three missiles at the spiritual leader of
the Hamas movement after he finished his prayers in a
mosque near his home. He was killed instantly, as were
six other Palestinians. Afterwards, the Israeli Prime
Minister, Mr. Ariel Sharon, made statements indicating
that he personally supervised this mad and brutal
assassination and that he will continue this policy. We
strongly condemn this new Israeli crime and hold the
occupying Power and the Israeli leadership legally and
politically responsible for committing this crime, as
well as responsible for any consequences this crime
may entail.

We do, however, value the wide international
condemnation of this crime. We also value the decisive
calls made to Israel to refrain from perpetrating other
extrajudicial executions and to commit themselves to
the provisions of international humanitarian law. We
value the readiness and the desire of the overwhelming
majority of the members of the Security Council to
take a clear position vis-a-vis what has happened, in
accordance with the responsibilities of the Security
Council and the United Nations Charter. Regretfully,
the Council was not able to take an urgent position in
the form of a presidential statement. We hope that the
Council will be able, after taking more time to consider
this, to adopt the draft resolution before you, which
was submitted by the Arab Group. There is no doubt
that this is a matter of the utmost importance.

In this context, and to emphasize the importance
of the Council taking a clear and decisive decision,
allow me to point to the statements made by Israeli
officials, which highlight a general Israeli policy in this
area that must be confronted and halted. Here, I should
like to refer to statements made by three officials.

(spoke in English)

Mr. Shaul Mofaz said that other Hamas leaders
would be targeted now that Israel had assassinated
Hamas founder Sheikh Ahmed Yassin: "If we will
continue, in a determined way, with our strikes against
Hamas and other terror groups, with the means I
outlined, including action against those leaders, we will
bring more security to Israeli citizens."

Public Security Minister Tzachi Hanegbi said that
no Palestinian "terror leader" was immune from an
Israeli attack: "Anyone who is involved in the Gaza
Strip or the West Bank or anywhere else in leading a
terror group knows from yesterday there is no
immunity. Everyone is in our sights."

Israeli Defence Forces Chief of Staff Moshe
Ya'alon said that the responses of Palestinian Authority
Chairman Yasser Arafat and Hizbullah chief Hassan
Nasrallah to the assassination showed that "they
understand that their turn is drawing near".

(spoke in Arabic)

Is anything crazier than that? Can the Security
Council fail to adopt a clear position on this issue? We
must compel Israel, the occupying Power, to respect
international law. And that is precisely the heart of the
matter: Israel is an outlaw State. It regularly violates
the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, international law and international
humanitarian law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention; it violates Security Council resolutions
and other United Nations resolutions; it violates even
the conventions it has signed.

Israel, the occupying Power, has occupied our
territory for more than 36 years. It continues to
colonize and illegally confiscate that territory. Israel
has completely destroyed the life of our Palestinian
people, deprived them of their national rights and
violated all their human rights. Israel is an aggressive
occupying Power, not a peaceful country that is
defending itself. Israel's current policies are not
designed to counter terrorism; in fact, they are one of
the major reasons for the presence of terrorism in the
Middle East and beyond.

The assassination of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin does
not serve counter-terrorism efforts. We have stated
repeatedly before the Council that Mr. Sharon's
Government would like to continue the escalation of
the conflict and that it has constantly worked to destroy
everything that has been achieved, including the truce
reached last year. Now, his Government has taken
another major step in that direction by committing this
crlme.

Clearly, the Sharon Government believes that
continuing the violence and the terrorism will excuse it
from the responsibilities of implementing the road
map - including putting an end to the occupation and
accepting an independent Palestinian State - and it
considers such violence and terrorism to be in the
country's interests. We have reiterated before the
Council that Mr. Sharon's Government does not want
and will work to bury the road map, as it buried the
Mitchell Committee's recommendations and other
initiatives.

Mr. Sharon recently mentioned what he called
unilateral disengagement in Gaza. A unilateral step, by
its nature, cannot be part of the road map;
disengagement, by its nature, cannot be part of a
negotiated withdrawal; and Mr. Sharon, by his nature,
will not voluntarily do something in the interests of the
Palestinian people and in the interests of peace. That is
probably the reason Sheikh Yassin was assassinated. If
Mr. Sharon withdraws from Gaza, he wants to punish
the Palestinian people by first making Gaza a huge
prison, withdrawing only after causing maximum
destruction and chaos in that poverty-stricken area.
What is strange is that the Israeli Government wants
something from certain parties in return for that step,
perhaps in the form of acceptance of the expansionist
wall it is building in the West Bank. What is even
stranger is that certain parties who submitted the road
map are considering giving Israel something in return
for that step: the official destruction of the road map.

Despite all that, our land - all of it - will
continue to be ours. Aside from Sharon's plans, any
Israeli withdrawal will inevitably mean that we will
shoulder our responsibilities. But it will also mean that
there will be no bilateral commitment on the part of the
Palestinian Authority, which means that we would have
the freedom to ask for an appropriate international
presence. In fact, such an international presence - as
has been consistently shown - could create a different
and positive situation in all the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem.

Here, I should like to refer with grave concern to
the occupying Power's continued building of the
expansionist wall in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, even after the matter was
submitted to the International Court of Justice, at the
request of the General Assembly, for an advisory
opinion. The wall is seen as the greatest war crime of
all. It destroys the life and the future of our people. It
represents an illegitimate annexation, as a fait
accompli, of large areas of our land, and it renders
impractical and impossible any implementation of the
two-State solution. The wall is the central issue for the
Government of Mr. Sharon; halting its construction and
destroying it is a major issue for the international
community. We will push insistently and relentlessly
for that, and we hope that the international community
will respond.

We reiterate our condemnation of Sheikh Ahmed
Yassin's assassination and our appeal to the Security
Council to take the necessary action in that regard.

