Mr. Poukre-Kono (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): I welcome the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT)
(S/2009/359) and the latest developments it brings to
the attention of the Security Council and the
international community. On behalf of my Government,
I should like to thank MINURCAT and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Victor
Angelo, for the outstanding manner in which they are
carrying out their mandates. They can be assured of the
full support of the Central African Government.

The situation prevailing in the North-East,
particularly in the prefectures of Vakaga and Haute
Kotto, remains worrisome in several particulars.
Following the inclusive political dialogue clashes
broke out between certain rebel forces and the Central
African armed forces; a new rebel movement formed,
causing a rupture within the Union des forces
de'mocratiques pour le rassemblement; ethnic clashes
erupted; and alliances were established. These have
been accompanied by mass displacement of the
population and restrictions on humanitarian, economic,
trade, agricultural activities and the proliferation of
light weapons. In order to remedy these problems - in
particular ethnic tensions - the Government has
intervened to try to reconcile the feuding communities.
The restoration of the rule of law is sorely needed.

Government mediation efforts were undertaken
immediately, since the Government is the party with
the primary responsibility for protecting its population
from the woes of insecurity. It therefore launched talks
with certain rebel groups that were hesitant to enter
into the inclusive political dialogue. This approach has
brought those groups into closer interaction with the
Government, and certain groups have signed on to the
Libreville Comprehensive Peace Agreement of June
2008.
This progress is welcome, as it will facilitate the
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process, which is very important for
any country emerging from conflict. That process is
necessary both to respond to the urgent humanitarian
needs created by the conflicts and to support socio-
economic development.

I have mentioned in one of my statements to this
Council the strategic geography of the North-East of
the Central African Republic, which forms a triangle
with Chad and the Sudan. This area was vital to the
country because of the former lively trade with Port
Sudan and the seasonal cattle migration patterns from
Chad, along with its mineral and animal resources.
Since then, it has become too dangerous for economic
activity due to the emergence of rebel groups and the
impact on the area of the situation in southern Darfur.

The activities of MINURCAT, which has replaced
the European Union-led military force in the region,
have increased, and with good reason. The United
Nations has shown great concern for my country from
the time when crises gripped the country for an entire
decade until we emerged from them, and we are
therefore ready to cooperate fully with the
Organization. The consultations between MINURCAT
and the Government have proven fruitful, as most of
our discussions have often led to agreements. Of
course, MINURCAT is mandated to provide counsel
and advice, as evidenced by the fact that the
Government has been able to establish a purely
humanitarian corridor, with no apparent armed escorts,
to come to the aid of its population along the route
from Ndele, in the Central African Republic, to Daha,
in Chad.

Aware of the logistical difficulties in the Central
African Republic, MINURCAT put its means of
transportation at the disposal of the Central African
Republic authorities in order to enable them to come
occasionally to the area of operations. This occurred
when ethnic groups clashed in the northern part of the
country. Despite the meagre resources at their disposal
and the difficult terrain, MINURCAT has been able to
support the Government in times of crisis.

We would request here a strengthening of
assistance to MINURCAT to enable it to easily deploy
in its area of operations. The difficulties on the ground
are not negligible, which only highlights the
commitment of MINURCAT to the refugees and
displaced people of the Central African Republic. We
remain grateful for its humanitarian efforts. We
reiterate our commitment to supporting MINURCAT in
the fulfilment of its mandate. We would also like once
again to express our gratitude to France, which is also
helping us in terms of logistics in the northern part of
the country.

My Government believes that the activities of
MINURCAT, the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic,
the Mission of the Economic Community of Central
African States for the consolidation of peace, and the
Peacebuilding Commission must complement each
other in a country emerging from conflict. In its exit
strategy, MINURCAT identified the criteria for
stabilizing the situation in north-eastern Central
African Republic with disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes that we will carry out in
accordance with the Strategic Framework for
Peacebuilding in the Central African Republic of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

In conclusion, I call once again for a serious
examination of the situation in north-eastern Central
African Republic on the basis of a regional approach.
The stakes are high for all the actors on the ground.
Another concern is the activities of the Ugandan rebels
of the Lord's Resistance Army, who carried out
incursions in 2008 and 2009 in Obo in the South-East,
leaving behind victims, taking supplies and seed stock
with them, taking men hostage as porters, kidnapping
women and enlisting child soldiers.

