Mr. Raja Zaib Shah (Malaysia): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, and the
British delegation on assuming the Council's presidency
for this month and for convening this timely debate. I
also would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General and the High Commissioner for
Human Rights for their respective briefings, which we
have heard with much interest.

In associating itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, my delegation
wishes to make some additional comments.

Malaysia reaffirms its support for efforts aimed
at preventing the escalation of conflicts into threats
to international peace and security. Malaysia also
believes that the United Nations system, including the
Security Council, has an integral role to play in that
regard. With a View to enhancing the effectiveness of
the United Nations system in discharging such a role,
Malaysia also supports efforts to achieve system-wide
coherence, which could, among other things, enable the
early detection of potential crisis situations.

On a related note, the nature of contemporary
conflict situations also raises certain questions,
including as to whether the United Nations, in particular
the Council, is adequately equipped to respond to new
types of conflicts or situations.

Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations
clearly provides an array of tools and approaches that
are available to both the Council and the General
Assembly. In the context of securing the widest
possible support for any proposed preventive measure
or approach, there may be a case for exploring closer
cooperation between the Council and the General
Assembly. It is noteworthy that, over the past few years,
the United Nations has utilized a wider range of tools
outlined in Chapter VI, including mediation. Malaysia
views positively the possibility of strengthening the
capacities and capabilities of the United Nations in that
field.

Alongside efforts at the international level, the
capacities and capabilities of actors at the regional
and national levels are also important components of
the international peace and security architecture. They
merit serious, sustained attention and should be further
strengthened.

It is distressing and unfortunate that we continue to
witness instances of situations relapsing into conflict
across various regions today. With regard to preventing
such developments, Malaysia believes that the United
Nations could do more to assist countries and societies
facing such situations.

In particular, Malaysia is of the view that the
potential roles of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
should be given more attention, particularly in the
context of its upcoming review scheduled for 2015.
Among other things, the PBC's role as a platform for
exchanging expertise and experience could be further
enhanced. Additionally, the role of women in conflict
prevention should be further mainstreamed.

In conclusion, my delegation notes that the outcome
ofthis debate has been reflected in the form ofa Council
resolution - resolution 2171 (2014). Malaysia reiterates
its firm belief that the United Nations in general and the
Security Council in particular should continue to play
a central role in the maintenance of international peace
and security, including in conflict prevention.

