Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I wish you a
Happy New Year, Mr. President. I also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Menkerios for
his briefing.

At the outset, let me express my thanks to you, Sir,
and tio the Secretariat for leading a successful visit
to the Africa Union (AU) in Addis Ababa. We all saw
and heard first hand just how critical the relationship
is between the United Nations and the AU, and I
look forward and commit to doing whatever I can to
strengthen that relationship. I do so because our two
great organizations share the same objectives, the same
priorities and the same respect for the principle of
African leadership. It is therefore in all of our interests
to forge an even closer relationship as we strive to
maintain peace and security in Africa.To do so, I see
three steps that we should take.

First, and the others have said, we need to do more
to learn from each other. A simple first step would be
having more joint briefings in the Chamber from Au
and United Nations officials, as we do on Somalia.
They are a vital means of increasing the awareness and
knowledge of all of us around this table. There should
also be more joints analysis, joint planning and joint
assessments so that we form a common understanding
of a situation and together find common solutions. The
recent un-Au Visit to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Nigeria on the theme of women and peace
and security was an example of the sort of collaborative
work we should encourage. We should cultivate our joint
reporting on gender-based violence in places like South
Sudan so that we move beyond reporting to the sharing
of action plans and further collaboration. We should
agree as the United Nations that we will make available
any of our special envoys or special representatives if
the African Union Peace and Security Council wishes
to hear from them, and we should invite the African
Union to do the same.

We should also look at what more we can do as
Member States. The United Kingdom works closely
with AU member States to provide military capacity-
building, delivering, training and sharing expertise on
improving accountability, human rights compliance
and preventing sexual Violence in conflict. I know
others are doing the same, and I encourage all to do so.

Secondly, we need both organizations to play to
their comparative strengths so that together we are more
than the sum of our parts. We need only look to Somalia
to see that it works. The bravery and the heroism of
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) troops,
to whom I pay genuine and profound tribute, supported
by the United Nations, has enabled the political process
and progress we see there.

During this year's presidential elections, it was
AU troops who protected the venue, infrastructure
and participants, ensuring the safety and security
of all those involved, and it was the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia that helped AMISOM. in
the preparatory work, setting up the venue, ensuring
the integrity of the site and providing Vital security
equipment to AMISOM. Together, they - we - helped
make history, ensuring that the most democratic
presidential elections in Somalia in decades passed
off successfully and peacefully. It is a model that we
should replicate elsewhere.

My third and final point is that our cooperation
will count for little without sustainable financing.
As we heard last week during our discussions with
the AU Peace and Security Council in Addis Ababa,
this is a top objective for all of us. So we must find
a solution which shares the responsibility to provide
adequate, predictable and sustainable financing to AU-
led missions, including the AU's own commitment to
fund 25 per cent of costs by 2020. It was important to
the United Kingdom that on our visit to Addis Ababa,
so many speakers from the two Councils and the AU
Commission reiterated their commitment to funding
that 25 per cent.

This financial solution must be combined with the
undertaking of agreed standards and mechanisms to
ensure oversight and accountability for performance,
conduct and discipline, including sexual exploitation
and abuse, and financial management. In doing so, not
only will the finances of AU missions be secured, but
their performance and accountability will also improve.
This will only be to the benefit of peace and security
and to the benefit of many outside this Chamber. This
seems to me a fruitful area for concrete follow-up by
the United Nations Secretariat and the AU Peace and
Security Council.

In conclusion, there is still some way to go to bring
our organizations even closer together, but through
these three steps, I believe that we can do so, and our
collaborative progress to date should encourage us that
we can resolve future challenges together.

