Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The Security
Council is about to be asked a simple question: Will we
take action against those who use chemical weapons in

Syria? It is that simple. Will we take action on behalf
of those whose lives have been destroyed by these
senseless weapons? Will we take action for people
like Mohammed Abdul-Razzuk Alhashash? Thanks
to the testimony of those on the ground, we know
that Mohammed was admitted to hospital at 1.30 p.m.
on 21 April 2014. A couple of hours earlier, a Syrian
regime helicopter had dropped two containers on his
home town of Talmenes, exposing him and many others
to a yellow toxic gas.

After the attack, Mohammed was unable to breathe.
He lost consciousness. On arrival at hospital he was
intubated under mechanical ventilation. His face went
red. Pink foam poured from his mouth. His pupils were
dilated. His lungs were crackling. His heartbeat and
breathing stopped. Cardio-pulmonary resuscitation
was performed, but all attempts to revive him failed.
Mohammad died at two o'clock. He was six years old.

Mohammed is why we are here today. We are here
in the Chamber to begin to bring justice for him, for
his family and for the hundreds, if not thousands, of
other Syrians whose stories are all too similar to his
own. This is not about politics. At its core this is not
really about the Joint Investigative Mechanism or
about the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons - respectively, the JIM. and the OPCW, but
forget the acronyms. This is not even about Syria. This
is about taking a stand when children are poisoned. It is
that simple. It is about taking a stand when civilians are
maimed and murdered with toxic weapons - weapons
used in complete disregard for the international rules
and norms that we all claim to uphold.

Therefore, in a moment, when we are asked to
vote on this draft resolution (S/2017/ 172), I hope that all
members of the Council will lift their hands in favour
of this text, and do so with Mohammed in their minds.

