Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): It is my honour and privilege
to make the following statement on behalf of the member
States of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS).

Please allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. Having known you over the years,
and in View of your country's particular interest in, and
concrete contributions regarding the objectives of, today's
agenda item, I am confident that you will successfully
conduct this and subsequent deliberations of the Council in
a manner that will enhance the principles and purposes of
the United Nations Charter.

Permit me also to express the appreciation of the
ECOWAS Group of Ambassadors at the United Nations for
the convening of this important and very timely meeting of
the Security Council. The initiative on the part of the
members of the Council to focus attention on the need for
a renewed and concerted international effort to promote
peace and stability in Africa is clearly unprecedented and
deserves our commendation. At a time when several
African countries are making considerable economic and
social progress, what is required from the international
community is encouragement and support in order to
sustain the positive tendencies while minimizing or
eliminating the incidence of violent conflicts there.

Africa has the largest number of member countries
at the United Nations, but it is also the continent with the
largest number of intra-State conflicts on the agenda of
the Security Council. The Secretary-General has now
placed before our Organization a report which could
indeed point the way in helping us all to address the
terrible problem of violent conflicts in Africa. It merits
serious and careful consideration. However, there is no
real shortage of insightful analyses of the African
condition including, in particular, this report by the
Secretary-General. But there has unfortunately been a
shortage of concrete actions to ameliorate the socio-
economic situation and establish a regime of sustainable
development in our continent. As the Secretary-General
himself points out,

"it is in deeds rather than in declarations that the
international community's commitment to Africa
will be measured". [S/1998/318, para. 106]

The key causes of conflict in Africa, as listed in the
Secretary-General's report, are varied and complex. Some
are internal and some external. In addition to its heavy
external debt overhang, youth unemployment and poor
and often inadequate infrastructure, Africa is threatened
by serious social instability and conflicts resulting in great
loss of life and alarming numbers of refugees and
displaced persons, the most vulnerable of whom are
women and children. This aspect of the situation is fully
highlighted in the report before us today, and its dire
consequences have continued to compromise Africa's
efforts to ensure long-term stability, prosperity and peace
for its peoples.

At the beginning of the 19803, sub-Saharan Africa
entered a period of serious economic decline, during
which real income per capita fell. This continued until
1993. Investment and saving rates likewise declined
during this period. The debt burden became unsustainable,
with Africa's external debt estimated at a total of $328.9
billion in 1995.

However, beginning in 1994, three successive years
of improved economic performance have provided
grounds for cautious optimism. For the first time since the

 

beginning of the 1980s, gross domestic product growth
rates stood at slightly over 4 per cent, thereby exceeding
population growth, although by a fairly small margin. This
recent upturn in sub-Saharan Africa, as was highlighted in
the Secretary-General's report, was underpinned by the
continued and rigorous implementation of economic reform
programmes, as well as by reductions in socio-economic
and political instability. A major factor was growth in
exports, which, according to the Economic Commission for
Africa, went from minus 4.2 per cent in 1993 to 3.3 per
cent in 1994 and 16.2 per cent 1995.

There is therefore the urgent need for additional and
more positive action on the debt burden of African States
by the international community to promote and reinforce
these gains from economic reforms. The recent Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative is, no doubt, a
welcome step, even though its results so far have not been
encouraging. It should be expanded to include other highly
indebted countries in the continent, as only four countries
now qualify for this Initiative.

The ECOWAS group believes that the sustenance of
the recent economic upturn in sub-Saharan Africa depends
on a number of factors, in particular on how successfully
gains from increased export earnings are applied to
strengthen potential growth. A programme of sustained
economic growth should aim at significant investment in
infrastructure which, in many cases, is run down after years
of neglect. There is therefore the pressing need for foreign
direct investment in our economies which could enhance
the process of diversification beyond traditional exports,
which is essential for sustained growth.

Since the late 19805, foreign direct investment has
become an important new and vital instrument for the
integration of countries into the global economy.
Unfortunately, sub-Saharan African countries have not been
part of this trend, in spite of the fact that countries of the
region undertook many efforts to attract foreign direct
investment, for example, by liberalizing their markets and
increasing investor confidence through the conclusion of
bilateral investment promotion and protection agreements
and avoidance of double-taxation situations.

ECOWAS countries strongly believe that Africa is a
continent in which profitable investment opportunities
abound and that corporate and individual investors should
consider African countries as places to invest as we enter
the third millennium. However, the much-needed flows of
investment capital will also depend on the effectiveness of
measures taken by the international community to alleviate
the external debt burden of heavily indebted countries -
to which I referred earlier - which in sub-Saharan Africa
consists mainly of public and public- guaranteed long-term
debt. A satisfactory resolution of the external debt burden
is necessary if Africa is to be successfully integrated into
the world economy. In addition, debt relief would also
free resources needed for government investment in
physical and social infrastructures.

On the maintenance of regional peace and security,
the ECOWAS group is unanimous in its commitment to
the collective security of the entire subregion. This is
manifested through the creation of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) in August 1990, which
has succeeded in containing the Liberian civil war and
restoring peace to that country so that, in July 1997, it
was possible to have the election of Charles Taylor as
President of Liberia. The same ECOMOG was a crucial
instrument in the efforts which led to the restoration of
President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah as President of Sierra
Leone following the routing of the military junta that had
earlier taken power in Sierra Leone, in May 1997. This is
the first time in the recent history of Africa that a
democratically elected regime, overthrown in a military
coup, was restored to power as a result of collective
action in a subregion. This is a rare achievement for
which we in the subregion are proud.

With this record of achievement, ECOWAS has an
effective mechanism for peace and conflict resolution
which has proven itself. That is probably why at the
meeting of the Ministers of Defence and Foreign Affairs
of ECOWAS member States last March, experts from
member States were directed to work with the ECOWAS
Executive Secretariat to elaborate a mechanism for
conflict prevention, conflict management and conflict
resolution, as well as for peacekeeping, in pursuance of
the decisions of the fourth extraordinary session of the
ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government
held in Lome, Togo, in December of last year. In order to
prevent, manage and resolve conflicts and to maintain
peace in the subregion, the Ministers agreed to abide by
the provisions of the Protocol on Non-Aggression and the
Protocol on Mutual Assistance in Defence and to draw on
the experiences acquired in the field, notably by
ECOMOG, in the preparation of a mechanism for
peacekeeping.

At this juncture, the ECOWAS group wishes to draw
the Council's attention to the Malian initiative on a
moratorium in the production, illegal transfer and

 

trafficking in small arms in zones of conflict, an issue
discussed in the Secretary-General's report. This initiative
was recently endorsed by all ECOWAS member States
within the framework of ongoing discussions for the
establishment of a mechanism for the prevention,
management and settlement of conflicts in our subregion.
This important initiative deserves the support of the
international community.

The ECOWAS group would further wish to appeal to
the international community to support Africa's regional
and subregional initiatives such as the ECOMOG
mechanism and the OAU trust fund for conflict prevention
and peacekeeping. In doing so the international community
will rightly be complementing African efforts to resolve
African problems, as regional and subregional organizations
are perhaps more familiar with the complexities of local
situations.

We believe that the Bretton Woods institutions have
a key role to play in the promotion, as well as in the
consolidation, of peace in Africa. In this regard, these
institutions should develop what we call domestic "peace-
friendly" structural adjustment programmes which do not
undermine the ability of African Governments to fulfil their
basic responsibilities in such basic and critical areas as the
education, health and welfare of their peoples.

Moreover, even when a violent conflict has been
resolved, we all know that real peace still has to be
established in the form of post-conflict peace-building. This
essentially has to do with the provision of security and
basic social facilities to ordinary people. This is also the
key to preventing the recurrence of armed confrontation and
avoiding a vicious cycle of violence. The Secretary-
General's report clearly articulates the need for the United
Nations to put in place peace-building initiatives in order to
achieve sustainable peace, and we support this imperative.

Finally, the Secretary-General's report is, in our View,
bold in concept, but his recommendations are also practical
and, therefore, achievable - provided that all actors both
inside and outside of Africa honestly and consistently
commit themselves to the aims and objectives of the report.
Our Secretary-General is right in pointing out that

"conflict in Africa has been seen as inevitable or

intractable it is neither. Conflict in Africa, as

everywhere, is caused by human action and can be

ended by human action." [S/PV.387I, p. 2]

Together, by mustering the political will to act on
this report and its recommendations, we can all leave a
positive legacy of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa. In this regard, we need a United
Nations-led international economic and financial plan for
Africa, as we once had a Marshall Plan for the recovery
of Europe in the post-war era.

In closing, I wish to cite the wise words of a former
Secretary-General of this Organization, the late Dag
Hammarskjold, who warned that no one can expect to
keep his garden tidy by reserving a portion of it for
weeds. The international community and economic system
cannot long endure and function as a system if the
African component is allowed to remain in a permanent
state of economic depression, pervasive poverty and
social decay.

