Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. President, allow me at the outset to tell you
how pleased my delegation is to see you presiding over this
especially important meeting of the Security Council. We

 

wish you every success in your work in guiding the work
of the Council this month.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Hungary, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland and
Romania and Slovakia have also associated themselves
with this statement.

The European Union warmly welcomes the signing
on 14 December 1995 at the Paris Peace Conference of
the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

The European Union has always called for a
peaceful solution to this painful conflict. Today, we want
to reaffirm our determination to make a substantial
contribution to assisting all the parties concerned in
implementing the provisions of the Peace Agreement.

The resolution unanimously adopted today by the
Security Council authorizes the establishment of a
multinational force to implement the Peace Agreement.

The member States of the European Union have in
the past been the major contributors of United Nations
peace-keeping troops on the ground and will continue to
play a major part not only in the multinational force,
where thousands of our troops stand ready for
deployment, but also in the civil and humanitarian tasks
involved in implementing the Peace Agreement.

The Peace Agreement needs the full cooperation of
the parties. We call upon them to fulfil in good faith the
commitments they have entered into, bearing in mind that
they have the primary responsibility for the consolidation
of the peace and the prevention of the resurgence of
conflicts.

We expect that a process of stability will be initiated
in the entire region. In this context, we call upon the
parties to mutually recognize those States which have
emerged in the territory of the former Yugoslavia. Such
recognition will lead to the normalization of relations
among them as well as with the international community.
We warmly welcome the acts of mutual recognition that
have already taken place.

In order to create a stable peace in the region, the
promotion of regional stability and arms control are
essential. The conference to be held in Bonn next week
provides an early opportunity to initiate such a process.

 

We remain deeply concerned at the precarious
situation in Eastern Slavonia. Any failure to implement the
Basic Agreement could have very serious consequences for
stability in the whole region. We urge the parties to
cooperate fully in the implementation of the Agreement.
We hope that in the near future the Security Council will
address this issue on the basis of the report of the
Secretary-General.

We are confident that the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina will at last be able to live in peace.
Reconciliation is one of the vital ingredients in any process
of building a society. The holding of free, fair and
democratic elections throughout the territory is crucial in
this respect. The European Union will fully support the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in
carrying out the functions entrusted to it by the parties
under the Peace Agreement.

Absolute priority must be given to respect for human
rights. Without genuine improvements in the human rights
situation, no peace agreement can have a solid foundation.

The serious human rights violations and breaches of
international humanitarian law in various parts of the
former Yugoslavia must come to an end once and for all.
The European Union strongly supports the work of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. The
parties must cooperate with it and fully comply with its
decisions. There must be no impunity for the guilty.

We welcome the parties' agreement to ensure all
persons under their jurisdiction the highest level of
internationally recognized human rights and fundamental
freedoms, among them the right of all refugees and
displaced persons to return to their homes. The behaviour
of all parties in this regard will be closely monitored by the
European Union.

The time has come for reconstruction. Our main task
will be to help restore hope and provide decent living
conditions, particularly in the areas most affected by the
conflict.

The European Union, which was among the first to
provide relief for the terrible suffering of the civilian
population, reaffirms its decision to continue its
humanitarian contribution in the former Yugoslavia and to
participate, along with non-European Union countries, in
the enormous task of reconstruction, in response to specific,
identified needs.

 

All these efforts must, in accordance with the newly
created structures, come together around the High
Representative. We support his key role as coordinator
and guide of the many organizations and agencies
involved in the process. We welcome the appointment of
Mr. Carl Bildt, who will have the full support of the
European Union.

Some important aspects still remain to be resolved.
We hope that next week the Security Council will
approve the establishment of an International Police Task
Force and of a United Nations civilian mission, to be
financed through assessed contributions.

Thousands of men and women from the member
States of the European Union and from other countries
have served in Bosnia over the last three years as
peace-keepers, as humanitarian aid workers, as monitors
and as searchers for peace. Some have made the ultimate
sacrifice: their lives. We pay tribute to them, to all those
who have joined them in the work for peace and to those
hundreds of thousands of innocent civilians who have
perished in the conflict. Now the time has come to build
a just and lasting peace.

