Mr. Khalil (Egypt): 1 would like first to wish a
happy Eid for those who celebrate it. Today is a holy
feast for all Muslims and we hope that at the next Eid
the Muslim world and Palestine will be in better shape.

I am speaking on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. I would like to start by thanking Rwanda
for convening today's meeting on this important
topic. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive statement this morning and for his
clear assessment of the progress made in peacekeeping
activities in terms of concepts and operations, as
well as his efforts to strengthen the United Nations
peacekeeping operations as an important tool in the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
helping peoples emerging from conflict to achieve
stability. I also wish to commend Under-Secretary-
General Amira Haq, whose extensive personal expertise
and commitment were clearly reflected in her work over
the past couple of years. The Non-Aligned Movement
wishes her all the best in her future endeavours.

United Nations peacekeeping is at a crucial
juncture as a result of increased demand and of the
expansion and complexity of its tasks and mandates
in assuming responsibilities that are outside the scope
of its traditional political and military roles and its
capacity to implement them. All these factors place
additional burdens on the capacity of the Organization
and the countries contributing uniformed personnel to
achieve their desired objectives.

The continuous increase in the activities of United
Nations peacekeeping operations requires, inter alia,
improved capacity to assess conflict situations, effective
planning based on accurate information, enhanced
measures for the safety and security of peacekeepers,
and rapid response to emergencies in accordance with
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. The
Non-Aligned Movement re-emphasizes its commitment
to supporting all efforts aimed at achieving the
effectiveness ofpeacekeeping operations, and reiterates
the following five points.

First, it is important to reach a consensus among
Member States on the development of policies and
to ensure that only ideas and approaches adopted
collectively by Member States are implemented. We call
on the Secretariat to refrain from working on policies
that have not been agreed in an intergovernmental
process. The Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations is and should remain the sole body in charge
ofpolicymaking in peacekeeping.

Secondly, all necessary support should be provided,
including financial, human resources and military
and civilian capabilities, to peacekeeping missions in
order to achieve their tasks within the framework of
full respect for the host country's sovereignty, laws and
regulations. In that context, it is also necessary to avoid
changing the mandated tasks of peacekeeping missions
without prior consultations with troop-contributing
countries. Troops on the ground are the guarantors of
the successful implementation of mandates. Seeking
their advice should be a prerequisite for any change in
mandates.

Thirdly, we would stress the need for a strong and
clear Security Council commitment to drafting clear and
achievable mandates, based on an objective assessment,
without rushing into the adoption of mandates that
lack a political basis or sufficient resources or are not
practically achievable. The development of integrated
planning and consistent approaches to achieve the link
between policy formulation and implementation on the
ground are paramount to achieving success.

Fourthly, it is very important to enhance the
integration of peacekeeping and peacebuilding, so that
peacekeeping efforts are accompanied by economic
recovery and capacity-building efforts, on the basis of
national ownership. The Peacebuilding Commission and
the Peacebuilding Fund have a significant role to play in
that regard. The objective should not be peacekeeping
cost-cutting, but enhancing States' potential in order to
avoid their relapse into conflict.

Fifthly, the Movement strongly believes that
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of

international peace and security rests with the United
Nations and that the role of regional arrangements should
be in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter. The
Non-Aligned Movement calls for intensified support on
the part of the United Nations for the African Union's
operations through the ensuring of predictable and
sustainable funding for its missions.

The Non-Aligned Movement, as the one group that
comprises most, ifnot all, ofthe top military and police
troop-contributing countries, continues to support
peacekeeping operations. Its member States keep
increasing their contributions in terms of military and
police, as well as in civilian experts, to United Nations
peacekeeping missions. That represents clear evidence
of our commitment to efforts aimed at maintaining
international peace and security.

I would like to conclude by paying tribute to the
men and women of the United Nations who are carrying
out their tasks in the implementation of peacekeeping
activities, and in particular to those peacekeepers who
have lost their lives in the field defending the flag of
the United Nations and contributing to upholding the
positive image ofthe Organization and its peacekeeping
operations.

