Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): At the outset, I should like to welcome the
presence here today of Mr. Xanana Gusmao, President-
elect of East Timor. I am pleased to extend our
congratulations to him. In a few weeks, he will be
sworn in as the President of East Timor. I am sure that
he will continue to embody the lines of Horace: "To
have begun is to be half done; dare to know. Start!"

I should also like to welcome the presence of Mr.
Mari Alkatiri, Chief Minister of the Transitional
Government and head of the majority in Parliament.
We have learned a great deal from his important
statement.

Our meeting today is historic in more ways than
one. It provides us with an opportunity to demonstrate
to international public opinion the Security Council's
capacity to build and maintain peace and security.
Launched in dramatic conditions on 15 September
1999, the actions of the Council and the United Nations
in East Timor will enjoy a happy ending on 20 May
with the advent of the independence of East Timor and
the swearing-in of President Gusmao.

Today's success would not have been possible
without the efficiency, dedication and tenacity of the
civilian and military components of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).
Cameroon extends its heartfelt gratitude and sincere
congratulations to them all.

I should like to take this opportunity to associate
myself with the sincere tribute paid to Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of UNTAET, for his work
and outstanding success. I wish him much happiness
and success in his new activities.

The results achieved in East Timor since 1999
and, in particular, over the past few months are most
telling. They include a multilateral financial
mobilization of well over $1 billion; peace in the
territory; the relaunching of economic activity; the
establishment of a Transitional Government; and, last
but not least, the presidential election of 14 April.
These are all historic milestones marking the
emergence on the international stage of a new nation.
All of these achievements must be consolidated. The
fact that the Timorese are now masters of their own
destiny should not lead the international community to
abandon its role in assisting them.

The highly relevant paragraph 4 of the Secretary-
General's report in document S/2002/80 says, in part,
that:

"the comparative fragility of the political
foundations of this new country, its very limited
pool of professional and administrative expertise,
lack of strong independent security mechanisms
and nascent state of economic development mean
that East Timor will continue to require
significant assistance from the international
community well after independence, in order to
ensure stability and realize the potential for
progress that has been generated over the past
two years."

The independence of East Timor, far from
entailing an end to the United Nations commitment,
marks instead the beginning of a new phase of
significant and sustained assistance from the United
Nations in order to ensure that the results are preserved
in the long term. That is why Cameroon thanks the
Secretary-General for his statement and for the high
quality of his report. The delegation of Cameroon fully
endorses the creation of the new United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor, including its
financial implications, and supports the other
recommendations contained in the report. It is
gratifying that the United Nations will keep a mission
in East Timor beyond 20 May.

I congratulate my friend and colleague
Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma on his nomination by
the Secretary-General to succeed Mr. Vieira de Mello.
It is perfectly clear that Mr. Sharma, as a man of great
experience, attentiveness and persuasiveness and
therefore of great human value, will be able to provide
the Timorese with all due support and to assist them in
persuading the donor community 4 within which,
fortunately, he has many friends - to continue,
increase and strengthen its financial and technical
assistance to that young country.

I hope that our friends from East Timor will
continue to keep their country's noble mission in mind
through the spirit of dialogue, openness, tolerance and
joint management that they have clearly displayed in
recent weeks, to the satisfaction of all. I wish them all
the best.

In conclusion, I reiterate my country's great
pleasure at seeing the approach of independence for
East Timor on 20 May. That date is also Cameroon's
national holiday. This year, our countries will be
celebrating on 20 May; beginning in 2002, each year
our countries will display their patriotic fervour on the
same day. In anticipation of 20 May 2002,
Cameroon- impatiently awaiting the reception of
East Timor into the great family of nations - assures
Mr. Gusmao of its resolve to enjoy relations of trust
and close cooperation with his country.

