Switzerland wishes to thank Germany for organizing this debate and its participants for their contributions. The impact of climate change on the global environment, economy and society is profound and exacerbates existing vulnerabilities and inequalities. When combined with existing conflict drivers such as political and economic instability, climate change is a risk multiplier, making conflicts more likely, more intense and longer-lasting. Switzerland is taking action to limit the security implications of climate change, for instance, through our Blue Peace initiative, launched in 2010, which supports cross-border cooperation to promote dialogue on water access. We are co-Chairs of the Nansen Initiative and support the Platform on Disaster Displacement. When disasters or climate-change effects lead to forced displacement, they can act as a driver of social tensions and conflict. We recognize the urgency that proactive steps be taken to limit the impacts of climate change on human security. The Council has recognized adverse effects of climate change on international peace and security, starting with resolution 2349 (2017). We welcome the fact that the Council has made progress in recent years in integrating language on climate-related security risks into its outcomes and that the need for improved assessment of climate-related security risks has been noted in such contexts as Somalia, Mali, West Africa, the Sahel and Darfur. Switzerland wishes to underline three areas of action in which the Security Council can contribute to mitigating climate and security risks. First, as the interdependent nature of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development shows, climate action cuts across multiple agendas and United Nations bodies in the three pillars of the Organization. The Security Council has recognized the link between peace and security and sustainable development and must now also fully address the peace and security implications of climate change. The Council should include a gender-responsive approach and acknowledge the innovative role that youth has to play. Switzerland appreciates the continued engagement of a majority of Security Council members, as well as of the Group of Friends of Climate and Security. We support the Group's joint position and the call for a region-specific and forward-looking report of the Secretary-General on climate-related security risks. Regular reporting, using existing structures within the United Nations, is crucial to addressing such risks efficiently. Secondly, the Security Council should systematically integrate climate-related security risks in addressing regional or country situations on its agenda. It should take full advantage of the information and resources available within the United Nations system. This requires early-warning systems to systematically identify situations where climate change acts as a risk multiplier in order to develop adequate responses. Climate-data collection, climate scenarios and early-warning systems have already been applied with success. It is vital to exchange this knowledge and use synergies within the United Nations, including the Security Council. Improved coordination across the entire United Nations system should enable an appropriate response to these challenges. Thirdly, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has intensified the climate crisis, deepened social inequalities and posed a risk to peace and security. It has increased vulnerability for populations living in regions affected by conflict, fragility and climate change. The combined impact of climate change, COVID-19 and conflict has resulted in millions of people in need of humanitarian assistance. Women, children, the elderly, people with disabilities and displaced populations are particularly at risk. COVID-19 must not be used to allow setbacks in climate protection, and the implementation of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change must remain a priority. Against this backdrop, Switzerland supports an enhanced engagement by the Security Council with respect to all the implications that climate change has for international peace and security. There is an increasing need to address climate- change, fragility and conflict risks together. Climate change needs to be taken into account systematically and in an integrated manner to prevent conflicts and strengthen resilience and adaptation measures. Climate and development policies have to become more conflict-sensitive, and security policy has to become more climate-sensitive.
