Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank Mr. O'Brien for
his briefing.

We have heard many times that the situation in Syria
cannot get any worse, yet this tragic crisis continues.
Thirteen and a half million people need humanitarian
assistance. Even the so-called improved access in
March allowed aid convoys to reach only 39 per cent
of people for whom access was requested. There has
been some progress on the hard-to-reach areas since
the 12 February agreement between the Syrian Higher
Relief Committee and the United Nations, but the
situation in the besieged areas is still devastating. And
we can only imagine the horror of the evacuees on
15 April who finally exited their besieged towns only
for their convoy to be brutally targeted in Al-Rashidin.

The many victims of the tragedy in Syria include
not only ordinary civilians, but also the people who are
trying to help them. Nearly one year has passed since
the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), which called for
the protection of medical staff, yet countless medical
personnel and humanitarian workers are still being
killed in Syria. I would like to take this opportunity
to express our sorrow and gratitude to them and to pay
our respect to the brave men and women who continue
to work for those in need, under the most severe
of circumstances.

The Council and the International Syria Support
Group Humanitarian Taskforce have been making
strenuous efforts to achieve rapid, safe and unhindered
access throughout Syria, as mandated by resolution
2254 (2015). Our attention has been extensive, but
any progress is often hard-won. Over the past year,
we have worked to identify concrete measures,
obstacles and areas to be reached. Yet we have
constantly encountered bureaucratic impediments
and unreasonably delayed clearances from the Syrian
Government. Every inter-agency convoy's departure
or potential cancellation is a subject of worry, and
every item is potentially at risk of being removed from
convoys. Furthermore, it is clear that facilitation letters
issued by the Syrian Government are crucial. It is tragic
and unbelievable that one bureaucratic document can
be so critical for access to thousands of people. The
humanitarian co-penholders - Egypt, Sweden and
Japan - have discussed this matter directly with the
Permanent Mission of Syria in New York. We urged
Syria to make more efforts to issue letters immediately,
in line with the United Nations call for them to be issued
within two to three days. We believe that the Syrian
Mission conveyed ourjoint message to Damascus. The
co-penholders will try to achieve as much as possible
in this area.

One of our most urgent concerns at present is
eastern Ghouta. Mr. O'Brien explained that the United
Nations is requesting a cessation of hostilities to allow
humanitarian access. Japan supports that call. But the
need for a ceasefire is not limited to eastern Ghouta. We
are also concerned about the many reports of fighting
in various locations. The next Astana process meeting,
to be held at the beginning of May, will be crucial to
preserving the ceasefire mechanism, which allows for
humanitarian access.

While the details and logistics I have mentioned are
vitally important for Syria, we should also keep two
broader goals in mind.

The first is the importance of the political process.
Although the recent Geneva talks did not yield a
breakthrough, there was also no breakdown. That is an
implicit affirmation of the fact that there is no military
solution to the conflict. We must act on that progress
to gain commitments that translate into lifesaving
changes on the ground.

The second broad point is the need for truth and
accountability. We have seen so much destruction
and so many crimes during this six-year war, in
particular the use of chemical weapons. Justice may
not come immediately, but the United Nations and
other humanitarian actors must use their various tools,
including those granted by the Security Council, to
ascertain facts on the ground. Those facts will form the
basis for accountability and for addressing the suffering
of the Syrian people.

With those two broader goals in mind, we must
continue our efforts unabated to achieve good-faith
cooperation and humanitarian access from the Syrian
Government in order to serve those most in need.
