Mr. Annabi: One set of questions related to the
decrease in the rate of return of refugees from West Timor.
As I said, we feel that this is due to a combination of
factors. Some misinformation and intimidation is still going
on, and that, of course, is one factor. According to the
information we have, the fact that there has been extensive
destruction in the territory and that some of the refugees are
not sure that they will have a home to return to is possibly
another factor. And finally, the third factor is probably the
fact that those in West Timor who had voted in favour of
autonomy - and let us not forget that more than 20 per
cent of the East Timorese voted in favour of autonomy -
may not wish to return to East Timor at the present time,
or may not feel comfortable about doing so for one reason
or another. One hundred twenty thousand have returned,
and we may be reaching the point where some do not wish
to return, at least in the immediate future.

We hope, however, that the working group whose
establishment was agreed upon with the Indonesian
authorities during the Special Representative's visit to
Jakarta, and which will look at all these issues, can help
improve the situation and enable us to move quickly
towards a situation where we have more clarity as to the
exact wishes and intentions of those who are left in West
Timor, so that those who wish to return can indeed return
in safe conditions and so that those who do not wish to
return can be resettled elsewhere.

There was also a question by the representative of
France regarding the strength of the United Nations
peacekeeping force. We believe - and this is the
assessment of all the experts concerned - that it is wise
and prudent that the peacekeeping force taking over from
the multinational force should be a strong, credible force,
and that it should be endowed with a credible deterrent
capacity. It will be smaller than the multinational force;
when I visited East Timor at the end of November I was
informed that the International Force, East Timor
(INTERFET) had more than 11,000 troops in East Timor.
The United Nations force which will take over during
February will have more than 8,000 troops.

But it is a fact that the security situation has
improved, and we welcome this. We must, in this regard,
pay tribute to INTERFET for the excellent work it has
done to restore peace and security in the territory. If the
present trend continues - and we have no reason to
believe that it will not - certainly the Secretary-General
will reassess the situation in due course and will not
hesitate to come back to the Security Council with
proposed reductions if he feels they can be safely
undertaken. I can assure the Council that he will not wish
to keep more troops in East Timor than are necessary to
implement the mandate as foreseen in resolution 1272
(1999).

Finally, on coordination and division of labour
regarding the implementation of the assistance that has
been offered to East Timor, we have made an unusual
effort to present to donors a comprehensive picture on the
humanitarian assistance side, on requirements for
administration and for creating a self-government
capacity, and on longer-term reconstruction and
development
 

requirements. We have made an effort to present an
integrated picture, and I can assure the Council that we will
continue to do what we can to ensure proper coordination
in the implementation of these programmes. to avoid, as
much as we can, overlap and duplication among various
agencies.

