Ms. Ibrahim: I am pleased to address the
Security Council regarding Somalia's democratization
process. From the outset, I wish to extend my sincere
appreciation to the members of the Council and the
international community for their support for Somalia
and, in particular, for assisting the National Independent
Electoral Commission (NIEC) in its effort to carry out
its mandate of conducting universal suffrage elections.

Since Somalia formally became an independent
State in 1960, universal suffrage elections have been
conducted only twice, in 1964 and, most recently, in
1969. The essential platforms for promoting democracy,
including political parties and the Constitution, were
suspended when the military took over in 1969.

After 21 years in power, the military Government
was removed from power by clan militias in 1991. The
country descended into civil war, as those clan-based
factions failed to agree on power-sharing and universal
suffrage has not been in effect over the past 50 years.

Currently, Somalia has an estimated population
of 12 million, with a large population living in major
cities across all member states as internally displaced
persons. Following several decades of State failure and
in the absence of a functioning Government, a clan-
based power-sharing model was agreed upon at the end
of 2016 and in early 2017. Under the clan power-sharing
model, clan leaders were given the mandate to nominate
candidates and delegates from their respective clans. In
the end, the elders managed to choose 275 members of
the Lower House and 54 members of the Upper House.

Although the model facilitated the indirect election
of Members of Parliament and the President at the
federal level, the process was compromised by extensive
vote buying. There was a great deal of corruption in the
process, the limited participation of women in the two
Houses and the complete exclusion of marginalized and
minority groups.

The National Independent Electoral Commission
was first established in 2015. Soon after its formation,
the NIEC Board of Commissioners begun building
an institutional foundation to prepare the country for
elections in 2020/2021. The NIEC's preparatory work
commenced with the formulation of a strategic plan
that was based on the constitutional principles and
harmonized with the country's national development
plan and Constitution. The four-year preparation by the
NIEC has focused on the following areas.

First is the capacity-building of the NIEC
Commissioners and the secretariat. The second
aspect is the provisional registration of political
parties. To date, 57 political parties have temporary
registration. The third aspect is the establishment of
NIEC field offices in all federal member states. The
fourth area is the development of the voter education
curriculum, supporting materials and voter education
messages. Fifth is the identification and verification
of potential voter registration sites and the selection
of the voter registration model. The sixth area is the
development of the concept of operations and budget
for voter registration operations. Seventh is overseeing
the construction on the NIEC data processing centre
and warehouse building. The eight element is the
preparation of all the necessary rules and regulations
for the adoption of the electoral law.

The significant progress in the preparation for
the 2020/2021 election would not have been possible
without the support of the Federal Government of
Somalia, federal member states and our international
partners, particularly the Integrated Election Support
Group, the United Nations arm created to provide
assistance to Somalia's elections in 2020/2021 and the
African Union. There are also several international
non-governmental organizations.

Since 2011, Somalia's political leaders have agreed
to holding a one-person one-vote election as the basis
for the process of choosing leaders and a substitute
for the clan-based power-sharing. Besides the leaders'
decision, the findings from a nation-wide feasibility
study conducted by the NIEC indicate significant
public support for a fair and credible election given
that it is the cornerstone for building a vibrant society
in Somalia. Moreover, the Somali public support the
one-person one-vote system because they believe that
it is the only mechanism whereby marginalized groups
can regain their rights to take part in the political
decision-making process.

I want to remind the members of the Council
that 2020 is a pivotal year for Somalia's citizens, who
have been denied their right to political participation
for 50 years. The 2020 election is a milestone for the
international community, which has been investing
heavily in Somalia for several decades with a view
to introducing and promoting democracy and good
governance. However, that milestone will be realized
only when the Somali leaders and the international
community show a commitment to ensuring that
one-person-one-vote elections take place in 2020
and 2021.

I want to reiterate that the clan power-sharing
model was initially designed as a temporary measure
to support the transitional Government of Somalia
in preparing the country for one-person-one-vote
elections. That is why various meetings of Somali
political leaders and partnership forums have all called
for one-person-one-vote elections and an end to the
clan-based power model. It is also worth noting that
any election model that does not enable the Somali
people to exercise their right to vote violates Somalia's
Constitution and the various human rights conventions
that Somalia has ratified. Article 46 of the Constitution
specifically stipulates that the public representation
system shall be open and shall give everyone the
opportunity to participate, and that its procedures and
rules shall be simple and understandable.

In order to restore the right of the Somali people
to a free election, as stipulated in article 22 of the
Constitution, and also in recognition of the fact that
one-person-one-vote elections are the cornerstone for
building Somalia's democratic governance, I therefore
want to make the following appeal to Somalia's leaders
and international partners. The National Independent
Electoral Commission is requesting that the country's
leaders treat the 2020-2021 one-person-one-vote
elections as a constitutional obligation and a national
priority, and that they provide the political and
financial support that the Electoral Commission needs
to carry out its mission to conduct one-person-one-vote
elections. The Electoral Commission also appeals
to our international partners to make the necessary
funding for election operations available. The overall
operational cost of the election in Somalia is estimated
at $53 million, excluding the cost of election security
and the Electoral Commission's annual operational
costs. The Electoral Commission also expects political
support from the international community.

I want to remind our partners that there are several
post-conflict countries whose elections have been guided
by the United Nations and the international community
with costs several times higher than the total projected
costs of Somalia's election. But that was done because
the international community believed that elections were
a vital part of the process of rebuilding those countries.
While the National Independent Electoral Commission
appreciates the support that the Somali Government
and the international community have given in the past
to promote Somalia's democratization, we believe their
efforts of the past years will be wasted if they do not
genuinely support the holding of one-person-one-vote
elections in Somalia in 2020 and 2021.

