Mr. Ould-Abdallah (spoke in French): I should
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, for having
taken the good initiative of organizing this meeting,
which attests to the importance that the Security
Council attaches to the questions of peace and security
in West Africa.

I shall begin with two comments.

First, West Africa is a region in transition:
political transition from the era of single parties to
multiparty democracy, but also economic transition
from State-run economies to the private sector. The
transition is also demographic, and this is a new and
important problem. The population is largely young. Of
the 270 million inhabitants in the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), almost
sixty per cent are less than 30 years old. A great many
of those young people are unemployed, so instead of
being a source of hope they are a threat to stability,
06-4607]
despite themselves. For two decades war has been their
primary employer.

Secondly, informal migration - sometimes
called clandestine migration - of young people is
gradually becoming a major political challenge for the
Governments of the subregion and for the international
community.

These are new threats. Much progress has been
made in West Africa. The Council should reinforce its
support for those efforts, especially to consolidate
progress and preventive action in the face of new
threats.

In terms of threat - and I insist on this point; we
do not read about it much in the press or in the
reports - the northern and eastern borders of the West
African subregion are porous and fragile, as are the
borders between States. Those zones are areas of
legitimate commerce, but they also shelter criminal
activities such as trafficking in arms, drugs and natural
resources.

In the southern area, along the Gulf of Guinea, as
in the Sahel, there are religious groups - evangelists
and Islamists. Social functions that formerly were
performed by the State are now being carried out by
these groups - health centres, schools and wells, for
example. Alongside those two religious groups, the
older, well-established Islamic brotherhoods and the
Christian churches, especially the Catholics, are less
and less visible.

Another emerging threat that I wish to mention is
the development of piracy on the high seas.

Notwithstanding all these challenges to be
monitored, the integration of West Africa is continuing
to make progress. The subregion is more integrated
politically and economically than it was in the past.
The voice of ECOWAS is increasingly asserting itself
in crisis management. Here we should give credit here
to the Executive Secretary of ECOWAS, Mr. Ibn
Chambas, who is with us today. Credit is also due to
Nigeria, which increasingly is becoming the
indispensable State of the subregion. Nigeria and
Ghana provide eighty per cent of the ECOWAS budget.

The commitment of the United Nations is
accepted in West Africa; the Organization is a factor
largely accepted by the people. Missions in the
subregion include my office, the United Nations Office
for West Africa, and the missions in Sierra Leone,
5
Liberia, Guinea-Bissau and Cote d'Ivoire. Those
missions are complementary. They meet regularly to
exchange information and experience and to design a
coherent, integrated approach. That approach, which is
very effective at the level of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, enables the United Nations
to share its human and logistic resources and to speak
with a single voice in crisis management.

On several occasions the Security Council has
recognized and encouraged this inter-mission
collaboration, for instance in its presidential statements
S/PRST/2004/7, of 25 March 2004, and
S/PRST/2005/9, of 25 February 2005. That Security
Council support is valuable to us in order to better
carry out the mandates entrusted to us.

I believe there has been an evolution in Africa
that should be seen beyond this, and that is the
evolution at the people's level. To illustrate my point I
have brought something to show how much West
Africa and its people are connected, including with the
Security Council. I have brought with me a little radio
that costs less than a dollar and that makes it possible
to follow the news on FM. - and I am not doing public
relations for the BBC or for Radio France
Internationale or the Voice of America, but one can
listen to news on these little radios. I think that each
Council member should have one of these radios just to
understand my point. They cost less than $1 each, and
people can keep abreast of the news by using them.

Thus, the people are well-informed and
interconnected. We need only think back to the Africa
of 1960, when many people did not read and were not
informed, to see how things have changed. Everything
that the Council does is followed closely. People are
increasingly connected, not only in capital cities, but in
all parts of the world. Thanks to this connectivity,
people are better informed and more demanding of
their Governments and of the international community.
Through radio and television, the discussions that take
place here are closely followed and understood in the
countryside and in the remotest villages.

In supporting conflict management and crisis
resolution, the Security Council must pay particular
attention to countries in transformation. These are
stable States moving towards democratization, but they
are still fragile. Their institutional capacities must be
reinforced and vulnerable populations must be assisted,
as appropriate.
Before concluding, I would like to stress that next
year is an election year. Elections are an exercise in
democracy, but they are also a time of tension.
Elections are due to take place next year in Benin, Cote
d'Ivoire, Mali, Nigeria, Senegal and Sierra Leone.

In conclusion, the following priorities deserve
attention: first, youth unemployment and its impact on
national and regional peace and stability; secondly,
unauthorized immigration and its increasing impact on
local government and international relations; thirdly,
peaceful democratic change of Government as a means
of preventing conflict. How can we ensure the peaceful
handover of power and avoid coups d'etats, violence
and civil wars? Fourthly, rapid urbanization and
increasing insecurity are also a priority: 38 per cent to
40 per cent of West Africans live in capital cities.
Finally, despite ECOWAS conventions on the matter,
the free circulation of people and goods in West Africa
has been difficult to maintain - in particular because
of roadblocks and the constant harassment of the
private sector. The private sector in Africa must be
supported as a way of ensuring progress.

