Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for
his briefing today and for his ongoing work to advance
the political process. I reiterate the appreciation and
gratitude of the State of Kuwait for all his endeavours
over the past four years to carry out his difficult task.

The Sochi agreement reached in January on the
formation of a constitutional committee was a beacon
of hope for the Syrian political process. However, 11
months since the agreement was struck, no progress has
been made and hope is giving way to disappointment,
particularly among the Syrian people, who have long
awaited a political settlement that would meet their
aspirations and legitimate demands after years of
killing, destruction and displacement, and that would
preserve the unity, independence and sovereignty
of Syria.

The State of Kuwait supports the final declaration
issued at the summit between Turkey, Russia, France
and Germany in Istanbul on 27 October, in particular
with regard to launching the work of the constitutional
committee by the end of this year. We encourage the
Special Envoy to continue to engage with the relevant
parties so as to establish a credible and balanced
constitutional committee as soon as possible. The
committee is a key milestone in the transitional political
process and a basis for additional milestones, as set out
in resolution 2254 (2015), including the drafting of a
new constitution and the convening of free and fair
elections in Syria, under the auspices of the United
Nations and with the participation of all Syrians.

We reiterate that the Sochi agreement clarifies the
role of the Special Envoy and the Geneva process in
the final formation of the constitutional committee.
We believe that the Special Envoy has the necessary
mandate to establish such a committee.

We reaffirm that there is no military solution to
the Syrian crisis. All Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolution 2254 (2015), which was adopted
unanimously, must be respected and should not remain
dead letters. We are at a critical juncture regarding
the Syrian issue. We must all seize the window of
opportunity afforded to us by the upcoming days as
long as there is relative stability in Idlib as a result of the
Russian-Turkish agreement. We hope that progress will
be made in advancing the political process before the
end of the year so that Syrians do not enter their eighth
year of conflict with no real and tangible prospects for
lasting and sustainable peace.

