Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): On behalf of the
Republic of Angola, I should like to welcome you, Sir,
to New York to preside over this important debate. We
express our appreciation to the Lithuanian presidency
for organizing this debate on an issue that is a matter
of great concern and deserves our full attention, with a
View to finding the most appropriate ways to counter a
dangerous trend in international life. The presence and
participation in this debate of a significant number of
eminent Ministers of the Interior are in themselves an
indication of the commitment of our Council.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General and to
the Chairs of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, respectively the Permanent
Representatives of Lithuania and New Zealand, for
their insightful briefings, as well as to the Secretary
General of INTERPOL, Mr. Jiirgen Stock.

In recent years, we have witnessed a very
disturbing development in international life, with
growing numbers of individuals getting involved
in various conflicts in different parts of the world,
thereby creating a new kind of international terrorist
movement. Thousands of individuals of over 100
nationalities have become foreign terrorist fighters, as
the Security Council has labeled them, and constitute
an increasing threat to international peace and security.
Although this phenomenon is not new, the extent of the
involvement of foreign terrorist fighters in conflicts
and acts of terrorism is unprecedented.

We have to recognize that something is deeply
wrong in the world we are living in, and that the
benefits of material affluence and cultural, scientific
and technological development are being disgracefully
turned away from serving the common good. Scores of
young people have gone astray to take part in senseless
bloodshed and acts of terrorism in which obscurantism
prevails. The hatred of the other for being different,
the denial of the value of human life, and contempt
for humankind's cultural heritage are taking the upper
hand.

The fundamental question we have to raise is:
Why is this happening? What have we done wrong
to push so many young people into committing of the
most despicable crimes and becoming associated with
the darkest forces of obscurantism and destruction? In
our view, finding the answers to those and many other
questions is crucial if we are to find the proper ways to
counter such phenomena. Other than taking repressive
legislative measures, we must wage a well-structured,
imaginative and energetic ideological struggle against
that trend and unveil the wrongdoings of the terrorists,
their nihilistic concept of life and the world, and the
nightmare that awaits these young people after the
dream is over.

Terrorist groups such as Al-Qaida, the Al-Nusra
Front, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, Boko
Haram and others recruit fighters from all over the
world, making their brand of terrorism a threat not only
to the targeted countries but also to terrorists' countries
of origin and transit. The recent report of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team (S/2015/358)
gives concrete evidence of the threat poses to the world,
given that there are currently more than 25,000 foreign
terrorist fighters of more than 100 different nationalities
acting in Syria, Iraq and Libya. That is a warning to the
entire international community of the need to identify
the causes of the threat and use the best approaches to
combat it.

Today, eight months since the Council's unanimous
adoption of resolution 2178 (2014), sponsored by 120
Member States, the threat posed by those individuals
is greater than ever. Today's debate is a good
opportunity to take stock of the progress achieved in
the implementation of that resolution, as well as to
identify shortcomings and obstacles. In that regard,
we reiterate Angola's full commitment to combating
the threat posed by terrorist groups in general and by
foreign terrorist fighters in particular.

Due to the growing threat of international terrorist
groups and the ever more sophisticated recruiting
methods they use to attract young people, this year the
Angolan Government created a national anti-terrorism
observatory, coordinated by the Ministry of the
Interior. The observatory enjoys the participation of a
multisectoral expert group that includes, among others,
the Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Defence, and State
security services, with the main objective of monitoring
and combating any potential threat caused by terrorists.

In line with our commitment, Angola has
participated in seminars conducted by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and its Executive Director, aimed
at formulating a counter-terrorism strategy for Central
Africa. We hosted one such seminar in February, in our
capital. We participated in the first counter-terrorism
seminar for Southern Africa and will take part in a
second one, to take place in Gaborone in June. The
Heads of State and Government of the ninth Summit
of the International Conference of the Great Lakes
Region, held in Rwanda on 18 May, focused, among
other issues, on the terrorist threat. They decided to
strengthen the proactive sharing of intelligence among
member States to improve early warning mechanisms,
promote closer monitoring of border movements and
strengthen existing mechanisms to fight the growing
threat of terrorism in the region.

Within the framework of the effective implementation
of resolution 2178 (2014), Angola prohibits the
recruitment of foreign terrorist fighters on its
territory, in accordance with our pertinent national
legislation. Angolan legislation also criminalizes, with
imprisonment for 2 to 12 years, the actions of any
person collaborating with a terrorist group by providing
information or material resources - including
weapons, ammunition, shelter or meeting places - or
by helping such groups recruit new members. Angolan
law establishes mechanisms to verify the identify and
history of persons suspected of committing terrorist
acts before the granting of entry visas. An electronic
mechanism has recently been set up consisting ofa data
base with the records ofnational and foreign citizens that
catalogues their potential to commit offenses, including
acts of terrorism. INTERPOL Angola, in collaboration
with international INTERPOL and the international
security services, are part of that mechanism.

With regard to the exchange of information and
administrative and legal cooperation for the prevention
of terrorist acts, there are exchanges among the members
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries,
and with the members of countries of subregional
organizations ofwhich Angola is a member, specifically
the Southern African Development Community (SADC)
and the Economic Community of Central African
States. With respect to the collection and sharing of
information inside SADC, the Regional Early Warning
Centre was created to improve communication among
the 14 members of that organization. Angola also
maintains contacts and cooperation with the African
Centre for Study and Research on Terrorism within
the African Union mechanisms with headquarters
in Algiers. International cooperation is pivotal to the
response to that threat, and resolution 2178 (2014)
provides a very crucial framework.

In conclusion, we reiterate our strong belief that
the root causes of the phenomenon must be identified
and and resolutely and properly addressed. Otherwise,
we risk making the mistake of limiting our action
to targeting the consequences of such a disturbing
phenomenon while ignoring its real or root causes. We
are convinced that together we can and shall prevail
over the challenge.

