Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): Allow me to join all those who have thanked
you personally, Mr. President, for suggesting and
convening this meeting and for having invited your
compatriot, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, to share his
views. As always he has expressed them in an extremely
clear, precise, well-documented and thought-provoking
way. We trust that this debate convened on your
initiative, and which was so ably opened by the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, will indeed
encourage the members of the Council to continue to give
thought to these matters so that this fundamental issue of
simple respect for human beings caught up in conflict
situations can really begin to be resolved.

We are all aware of the considerable change that has
occurred in recent years in dealing with these complex
problems. It is striking that now 90 per cent of the
victims of armed conflicts are civilians, whereas it used
to be that this 90 per cent represented combatants.
Civilian populations have become the principal Victims of
conflicts, and sometimes deliberate targets. I am thinking
in particular of the most vulnerable group: children. It is
therefore essential, as Mr. Vieira de Mello said, that
measures be taken to raise the minimum age at which
children can be inducted into armed forces and to ensure
better, effective protection of children during armed
conflicts. But this, we must admit, is but one example of
the significant worsening of respect for humanitarian law
in recent years.

Of course, everyone knows the principles. They
remain fundamental. These principles include assured and
unimpeded access to victims and to all affected
populations. This is a fundamental right. It is often
flouted. Sometimes it is respected, which proves that
sometimes in difficult situations it is possible for there to
be respect for some principles. In this connection, Mr.
Vieira de Mello was right to mention the crisis in Guinea-

 

Bissau where, happily, it has been possible to provide
assistance to the parties involved.

Another fundamental principle is the protection of
refugees and displaced persons. Yet another, of course, is
the distinguishing and separation of civilians from
combatants. In the report submitted to us in September the
Secretary-General once again stressed the urgent need to
make this distinction. Other principles include protection of
hospitals and, lastly, protection of humanitarian personnel.
Since here again there is a good example, I would like to
join in the tribute that Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello paid to
the representative of Russia for the role his country played
in the release of Vincent Cochetel, a member of the
humanitarian staff of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.

Clearly, we must remind ourselves of these principles,
and we are being given the opportunity this year, it being
the anniversary year of several conventions: the Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols, and also of
course the Hague Conventions. These anniversaries should
lead us to take action to ensure that these Conventions are
better respected and ultimately to strengthen the guarantees
they provide.

But beyond these necessary reminders, beyond the
work we can do to strengthen these legal instruments, we,
the members of the Security Council, must act. We must
take long-term measures, as we have, for example, in
establishing International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda
and the former Yugoslavia, which are charged with trying
those responsible for serious violations of international law.

Another long-term and positive undertaking is the
establishment of the International Criminal Court, which
will sanction violations of the Geneva Conventions. This is
a major step forward, and France, which is proud to have
supported early on to the establishment of the International
Criminal Court, hopes that it will soon be able to take
action.

However, in the short run, during which we are almost
daily confronted with crises that are at once political and
humanitarian, we Council members must strive to provide
a response, and to do so immediately. This will lead us, as
we reflect on the maintenance of peace, to anticipate
humanitarian problems and, above all, the need to protect
innocent civilian populations. We must strive to act before
there is a crisis, as, for example, recently when we held a
debate on peacekeeping, trying to do all we could in
advance to avoid humanitarian disasters.
Here again there are examples that show this is
possible. I am thinking for example of the multinational
force authorized by the Council, Operation Alba in
Albania. But we also have to keep in mind the
shortcomings, setbacks and failures; I am thinking of our
inability at the end of 1996 to avoid the disaster in
eastern Zaire, the humanitarian tragedy that took place in
that region of Africa, as everyone knows.

This leads us to reflect on how to draw lessons from
past experience. Within the Council, of course, we
already know that we must strive from now on to define
precise mandates, to distinguish the political, military and
humanitarian tasks to be done, and to preserve the
neutrality of humanitarian activities. As several speakers
have said, such as the Ambassador of Slovenia, we must
in any case remain well aware that, by leading to
extensive movements of refugees and displaced persons,
the risks of humanitarian catastrophes can themselves
threaten peace and international security. Thus, the
Security Council has the responsibility and the duty to
provide a response to this.

To be very specific, we must be well aware of the
challenging tasks facing those who deal with humanitarian
problems. One of these tasks is indeed distinguishing
between the humanitarian and the political solution. The
humanitarian response cannot always substitute for
dealing with conflicts and their causes. Sometimes the
representatives of humanitarian agencies bear a heavy
responsibility, the heavy responsibility of saving, "We are
doing what we can, but the problem goes deeper and it is
up to the Security Council to take political decisions, and
sometimes also military decisions." We must realize that
the Council cannot completely shed this responsibility,
entrusting it to the humanitarian actors.

Another responsibility weighs heavily on those in
charge of humanitarian agencies: to what extent can those
agencies accept departures from the principles of
neutrality and non-discrimination in order to carry out
their mission? This is not a theoretical question; it arose
recently in very practical terms in several conflict
situations in Africa and in Afghanistan. In other words,
what are the acceptable limits on the constraints that local
authorities may seek to impose on the presence and the
work of humanitarian personnel? This is a serious
question that involves ethics, the agencies' responsibility
vis-a-vis their immediate obligation to provide assistance,
and also respect for more general legal principles.

 

My last point relates to the topic of existing standards,
and in a way it is a question for Mr. Vieira de Mello. Does
he believe that new standards of international law must be
introduced in View of the changing nature of armed
conflict, the fact that the civilian population has become by
far the main victim and target, and that the distinction
between civilians and combatants is becoming increasingly
blurred?

Mr. President, this debate, which you have taken the
initiative of convening, must not only lead to the Security
Council's becoming more active in monitoring and
responding to conflicts politically, militarily or at the
humanitarian level; it must also lead us, together with the
Secretariat, to reaffirm certain principles and also to reflect
on ways of supplementing or fine-tuning them if necessary.

