Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Let me start by
commending the peaceful way in which the Sudan has
started a new chapter of its history. This is indeed a
historic achievement. Portugal looks forward to
continuing working with the North and the South to
build a peaceful and prosperous future for both
countries.

I thank Special Representative Menkerios and
President Benjamin Mkapa for their comprehensive
briefings, as well as for the significant work the
Special Representative and the Secretary-General's
Panel have undertaken. Allow me also to extend a word
of appreciation to Minister Deng Alor Kuol and
Ambassadors Kane and Osman for their statements.
What we heard from all of them today is indeed very
encouraging.

Portugal welcomes the official announcement on
7 February of the final results of the referendum on
self-determination for the people of Southern Sudan,
and congratulates them once again on their peaceful
determination and the orderly way in which they
expressed their democratic will. We commend the two
parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA)
for living up fully to the political commitment required
to ensure that the peace process moves forward. We
also commend the work of the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission in Khartoum and Juba, and
of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan.

The Southern Sudanese people have clearly
expressed their determination to establish an
independent State. But as we have underlined before,
despite the remarkable operational and political
achievement that the referendum represents, the work
to complete implementation of the CPA is not over. It
requires further, complex negotiations led in a spirit of
continued compromise and cooperation on the part of
both parties. We are encouraged by the willingness
reiterated by President Bashir and First Vice-President
Kiir to continue implementing the CPA and seeking an
agreement on the key post-referendum arrangements
that are essential to ensuring a peaceful future and a
mutually beneficial relationship between two viable
States.

In this regard, we welcome the start of the
popular consultation process in Blue Nile state and
urge the parties to once again ensure inclusive, timely
and credible popular consultation processes there and
in Southern Kordofan state. Another question of
paramount importance is reaching a comprehensive
agreement on the status of Abyei, encompassing all the
issues at stake. The lack of such an agreement will only
tend to keep fuelling tensions in the region. We
therefore reaffirm our support for the ongoing
mediation work of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel and its Chair, President Thabo
Mbeki. While leaders of the North and the South
continue to work together, it is also essential that both
parties protect the rights of Sudanese civilians, whether
Northerners or Southerners.

Peace and hope should extend to all Sudanese,
including those in Darfur. Continued violence against
civilians and violations of their human rights are
unacceptable and must cease forthwith. Portugal
wishes to voice its appreciation for the efforts so far
undertaken within the African Union-United Nations-
led peace process for Darfur, and to acknowledge the
added value that the Darfur-based political process can
represent as a complement to the Doha process once
the enabling environment throughout Darfur has been
established.

But, as many of us have stressed, a peaceful
solution to the crisis in Darfur can be found only if
there is real commitment from all parties to laying the
foundations for an inclusive and comprehensive peace
agreement. We are therefore encouraged by the
willingness to negotiate within the Doha framework
recently shown by the Government of the Sudan and by
the Justice and Equality Movement and the Liberation
and Justice Movement. Nevertheless, we urge all the
other groups to join and actively engage in the peace
process without further delay or preconditions, and to
cease hostilities immediately. We also call on the
parties to ensure full and unhindered access for the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur throughout the Mission area, and to allow
humanitarian workers to provide assistance to all
populations in need.

To conclude, let me underline again that the
continuing commitment, engagement and close
cooperation of all parties will be necessary to achieve a
peaceful and prosperous future for the North and the
South alike. Likewise, the international community
must continue to show its unity and act in a concerted
manner under the leadership of the United Nations,
affording the two States the support and
encouragement they will need in the still difficult times
ahead. Portugal will continue to support along these
lines, and with the objective of supporting all efforts
that can contribute to making this new chapter of the
Sudanese people's life, in the South and in the North,
an effective success.

