Mr. Corman (Turkey): At the outset, I should
like to welcome the Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-
Leste, His Excellency Mr. Jose' Luis Guterres, and to
thank him for his presentation. We are honoured by his
presence today.

I should also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2009/504) and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Atul Khare, not only for his presentation today, but
also for his tireless efforts in assisting Timor-Leste. I
should like to seize this opportunity to praise
Mr. Khare for the outstanding contribution he has made
at the head of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) and to Wish him every success
in his future endeavours.
It is thanks not only to UNMIT but also,
obviously, to the resilience and determination of the
people and Government of Timor-Leste that on
30 August the country celebrated the tenth anniversary
of the popular consultation that led to its independence.
We praise the Government for having made such a
peaceful celebration possible only three years after the
2006 crisis and a year and a half on from the dreadful
attacks on the President and Prime Minister. That
considerable stabilization has enabled the Timorese to
address such key issues as the further strengthening of
State institutions and democratic governance, as well
as the adoption of important legislation to fight
corruption.

We welcome the fact that local elections were
held successfully and without major incidents on
9 October 2009, proving that the Timorese people are
committed to democracy and that the political parties
are demonstrating respect for democratic principles and
processes.

We are also glad to see that the security situation
in Timor-Leste has been steadily improving since
February of last year, with substantial progress in
addressing the situation of internally displaced persons
(IDPS). We are quite pleased that all 65 IDP camps in
Dili and Baucau had been officially closed by the end
of August. We hope that the process of handing over
policing responsibilities from UNMIT to the Timorese
national police will continue to be as smooth as it has
been so far. In that respect, we are pleased to note that
the resumption of primary police responsibilities by the
National Police of Timor-Leste (PNTL) in three
districts and at the police training centre has not led to
an increase in criminal activities.

We continue to support the Secretary-General's
gradual approach in this matter and welcome further
progress achieved in the registration, screening and
certification programme for the PNTL in accordance
with the policing arrangements. Further progress to
enhance security sector reform, internal security and
national defence, as well as the adoption of a national
security strategy, are of utmost importance. Improving
the justice sector and its institutions is of equal
importance.

Despite these considerable achievements, the
main issues that contributed to the 2006 crisis, as
mentioned in the Secretary-General's report - such as
poverty, unemployment, the lack of an effective land
and property regime and a weak judicial system -
continue to pose significant challenges, and they need
to be thoroughly addressed in order to anchor stability
in Timor-Leste.

Given the progress that has been achieved so far,
we are confident that Timor-Leste will eventually
overcome all these challenges. However, this requires
continued national dialogue and unity. Therefore, we
join the Secretary-General in encouraging the
parliament and the Government to continue efforts at
broad consultations. We also believe that Timor-Leste
requires continued support from the international
community in its quest for peace, stability and
prosperity. We thus agree with the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the present strength and
composition of UNMIT should be maintained. The
recommendations of the technical assessment mission
expected to visit Timor-Leste in January of next year
will be crucial for evaluating possible adjustments in
UNMIT's mandate and strength.

Let me conclude by saluting once more the
owners of the normalization process, namely the
Timorese people and Government, and by wishing
them continued success.

