The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Brazil.

I join previous speakers in thanking the High
Representative, Lord Ashdown, for his useful update
on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I also
welcome Minister Barisa Colak.

There is much that is positive in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The authorities have been showing
increased commitment to progress. Structural,
administrative and legislative reforms are continuing.
The NATO benchmarks have, for the most part, been
reached, and the launching of negotiations with the
European Union (EU) is in sight. The ownership of the
process is gradually being transferred to the Bosnian
authorities, which testifies to the success of the efforts
of the international community. The city of Mostar,
ravaged by inter-ethnic strife not long ago, now offers
an example of integration between different
communities that are gradually learning to live
together. The High Representative and his Office have
also given able guidance to the process of reform.

Cooperation with the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, however, remains a thorny
issue, despite the positive signs given by the handing in
of some indictees. Bosnia and Herzegovina and, in
particular, the authorities of Republika Srpska, must be
encouraged to further improve their cooperation with
the Tribunal. Failure to do so is preventing the country
from achieving important national goals, such as
acceptance in NATO's Partnership for Peace and the
opening of negotiations on a stabilization and
association agreement with the European Union.

Rebalancing Government budgets, enacting
legislation on taxes and public procurement and other
key initiatives have pushed forward much-needed
economic reform. Progress can be noted on the path
leading to a market economy that will help attract
foreign investment. The transition between the
Stabilization Force and the European Force occurred
smoothly in December, marking the start of the
transition between the Dayton era and the Brussels era.
The fact that the EU is already considering reductions
in the size of the force after June points, in our view, to
the good level of stability already reached.

We are pleased to note that, according to the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
situation regarding returns has improved dramatically,
and the sustained return momentum continues. It is
encouraging that the Governments of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, of Croatia and of Serbia and Montenegro
intend to combine their individual action plans to
resolve the refugee issue by the end of 2006. In this
context, we renew our call to Republika Srpska to do
more to harmonize its legislation with State law on that
subject.

The international engagement is consistently
bearing fruit in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
remaining steps, although in some cases difficult, must
be taken in accordance with the commitment to achieve
a peaceful and fully multi-ethnic country on its way to
economic prosperity and in harmony with its
neighbours.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker is the representative of
Luxembourg. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

