Mr. Quinlan (Australia): It is an especially
encouraging moment for Australia to speak today
before the Council under Japan's presidency, and you,
Mr. President, are to be commended for convening
today's debate.

There is a lot of discussion, as we know, currently
under way in different forums about the importance of
peacebuilding. It is essential that that discussion also
continue in the Security Council, since peacebuilding
is a necessary - and often the most difficult -
element in preventing future conflict and in
consolidating the gains achieved by peacekeeping
missions. Both of these tasks, of course, are central
aims of the Council's work.

I would like to focus today on only a few
overarching points that have been borne out of
Australia's engagement in addressing current
peacebuilding challenges in Timor-Leste, Afghanistan,
Solomon Islands, earlier in Bougainville, and more
recently through our engagement with Sierra Leone
through the work of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). We are contributing further to this debate
through the current review of the PBC.

First, we think that peacebuilding needs to be
considered at the inception of a peacekeeping mission.
There is increasing international recognition that
beginning recovery efforts as early as possible in post-
conflict situations is critical to helping countries
stabilize and provide essential services to their
population. As such, the planning of peacekeeping
missions should not be seen, of course, as a military
task alone, but rather as one that demands a
multifaceted effort that combines political,
humanitarian and development considerations with the
security dimension. This also demands a closer and
more organic relationship between the Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission throughout the Council's
consideration of a situation.

Secondly, there are of course no quick fixes to
intractable problems. The transition from post-conflict
to what we might call normal, while unique in each
case, typically takes a long time. There is an imperative
to balance the need for rapid and flexible responses to
short-term issues against our steady efforts on longer-
term goals. Scaling back our engagement too quickly
can result in relapse into conflict. Australia learned this
lesson the hard way in Timor-Leste, most obviously
with the need in 2006 to return peacekeepers who had
been withdrawn too quickly. We need to be cognizant
of and able to respond to the rapidly changing political
and security context and, of course, be prepared to see
a challenge through to its conclusion.

Thirdly, while creating and sustaining peace and
security is a critical component of peacebuilding, it
also requires efforts at State-building. This requires all
international actors - whether political, security,
humanitarian or development - to develop a shared

understanding of all the factors affecting a nation's
ability to build a sustainable peace. They need to align
their respective efforts with Government priorities and
harmonize their activities to get the best results.
Australia's long-term approach to helping post-conflict
countries aims to address security, development,
economic and political issues in this kind of
comprehensive and sequenced way.

In Timor-Leste, the United Nations Mission and
the Australian-led International Stabilization Force are
not only helping to create and sustain peace and
security, but moreover significantly providing Timor-
Leste with the space to develop its Government and
security institutions so that there will not in the future
be any need for such an international security presence.
They are also providing the space for economic and
social development and investment in human
resources, both of which will be decisive for the long-
term future of Timor-Leste.

Australia's efforts in Timor-Leste in the earliest
stages placed priority, obviously, on stabilizing the
security situation, responding to humanitarian needs
and helping the new Government to start immediately
to rebuild the institutions it needed to govern.
However, with the benefit of hindsight, we now
recognize that a much earlier transition to also ensuring
visible, tangible benefits to the poor living in the
countryside and the very large numbers of people
Without jobs throughout all of Timor-Leste was
desperately needed. Our new country strategy seeks to
correct this imbalance, placing most emphasis on
working with the Government to deliver health and
education services, improve agricultural productivity
and address employment challenges for youth. This last
need is perhaps the most imperative of all. It is
indispensable to future stability.

In Afghanistan, our military efforts in Oruzgan
province are complemented by similar development
programmes. Our efforts to meet the population's
needs have highlighted the inextricable link between
military, diplomatic and development efforts in
establishing a sustainable peace.

Finally, Australia agrees with the Secretary-
General's assessment that there is a need to broaden
and deepen the pool of civilian experts, including from
developing countries, to help develop national capacity
in post-conflict societies. The Australian Civilian
Corps was established in late 2009 to enable the rapid
deployment of Australian civilians into post-conflict
countries in coordination with the local Government
and other international actors. We look forward to
playing an active part in the forthcoming review of
international civilian capacities.

