Archbishop Auza: At the very outset, my delegation
expresses its profound sympathy for all the victims of
the terrorist attacks in Paris, Beirut and elsewhere. Our
hearts and prayers go out to all those who mourn. Pope
Francis, in his address to the General Assembly of the
United Nations on 25 September, affirmed:

"War is the negation of all rights and a dramatic
assault on the environment. If we want true integral
human development for all, we must work tirelessly
to avoid war between nations and between peoples."
(A/70/PV3, p. 5)

United Nations affirmations that development,
peace and security and human rights are intimately
connected and mutually reinforcing abound, making
that link one of the guiding principles for peacebuilding
and peacekeeping. Member States have just adopted
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development with its
Sustainable Development Goals, thereby expressing
their determination

"to foster peaceful, just and inclusive societies
which are free from fear and violence. There can be
no sustainable development without peace and no
peace without sustainable development" (General Assembly resolution 70/1, p. 2).

That consensus decision must be translated into
reality ifwe are to succeed in sparing present and future
generations from the scourge ofviolence and in achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals. Evaluations of the
Millennium Development Goals show that countries
in conflict have lagged far behind in achieving those
Goals and, indeed, many have retrogressed, thereby
amply demonstrating that development can thrive only
in the context of peaceful societies. The recognition of
that fact at the level of principle must be translated on
the ground into a common approach to building peace,
sustaining development and fostering human rights.
To avoid fragmentation, the insight that development,
peace and security and human rights frequently overlap
and coincide must find concrete expression in the
manner in which the various United Nations bodies and
agencies operate on the ground.

Official development assistance figures and
peacekeeping budgets show how conflicts are not
just an intolerable burden for people, but also an
enormous strain for the international community,
including financially speaking. Development projects
that could help to prevent conflicts must come first,
as they could substantially lessen future expenses in
peacekeeping operations. By the same token, resources
spent on peacekeeping operations should be shifted
to development projects as soon as possible, once
situations start to stabilize. Even though the Security
Council's objective is not development per se, it could
help to mobilize resources for development as a key
component of its peace and security objectives.

The Holy See wishes to underline the important role
that grass-roots movements, faith-based organizations
and local communities play in the prevention of
conflict and in peacebuilding. Without their support
it would be very hard for the international community
to build peace and end conflicts. Their strengths lie
neither in material resources nor in scientific expertise
nor in political power, but in their being locally rooted
enablers of individuals and societies, and in their
capacity to produce and nurture leaders who are able to
inspire concrete action, develop a rapport of immediacy
with individuals and communities, and rally people to
work together for something greater than themselves.
However, they can also become major obstacles to
peace if they show partiality or indeed become parties
to the conflict.

Conflict prevention and peacebuilding are not as
dramatic and urgent as winding up active conflicts,
but they do require even greater attention, commitment
and sometimes more resources than ending wars and
civil strife does. They require perseverance, long-term
vision and commitment. They are consolidated through
thousands of daily actions that are the building blocks
of just and peaceful societies. They are realized when
both leaders and citizens transcend selfish interests
for the common good, reject a spirit of vengeance and
take the high road of healing and reconciliation. Those
elements underpin every effort towards achieving
sustainable development, durable peace and societies
that are more respectful of human rights. Without them,
military interventions and peacekeeping missions alone
will not solve the root causes of conflict.

