Mr. Madeira: I am honoured to have this
opportunity to address the Security Council on the
situation in Somalia.

It has been 10 years this month since the first
soldiers of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) landed in Mogadishu on 6 March 2007,
under fire from Al-Shabaab's Kalashnikov guns and
mortars. In order to mark that important event, show
solidarity and congratulate the people of Somalia and
President Farmajo on his outstanding election, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission - who
has asked me to greet those in this Chamber on his behalf
and present his excuses for being unable to join the
Council today - felt it was important and appropriate
that he begin his activities outside the African Union
headquarters with a visit to Somalia, his very first to a
member State of the African Union and only four days
after he took office, on Tuesday 14 March. He wanted to
be close to AMISOM's men and women in the field and
the people of the great country of Somalia, to honour
our heroes and celebrate 10 years of the sustained effort
by AMISOM. and the Somali National Army to restore
peace and stability in Somalia and in the East African
region as a whole.

The Chairperson also felt that it was important
to go to Somalia in order to highlight the alarming
humanitarian situation that has befallen the country,
where 6.2 million people are on the brink of famine,
and a catastrophe similar to that of 2011 is looming on
the horizon. As in 2011, the African Union, through
AMISOM, will once again continue to work hand in
hand and in coordination with the Somali authorities
and other partners to support our Somali sisters and
brothers who are the victims of drought, and to do our
best to save them from an impending calamity.

As we look back at where we were in 2007, we
realize that we have come a long way. Overall, the
situation in Somalia has greatly improved, thanks to the
enormous efforts of AMISOM. in its joint operations
with the Somali national security forces and other
partners. In terms of performance, Somalia has defied
the odds. The past four years have witnessed intense
political activity and reforms, facilitated by a security
environment conducive to such action. The Federal
Government has remained in place in Mogadishu,
functioning and actively formulating policy
frameworks, strengthening its institutions, improving
its performance and enhancing its efficiency. Regional
Governments have been established and are doing the
best to perform and respond adequately to the enormous
challenges faced by the people under their authority.
Economic life is coming alive in many regions of the
country, particularly Mogadishu. Political dialogue,
reconciliation and State formation, a constitutional
review and elections have all been taking place. With
the support of AMISOM. and the Somali National
Army, in September 2012 and February 2017, Somalia
succeeded in effecting exemplary peaceful transfers of
power. Eighty per cent of the country's territory has
now been recovered from Al-Shabaab.

However, a lot more must be done to bring Somalia
to the point where it needs to be. The country's capacity
to hold on sustainably to its liberated territories, restore
its authority, ensure the safety and security of its
communities and enable the Administration to perform
its governing functions must be further strengthened.
AMISOM. is playing its part in the concerted effort
to build the country's capacity and enhance the
effectiveness of Somalia's security forces, especially
the National Army, the police force, the intelligence
service and other public institutions that are central
to the provision of basic services to the people and to
keeping them happy and confident.

Somalia is now turning a new page under a new
leadership, committed to putting the people of Somalia
first. That means better governance, including the
delivery of services, accountability, fighting corruption
and enhancing the capacity of Somalis themselves to take
on, deter, degrade and contain Al-Shabaab terrorists. A
firm foundation enabling the country's institutions to
take over their constitutional responsibilities is being
laid. We are happy that the views of the African Union
and those of President Farmajo on how to do that are
very similar.

We are satisfied with the current ongoing
momentum in the build-up to the London conference
on a comprehensive approach to security in Somalia
and on streamlining, empowering and consolidating
Somalia's governance institutions. However, it is
important that we do not lose sight of the fact that the
effective achievement of our common objectives with
regard to Somalia implies establishing short-, medium-
and long-term benchmarks that must be pursued and
implemented in a coordinated, complementary and
mutually reinforcing manner. Concentrating on the
medium- to long-term objectives - without a joint,
coordinated and complementary commitment to a
concrete, mutually reinforcing and objectively feasible
plan to address the immediate challenges to our
common effort in the short term - has the potential
to undermine and render the implementation of our
medium- to long-term plans very difficult.

As the Government strives to contain Al-Shabaab and
improve security in a coordinated and complementary
manner, we must provide it with the means and requisite
support enabling it to concomitantly establish its
presence in and effectively govern the territories that
it has liberated with our support, and that must happen
while we pursue our medium- to long-term goals of
building permanent and more reliable and effective
State institutions. The fight against Al-Shabaab and
the efforts to degrade it must continue, and providing
adequate means and conditions for AMISOM. and
the Somali national security forces to do so more
effectively and in acceptable conditions must be one of
our common and immediate short-term objectives.

Containing Al-Shabaab today requires, inter alia,
that we build barracks to house the Somali National
Army soldiers who have already been certified and have
been made aware of the United Nations human rights
due diligence policy. It requires that they be screened,
equipped, rehearsed and motivated, paid salaries and
given command so that they can face the enemy more
effectively. It requires that both AMISOM. and the
Somali National Army be given the support that they
have requested to dislodge the enemy from its remaining
strongholds in the Juba Valley and Somalia's north-
eastern coastline. It equally requires that AMISOM. be
provided with a more predictable, less erratic and more
dependable source of funding to perform its duties and
achieve its mandate on time. That should include the
assessed contribution.

We have a very clear timeline. We have to start
drawing down in 2018. We do not have much time left.
We need the means to make a significant difference by
then. The Secretary-General has been on the ground
in Somalia and has seen for himself what needs to
be done. The African Union remains committed to
fulfilling its part in our common struggle against
violent extremism and terrorism and for the restoration
of peace and security, which are essential ingredients
for economic development and the improvement of the
living conditions of the people of Africa and of the
world at large.

