Mr. Goutondji (Benin) (spoke in French): As
this is the first time that we have taken the floor this
month in the Security Council, my delegation warmly
congratulates you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council.

We associate ourselves with the statement made

by the representative of Zambia on behalf of the Group
of African States.

Benin served as a sponsor of resolution 1894
(2009), adopted by the Security Council this morning.
We did so to demonstrate our commitment to the
efforts made by the United Nations over the past 10
years to ensure the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Since the Council began to consider that issue,
it has been able to correct the discrepancies that had
made the United Nations a powerless observer in the
face of grave violations of vital principles whose
preservation is one of its fundamental goals. In that
regard, we should commend the progress made by the
Security Council by, inter alia, adopting a series of
general and specific resolutions providing for the
gradual establishment of a system for implementing
protection measures on the ground.

Here, we should highlight the growing
effectiveness of the mechanisms put in place by
resolution 1612 (2005), initiated by Benin, to provide
for monitoring and reporting on children in situations
of armed conflict, and resolution 1882 (2009),
negotiated by Mexico, to broaden the scope of that
mechanism. We should also note the resolutions
recently adopted at the initiative of the United States of
America to combat sexual violence against women and
children in conflict situations.

Another step forward is the systematic inclusion
of civilian protection in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. Unfortunately, this has not always been
accompanied by the provision of the capacity needed to
ensure that this protection is effectively provided.
Populations in conflict zones continue to pay the high
price of this gap, as we have seen in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Darfur, Afghanistan and many
other theatres of operation.

Benin welcomes the discussion on the subject
initiated by the Secretariat in its document entitled "A
New Partnership Agenda: Charting a New Horizon for
United Nations Peacekeeping". The robust concept of
operations it proposes is logical, because we must
ensure that a mission receives adequate resources in
keeping with the situation on the ground and the nature
of the risks to populations under threat. In that regard,
the existence on the ground of a credible intervention
capacity can itself be a deterrent, making it possible to
keep a population safe from acts of violence to which
they could be exposed in situations of high
vulnerability.

We agree on the need for an in-depth discussion
to identify all the implications of deploying robust
missions, taking into consideration criteria for the use
of force in the light of the basic principles for the
deployment of peacekeeping operations and the need to
make adjustments to rules of engagement.
Peacekeeping operations mandated to protect civilians
must have determined and effective political backing in
accordance with the principle of civilian control of
armed forces, in order to maintain the legitimacy of
United Nations action.

In recent years we have also seen progress in
deterring massive violations of the human rights of
civilian populations, with the strengthening of the
international community's political will to step up
efforts to combat impunity for serious crimes
perpetrated in conflict situations. The International
Criminal Court and the ad hoc United Nations tribunals
play a crucial role in that regard. We urge United
Nations Member States to provide the cooperation
needed to enhance the authority of judicial bodies, both
nationally and internationally, with strict respect for
the principle of complementarity.

In addition to those measures, which focus on
coercion, my delegation welcomes the importance
attached to the dissemination of information about
international humanitarian law among stakeholders in
armed conflict and to training stakeholders in human
rights and refugee law, as a way of ensuring the
protection of civilian populations affected by conflict.
The criminal nature of massive displacements, the
deliberate targeting of civilians, attacks against
humanitarian personnel and the denial of humanitarian
access to vulnerable populations should receive special
attention through campaigns to raise awareness and
through training on international humanitarian law, in
the light of the increased use of those tactics in
conflicts that are on the agenda of the Security
Council.

Nevertheless, my delegation remains convinced
that the best way to protect civilians from armed
conflict is to engage in effective preventive diplomacy,
which can prevent the outbreak of conflicts, with their
unforeseeable consequences for human dignity.

Finally, my delegation associates itself with this
morning's appeal by the Deputy High Commissioner

for Human Rights for the provision of effective
assistance to the victims of human rights violations
linked to armed conflict.

