Mr. Swe (Myanmar): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to participate in
today's open debate. My delegation appreciates the
decision of the Vietnamese presidency to focus on
ways and means by which the international community
as a whole can contribute to achieving a long-term and
sustained solution to the issue of children and armed
conflict.

We also believe in a broad strategy of conflict
prevention. In cases where conflicts occur, national
reconciliation must be the preferred strategy. In that
connection, we are speaking from our national
experience. As a result of our policy of national
reconciliation, 17 out of 18 insurgent groups have now
returned to the legal fold. Peace and stability prevail in
almost all quarters in Myanmar. The country is no
longer in a situation of armed conflict.

We have also been addressing successfully the
issue of under-age children in the military. In its
summary, the report of the Secretary-General on
Myanmar (S/2007/666) pointed out that "The
Government of Myanmar has made a commitment at
the highest level that no child under the age of 18 will
be recruited". In that regard, I wish to stress that
Myanmar's international obligation is not to recruit
anyone under 16 years of age. However, our domestic
rules and regulations provide for a higher standard.
Under the Myanmar Defence Services Act and the
directives of the War Office Council, the minimum age
requirement for recruitment into the military is 18
years.

The Myanmar Armed Forces, including
Tatmadaw Kyi, is an all-volunteer army; those who
join the military service do so of their own free will.
Forced conscription in any form is strictly prohibited.
A new directorate has been established to oversee strict
adherence to orders, regulations and directives in the
recruitment process. However, there are cases where
persons younger than 18 years of age have professed
themselves to be older and have been able to enter
military service. There are also cases where recruiters,
particularly in far-flung areas, are lax in enforcing the
minimum-age requirement.

In January 2004, therefore, the Government
established a high-level committee for the prevention
of the military recruitment of under-age children as
soldiers. To achieve its objectives, the committee has
adopted a plan of action to strictly ensure that children
under 18 years of age are not recruited into the armed
forces. Public awareness measures have also been put
in place. The Committee has also set up a task force
composed of the relevant ministries.

What I would like to stress here is that a
mechanism and the necessary regulations are in place
to ensure that no one under 18 is recruited into the
military. In order to raise awareness among those who
are involved in the recruitment process, officers of the
Office of the Adjutant-General conduct talks on the
protection and promotion of child rights and the
directives and regulations governing the recruitment
process. UNICEF is also invited to conduct lectures on
the protection and promotion of child rights. New
recruits found to be underage at recruitment centres or
training bases are discharged and handed over to their
parents or guardians. Punitive action is taken against
recruiters who contravene regulations.

The Government has been providing detailed
information regarding the progress made in its
awareness-raising activities, the number of and specific
particulars about under-age children discharged from
the military and other pertinent data to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. That information was also
provided to the resident representatives of the United
Nations Development Programme and UNICEF, who
have from time to time had occasion to visit
recruitment centres to witness the recruitment process
first-hand. We also invited Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, to visit Myanmar. During her visit
in June 2007, the Government of Myanmar
demonstrated its positive engagement by agreeing to
set up a monitoring and reporting mechanism.

The Government is implementing a policy of
stringent scrutiny at the recruitment stage, at the
training stage and even after the training period. As a
result of that strict scrutiny, between February 2007
and May 2008 some 1,049 underage persons were
rejected at the recruitment stage. From 2004 to May
2008, 259 people who had slipped through the initial
scrutiny were discharged from the military. From 2002
to January 2008, disciplinary action was taken against
44 military personnel who failed to strictly abide by
the recruitment criteria.

Education is an important element in addressing
the issue of child soldiers. The Government, actively
assisted by UNICEF, has conducted a number of
seminars and workshops. Between November and
December 2007, a total of four workshops and
seminars were held, in which both World Vision and
Save the Children took active part. Those were
followed by a number of multiplier courses. Between 1
February 2008 and 30 June 2008, we are able to
conduct multiplier courses all over the country,

attended by over 100,000 military personnel and their
spouses.

I also wish to inform the Council that the six
armed groups that have come back to the legal fold, as
mentioned in the Secretary-General's report, have
committed themselves and openly declared that they
will not recruit child soldiers.

Resolution 1612 (2005) contains important
elements for addressing the issue of children and
armed conflict. Here, I wish to stress in the strongest
possible terms the need for United Nations entities to
abide strictly by the stipulations of resolution 1612
(2005), in particular regarding the dialogue established
under the framework of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism by United Nations entities with non-State
armed groups. Allow me to also stress that resolution
1612 (2005) also stipulates that the mechanism must
operate with the participation of and in cooperation
with national Governments.

I wish to conclude by stressing once again that
the Government of Myanmar has made a commitment
at the highest level that no one under the age of 18 will
be recruited into the military. We have set up a
mechanism through a high-level committee for the
prevention of military recruitment of underage
children. We have also established working groups
under the committee and have set up two focal points,
one in the Ministry of Social Welfare and the other in
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, to cooperate with the
United Nations Country Team.

The United Nations Country Team in Myanmar
has been a good partner and is supportive of the
Government's endeavours to prevent the recruitment of
underage children into the military. We will continue
our cooperation with the United Nations Country
Team. We have high respect for and confidence in
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Radhika Coomaraswamy and her integrity. We will
continue our cooperation with her.

Allow me to express the hope that the positive
steps taken by Myanmar to address the issue will be
accorded the recognition they deserve and that
Tatmadaw Kyi will be removed from the annex of the
forthcoming report of the Secretary-General.

