Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): This
year, Timor-Leste, a State in which the United Nations
is particularly invested, should be celebrating the
fourth year of its independence in peace and harmony.

The assistance provided by the United Nations
since 1999 - through, successively, the United
Nations Mission in East Timor; the International Force,
East Timor; the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor; the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor; and the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste, established in 2005 -
made it possible for the young republic to move
steadfastly towards the establishment of a State based
on the rule of law and to lay the foundations for
sustainable development.

Indeed, thanks to the United Nations, East Timor
now has a constitution and a national development
plan, and it has embarked on an institutional capacity-
building process. Unfortunately, against that promising
backdrop, destabilizing events took place in April and
May, centred on Dili, the repercussions of which are
continuing. My delegation condemns those acts of
violence - perpetrated one year after the departure of
United Nations troops and in the lead-up to
elections - which are putting the nation in jeopardy
and endangering the lives of the Timorese people, and
which threaten to dash the hopes of the international
community as a whole. We therefore encourage the
international community to continue to assist in efforts
to return the situation in Timor-Leste to normal.

The Security Council took steps to deal with the
dangers threatening the budding democracy by issuing,
on 25 May, a presidential statement (S/PRST/2006/25)
that supported, in particular, the request for assistance
made by the Timorese Government. The Congo
welcomes the prompt response of Australia, Malaysia,
New Zealand and Portugal - the States that were
called upon - whose dispatch of troops prevented the
deterioration of the situation and large-scale
humanitarian disaster.

Wisely, the Secretary-General promptly sent his
Special Envoy, Mr. Ian Martin, whose briefing to the
Council today will prove to be of great assistance to us
in our decision-making.

In the light of the recent developments in the
country, the proposals made by the Secretary-General
in his report contained in document S/2006/251 can be
usefully placed on the agenda again, especially those
relating to a commission of inquiry and, more
generally, to the involvement of the United Nations in
the envisaged security sector reform and in the
provision of support for institutions and for efforts
aimed at national reconciliation.

In conclusion, my delegation supports all of the
efforts to restore stability and peace in Timor-Leste.
We call on the Timorese parties to ensure calm. We
note the efforts aimed at reconciliation already made
by the Timorese authorities, religious leaders, security
forces and all those in the country and in the region
who are able to guarantee respect for the electoral
deadlines and ultimately promote the triumph of
legality and the rule of law.

