Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan Salamee, for his update on the increasingly alarming situation in Libya. Less than two weeks ago, international leaders gathered in Berlin, where they called for a sustained ceasefire and clearly committed to supporting effective United Nations monitoring when a lasting ceasefire is achieved and to rejecting toxic foreign interference in Libya. The United States looked to the participants at the Berlin conference to abide by the commitments that they made to maintain a truce and support renewed negotiations led by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). Regrettably, the promise of the Berlin conference is already under threat. During today's briefing, we learned of further blatant violations of the United Nations arms embargo, including the deployment of foreign fighters and mercenaries and the delivery of weapons, ammunition and advanced systems to the parties from Member States. Violators include and I must stress this - several countries that participated in the Berlin conference. It is past time for those who have violated existing Security Council resolutions, including the United Nations arms embargo on Libya, to face real consequences. These egregious violations worsen an already volatile situation in Libya, deepening the pain and hardship faced by ordinary Libyans on a daily basis. They must stop. We join the United Nations in calling on countries to live up to their Berlin commitments and we demand that Member States comply with their obligations to implement the United Nations arms embargo. This entails an immediate and permanent halt of all deployments of personnel, fighters and military equipment to Libya. We also call on Libyan parties to honour the fragile truce that they themselves respected over the past few weeks. Engagement in UNSMIL's planned 5+5 talks will be an important signal of how dedicated each side is to reaching a solution that avoids even more unnecessary bloodshed. Both parties need to commit to participating. While working towards a ceasefire is a critical step, it should not be the end goal. We cannot turn our attention away from Libya as the 5+5 discussions are launched. Any ceasefire must create space for serious and concrete discussions among Libyans about how to resolve the issues that have fuelled the conflict. Among these difficult tasks are the dismantling of extremist militias and the rooting of Libya's economy in transparency and the rule of law so as to benefit all Libyans, as well as efforts to prevent groups or spoilers from hijacking the political process. Looking further ahead, we continue to urge all sides to participate in UNSMIL's planned intra-Libyan political dialogue and to finalize the representation with the inclusion of women and youth leaders as soon as possible. A political solution for the conflict will require an inclusive Libyan-led and Libyan-owned process. In the light of the recent developments, we reiterate in this context that no group should be allowed to hijack Libya's national oil production. It is the Libyan people who suffer when the country's revenues collapse. The disruption of Libya's oil production has already caused electricity and water shortages. Shortages of fuel and cooking oil will likely soon follow. Thecurrent blockade on Libya's oil production must be lifted. Moreover, threats to civilian lives and aviation must end, and displaced people must be allowed to voluntarily and safely return to their homes in a sustainable and dignified manner. It is unacceptable that they have not yet been able to do so. There is an urgent need to reaffirm the truce agreed upon in Berlin and to convert it into a lasting ceasefire under United Nations supervision. On these points, we should all be able to agree. As parties to the Berlin conference affirmed, the Libyan people deserve to determine their own future, free from toxic foreign interference. It is the Council's responsibility, indeed its mandate, to enable UNSMIL and Special Representative Salame to help them do just that.
