Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): I thank you very much,
Sir, for convening this meeting to discuss this very
important issue in the presence of the general
membership. I would like to extend a very warm
welcome to the ministers of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Uganda and the Special Adviser to
the President of Rwanda, as well as the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Tanzania, present in the Security
Council Chamber this morning. We thank them for
their very important statements.

My delegation would like to express its gratitude
to Mr. Kassem and his team for the very
comprehensive addendum to the report of the Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The report is
indeed very comprehensive.

One of the main objectives of the Panel of
Experts was to research and analyse the links between
the exploitation of natural resources and other forms of
wealth in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the continuation of the conflict. My delegation notes
that the conclusion of the Panel demonstrates beyond
any doubt the existence of such an unhealthy link.

On a number of occasions, Mauritius has clearly
stated that the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo belong to the Congolese people

Sll'V.4437

 

and to no one else. It is also our firm View that the
natural resources of the country should not be
exploited to fuel or finance the conflict there. We
deplore this situation, and we would like to reiterate
our position on this issue once again.

In April this year, the Panel of Experts submitted
its first report, which was very comprehensive in
nature. The Panel has now presented an addendum. For
my delegation, the findings of the first report and the
addendum complement each other, and they should
therefore be studied together. Any action by the
Security Council must be based on the conclusions and
recommendations of both reports.

The reports have pointed clearly to the
involvement of neighbouring countries, at either a
national or an individual level, in the plundering and
the illegal exploitation of the resources in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Mauritius
considers that those countries involved should
immediately take necessary measures to cease such
activities or, in the case that their nationals are
involved, carry out necessary investigations with a
view to apprehending those responsible. In this regard,
Mauritius welcomes the setting up of investigating
commissions in some countries to look closely into the
matter.

One of the very important conclusions of the
Panel makes it clear that without a resolution of the
broader conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region, it would be highly unrealistic to
expect an end to the exploitation of natural resources
and other forms of wealth in the country. The Panel
also recognizes that the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement
provides the basis for the settlement of the conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. These
conclusions reinforce the fact that we should do
everything to fully support the implementation of the
Lusaka Agreement and not to deviate from the main
track.

My delegation fully agrees with the Panel that,
once the peace process is completed, the Government
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo would be in a
position to exercise full authority over its territory and
have full command of its institutions and structures and
would hence be able to fully protect its resources.

The Panel of Experts has made three specific
recommendations in its addendum - namely, a review
of all concessions, commercial agreements and

contracts signed between 1997 and 2001, a moratorium
banning the purchase and import of precious products
originating in the areas where foreign troops are
present in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
well as in territories under the control of rebel groups,
and the imposition of sanctions.

With regard to the recommendation calling for
the review of all concessions, commercial agreements
and contracts signed between 1997 and 2001, we
believe that we need to take into account the fact that
some of these contracts have been contracted by the
legitimate and sovereign Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Therefore, we
think that any decision to review these concessions can
be made only after the full implementation of the
Lusaka Agreement and with the full agreement of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

On the proposal of the voluntary moratorium, my
delegation recognizes that this is a new idea which
needs to be studied very carefully.

The peace process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has reached quite an advanced stage -
indeed, a very critical one - where we are embarking
on the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement or reintegration (DDRRR) process and we
are on the eve of the reconvening of the inter-
Congolese dialogue. We should therefore avoid taking
any measure which would lead to a hardening of
position of the parties to the conflict and which could
seriously jeopardize the chances of success of the inter-
Congolese dialogue. Any action contemplated by the
Security Council should therefore not disrupt the
ongoing peace process. Rather, it should assist it in
moving the process forward. The implications of any
measures for the already disastrous humanitarian and
economic situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo must also be very carefully studied before any
action is taken. For the same reasons, we believe that
the recommendation of the Panel to consider sanctions
also requires thorough study.

Mauritius therefore supports the extension of the
mandate of the Panel for a period of six months to
allow it to carry out a thorough study and to submit
precise recommendations on the possible actions that
could be taken by the Council to put an end to the
plundering of the natural resources in the country.

Mauritius believes in a holistic approach in the
resolution of the conflict and all associated problems in

S/l'VA437

 

the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We feel that the
full implementation of the Lusaka Agreement will
cover the illegal exploitation of the natural resources. It
will also take into account the security concerns of the
neighbouring States, which have been clearly
recognized by the Lusaka Agreement and by the Panel
of Experts in its addendum.

We believe that the Council should therefore
focus more on speeding up the peace process by
considering a robust deployment of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), especially along the eastern
borders of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
on expediting the DDRRR process. We note that
several parties to the conflict have committed
themselves to withdraw immediately from Congolese
territory once there is a large scale deployment of
MONUC, which could allay their security concerns.
While we insist that all foreign forces should withdraw
immediately from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we feel that perhaps the Council should assist
in creating the necessary conditions for such
withdrawals.

The efforts spent by the countries of the region
through the Political Committee in the settlement of
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
cannot be overemphasized. My delegation understands
that consultations are currently being undertaken at the
level of heads of States of the region to find ways and
means by which these countries could assist in
advancing the peace process, including the inter-
Congolese dialogue. In our opinion, such initiatives
must be encouraged fully.

The idea of convening an international
conference on peace and development in the Great
Lakes region is very interesting indeed, and it should
be encouraged. However, we are of the view that such
a conference can be beneficial only after peace has
been re-established and once there is a strong
Government in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
in full control of all its territory. Such a conference
would then be able to focus on the reconstruction,
rebuilding and economic development of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region as a
whole.

Finally, we support the presidential statement that
will be issued after this meeting and which will take
into account the views expressed by the general
membership.

