Mr. Ikouebe (Congo) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, let me say first how pleased I am to see
you presiding at this meeting. We wish to congratulate
you and the entire delegation of Ghana on the very
positive initiative of convening this public debate on
peace consolidation in West Africa. I welcome the
eminent individuals have come from West Africa and
elsewhere, including the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Qatar.

This timely occasion enables the Council to
review efforts to consolidate peace and security in that
region, which has witnessed some of the bloodiest
human tragedies in our continent. In so doing, the
Council is pursuing its past positive initiatives to meet
the serious crises troubling the region and to respond to
the aspirations of people for peace, security and well-
being.

06-4607]

For years, West Africa was the symbol of peace
and stability and a model of economic integration -
before it sank into horrific civil wars that devastated
countries such as Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau,
and, today, Cote d'Ivoire, which used to be considered
the economic lung and the beacon for a region full of
promise.

To speak of peace consolidation today in
countries such as Liberia or Sierra Leone is not only a
source of satisfaction but also a reason to hope for
other countries still embroiled in conflict. We welcome
the results achieved in Liberia, Sierra Leone and
Guinea-Bissau to heal the wounds of the past, to lay
the groundwork for democracy and to set the pace for
lasting peace, despite the stumbling blocks that remain.

A return to constitutional rule in these countries
following credible democratic elections is not the least
of these achievements, which must be welcomed.
Everyone still recalls the symbolic value of Mrs.
Johnson-Sirleaf's election as President of Liberia. Such
events have made it possible to foresee political
stability and economic recovery.

However, we remain concerned by the persistence
in some of these countries of destabilizing factors, such
as the illicit circulation of small arms and light
weapons, the phenomenon of child soldiers, poverty,
youth unemployment, corruption, gaps in the judicial
system and a lack of resources.

In Cote d'Ivoire, we cannot yet speak of peace
consolidation, but we are seeking a solution to enable
that country to emerge from the crisis. The Security
Council has just adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2006/37) reflecting the main concerns of the
international community in the face of this very
uncertain situation.

Since we are seeking viable strategies, I wish to
recall that, when considering problems relating to
peace consolidation, we must understandably turn to
the still very valid report of the Secretary-General on
the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa
(S/1998/318). Following its consideration of the
implementation of the recommendations contained in
the Secretary-General's report, the General Assembly
last year adopted resolution 60/223, and I wish to recall
some of the main ideas here. First, Member States and
United Nations bodies must consider implementing
those recommendations on a priority basis. In addition,
coordinated, sustained and integrated efforts must be
pursued by United Nations bodies, Member States,
regional and subregional organizations and
international and regional financial institutions to
prevent conflicts and consolidate peace.

Moreover, I note the determination of the African
Union (AU) to strengthen its peacekeeping capacity
and to carry out peacekeeping activities in the
continent, in close cooperation with the United
Nations, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter. Here I would note with satisfaction the
creation of the African Union Peace and Security
Council and the efforts aimed at setting up a
continental early warning system and an enhanced
mediation capacity.

We also need to support the new Peacebuilding
Commission, and we are pleased that Sierra Leone, a
country of the subregion, has been chosen for the
initial phase of its work.

There is also a need for the African Union
Commission, the secretariat of the New Partnership for
Africa's Development and the United Nations
Secretariat to coordinate their action to implement a
programme headed by Africans, involving a strategic
framework for post-conflict reconstruction, which the
AU can define with a View to peace consolidation and
post-conflict peacebuilding. Assistance must be
provided to African countries emerging from conflict
to restore security, ensure the return of displaced
persons and refugees, promote human rights and
increase productive, income-producing activities, in
particular for young people and former combatants. All
of these concerns have been taken into account in the
draft presidential statement before us today. That is
why my delegation strongly supports the draft
statement: it contains all the elements for a realistic
and dynamic approach to the problem.

The peace consolidation process requires a
cooperative approach that must lead to strengthened
cooperation among all actors involved. Foremost
among them are the States concerned, which must
work together on problems such as child soldiers, the
illegal exploitation of natural resources, the
implementation of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes, the illicit circulation of
small arms and light weapons, and so forth. As for the
various United Nations missions and agencies in the
subregion, they must work in a concerted and

integrated fashion. Here, let me stress that the United
Nations Office for West Africa has a major role to play
in implementing such an approach, and I thank
Mr. Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah for the outstanding
statement he made here this morning.

Finally, my delegation welcomes the excellent
cooperation existing among the United Nations, the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and the States of the subregion in
achieving the objectives of peace, security and
development in West Africa. This is one of the major
concerns of the African Union, and the current
Chairman of the Union, President Denis Sassou
Nguesso, knows that recovery for West Africa is a
crucial element of the overall development of our
continent, and of its future.

