Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We wish to
thank Special Representative Haysom for his briefing.
He reminds us of the complex set of challenges
facing Afghanistan. We thank him also for his patient
commitment to achieving peace in Afghanistan and
wish him well in his next, no-less-difficult, assignment.
We look forward to continuing the Security Council's
excellent relationship with his successor.

Almost 40 years after the Saur Revolution, 20 years
since the fall of Kabul to the Taliban and 15 years
since the United States-led intervention that followed
the 11 September attacks, sustainable peace for
Afghanistan continues to appear as elusive as ever. The
National Unity Government continues to face difficult
political, economic and security challenges.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2016/532) identifies
several areas in which modest progress has been made
during the reporting period, including on financial
planning and political appointments. We welcome
this week's confirmation of the appointments for
the positions of Minister of National Defence and
of Director General of the National Directorate of
Security, the last significant vacant positions to be filled
in the Afghan Cabinet. We also welcome the filling of
the last vacancy in the Afghan Supreme Court, and we
acknowledge and welcome the continued determination
and increasing professionalism of the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces.

However, that progress is more than offset by the
enormous human toll the conflict continues to exact.
The past three months have witnessed an increased
frequency of attacks on civilians, including the
deadliest incidents in Kabul since the Taliban rule
ended 15 years ago, as well as killings of Government
and judicial officials. Yesterday's separate attacks,
killing another 30 people, mainly civilians, underscore
the determination of the Taliban and other armed
groups to maintain that bloody trajectory. It is hard to
take seriously the Taliban's claim to be an alternative
Government when they show such disregard for the lives
of ordinary Afghans and of those who put themselves
at risk in the international effort to help Afghanistan.
It is also more than disappointing to note that
no progress has been made during this period in the
peace and reconciliation process or in achieving the
regional cooperation necessary to effectively meet the
serious threats facing the region. Vital milestones for
the National Unity Government are yet to be reached.
Economic growth remains low, with few prospects
for any improvement in the short term, and outward
migration continues.

All of that might seem to represent a poor return
on the vast resources that have been poured into
Afghanistan's security and reconstruction over the
past decade. However, it is very clear from past history
that, in the absence of sustained international support,
Afghanistan will risk slipping once again into chaos.
Whether we like it or not, the Government and the
people of Afghanistan need our continuing support.

The conferences to be held later this year in Warsaw
and Brussels will provide important opportunities
for the international community to assess in what is
needed and what can be provided. At the same time,
the international community will be expecting clear
results from the Afghan Government in return. The
National Unity Government and regional actors need
to show that they are brave enough to take the steps
needed to achieve sustainable progress in addressing
the challenges they face in a wide range of closed
critical areas. The National Unity Government needs to
provide the coherent and effective leadership its people
so desperately need. We endorse Special Representative
Haysom's call for the Government to adopt a broad
and collaborative approach in the ongoing political
dialogue. Similarly, we call on regional leaders to
set aside their differences in pursuit of their shared
interests in countering terrorism and in addressing the
conditions that breed instability and extremism to the
detriment of the security of the entire region.

The resumption of a meaningful peace and
reconciliation process remains another critical
challenge. We recognize the difficulty of achieving
that in the short term. But there is no getting around
the fact that achieving a sustainable and peaceful
Afghanistan is ultimately dependent on achieving some
form of reconciliation between the Afghan State and
some elements of the armed opposition. As a Council,
we also need to consider what practical steps we can
take in supporting the peace and reconciliation process.

New Zealand continues to believe that the sanctions
regime established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011)
can play an important role in that regard and that
sanctions can, and should, be used more actively to
support progress on the ground. That includes targeted
measures to reduce the ability of the Taliban to seek
a military solution. One example is by taking further
steps to restrict access to improvised explosive devices
and their components. Another is creating incentives for
meaningful engagement in the peace and reconciliation
process. Regular and meaningful engagement between
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2001) and key stakeholders
is important to ensure that the sanctions regime
complements broader efforts. We remain committed to
do our part in that regard during our remaining time as
Chair of the Committee.

One immediate action the 1988 Sanctions
Committee can take is to ensure its listings remain up-
to-date, particularly to keep pace with changes in the
Taliban leadership. In that regard, we note that regard
both the new Taliban leader and the Tehrik-i-Taliban
Pakistan leader are not currently listed. That anomaly
must be addressed as soon as possible.

We all stand to benefit from achieving a stable and
peaceful Afghanistan, no more so than for its immediate
neighbours and Afghanistan itself. New Zealand will
continue to offer its support to Afghanistan and to
the work of the Special Representative and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in ensuring
that the political and security foundations are in place
for Afghanistan to advance. We look forward to taking
stock of progress in September.

