Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
the President for having convened this open debate.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
important introductory statement. Conflict has changed
dramatically over the past 30 years and United Nations
peacekeeping has struggled to keep up. It is therefore
right that we consider the changes that we have seen
and those that we would like to see.

Conflict today is less often inter-State and more
predominantly internal, asymetric and multilayered. It
is driven by a wide range of factors. Some of the most
recurrent of those are economic and political exclusion,
which denies a free future for all, corrupt or venal State
institutions that curtail or abuse fundamental rights
and freedoms, and untrustworthy or inept security
apparatuses that favour one or other segment of society.

Addressing those complex and interwoven issues
demands a more sophisticated peacekeeping response
than before. In the past, we had one main model of
peacekeeping, namely, an interposition force deployed
along some form of recognized, albeit perhaps
disputed, boundary. The force created a physical and
political space, in which a ceasefire could be solidified
and a sustainable agreement negotiated. However, the
most recent example of such a traditional force was
the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea,
authorized in September 2000. No United Nations
peacekeeping operation established in the past 14 years
follows that traditional pattern.

Today, there are at least seven different models
of peacekeeping operations authorized by the United
Nations. That is not a bad thing in itself. It shows that
we are adapting but, of course, not all those models
have proved to be equally effective. However, the move
away from the so-called traditional model reflects the
realities of today's world. Infantry battalions deployed
to be largely static monitoring presences are not often
able to respond adequately to the sophisticated threats
and complex environments that we now face.

To ensure that peacekeepers can respond adequately
to the new challenges, they need to have the necessary
tools and capability to deliver the required effect.
One such tool is inter-mission cooperation, enabling
peacekeeping missions to share scarce resources when
faced with sudden crises. Inter-mission cooperation
should help missions to implement their mandates, not
provide a pretext for protracted budget wrangling or
questions about security.

Another tool is new technology aimed at supporting
peacekeepers in the areas of protection, information
gathering and intelligence analysis. That is a natural
evolution and one that we should seize with both hands.
For instance, unmanned unarmed aerial systems can
be used to observe the area around an exposed patrol
base and provide warning of the movement of armed
groups in the base's direction. That information can
then be used to deploy a rapid reaction force to deter
any would-be attackers.

We have seen the positive impact that the
deployment of such unmanned aerial systems has had
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as part of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. 1 would like
to acknowledge the Secretariat's drive and innovative
thinking in delivering that impact. The use of such
systems should be considered in other theatres where
peacekeepers are expected to cover huge areas with
limited numbers of personnel, such as in South Sudan
and Mali.

At the heart of any peacekeeping operation is the
mandate agreed by the Security Council. We have a
responsibility to make sure that mandates are clear
and not overloaded. We need better prioritized and
sequenced mandates that promote an integrated military
and civilian response. That requires discipline from
everyone, including Security Council members. But
it also requires an understanding that not everything
needs to be included in the first phase or the first budget.
We need to make clear the strategic goals of deploying
a peacekeeping operation and what tasks we are asking
peacekeepers to fulfil in order to achieve those goals.
The overarching objective should be to try to sustain
or create the conditions in which a lasting peace can
be agreed between the warring parties and achieved by
them or through external facilitation or mediation.

Exit strategies should be part ofthe discussion right
from the start when mandates are negotiated. In many
of today's conflicts that will mean prioritizing security
and the protection of civilians in the early phases.
Peacekeepers need therefore to be willing to take the
necessary risks to protect civilians. Where the nature
of the conflict demands, that should include conducting
targeted offensive operations to neutralize and deter
armed groups from threatening or attacking civilians.

Such robust action is not a radical departure from
what the Council has been asking of peacekeeping
missions with protection-of-civilian mandates for some
years. One of our closest partners is the African Union,
and that partnership has generated several models that
we have collectively benefited from - in Somalia,
Central African Republic and Mali. Quick deployment
and a readiness to adopt a robust posture and to use
force in pursuit of the mandate give us other important
tools in the peacekeeping toolbox.

Sadly, it is clear that we will continue to need
peacekeeping operations for the foreseeable future. To
ensure that United Nations peacekeeping is effective,
we need to remain flexible in how we mandate missions,
taking advantage of capabilities offered through new
technology, using scarce resources intelligently across
missions and working in partnership with those ready
and willing to address new conflicts. We should
not waste time trying to codify the ever-changing
peacekeeping landscape. That risks limiting how we
respond to conflict through an institutionalization
of our response. Doing so would be a sure way to
constrain our freedom of action and a sure way to fail
in responding to the next conflict.
We owe it to the people of the world suffering in
conflict situations to maintain as effective a response as
possible, and we owe it to the peacekeepers to provide
them with the tools and clarity they need to do their
jobs effectively, jobs that they willingly and bravely
undertake on behalf of the international community in
the pursuit of international peace and security. I take
this opportunity to pay tribute to them.

