Mr. Dangue Rewaka (Gabon) (spoke in French):
The international community expected the high-level
meeting held in Tashkent in July 1999 to promote the
peaceful settlement of the conflict that has torn
Afghanistan asunder for several years now. However, we
cannot but note that that same month the conflicting
Afghan parties chose to pursue the logic of war, giving
reason to believe that they preferred the military option to
a political solution.

However, in respect of conflict settlement and in
particular as regards Afghanistan, experience has shown
that a lasting peace cannot be achieved through the use of
force. It is on this basis that Gabon invites the Afghan
parties to observe a ceasefire and to resume a dialogue as
soon as possible, as this is the only road to national
reconciliation and the return of peace to that country.

It is in this spirit that we welcome and support the
efforts made by the "six plus two" group, the Secretary-
General and his Special Envoy to Afghanistan, and we

 

encourage them to persevere in that direction. While it is
true that the settlement of the conflict is first and foremost
the responsibility of the Afghans themselves, it is equally
true that neighbouring countries could make a significant
contribution by appealing to the various parties to resolve
their dispute by peaceful means.

Another subject of concern that is also the result of the
use of military means is the grave humanitarian situation
afflicting the Afghan population. A number of sources,
including the report presented to us this morning by Under-
Secretary-General Prendergast, also illustrate this. All have
indicated that thousands of men, women and children have
been displaced and lack basic necessities, while others live
as refugees in neighbouring countries.

In this connection, we ask all of the Afghan parties to
abide by international conventions on human rights and
international humanitarian law, and to see to it that their
territory is not used as a base for international terrorism.
Furthermore, we invite them to allow the personnel of
humanitarian organizations free access to populations in
need and to guarantee the safety and security of that
personnel. To continue to deprive these women and
children of acceptable living conditions would be for the
Afghan parties a decision fraught with consequences that
the international community could hardly accept.

