The President: The Security Council will now
proceed with the election of the one remaining member
of the International Court of Justice, in accordance
with Article 11 of the Statute of the International Court
of Justice.

May I take it that the Council is now ready to
proceed with the election of the one remaining member
of the International Court of Justice?

It is so decided.

The Council will now proceed to a third ballot. I
request the Conference Officer to distribute the ballot
papers.

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Onanga
(Gabon) and Mr. Onowu (Nigeria) acted as tellers.

The President: Members of the Council should
place an "X" in the box next to the name of the
candidate for whom they wish to vote.

***


The President: I take it that all the members of
the Council have now voted and I ask the conference
officer to collect the ballot papers.

>l<>l<>l<


The President: All the ballot papers have been
collected. I should like to remind Council members
that in accordance with the established practice, the
ballots will not be counted until it has been verified
that the ballot papers in the General Assembly have
also been collected. The Council will remain in session
pending the receipt of that information.

>l<>l<>l<


The President: I have now been informed that
the ballot papers have been collected in the General
2

Assembly. The counting of the ballots in the Security
Council will now begin. The tellers will now count the
ballots. As agreed in our consultations, there will be
two independent countings of the ballots, one by each
teller. I should like to remind Council members that, in
accordance with established practice, I shall wait for
the General Assembly to complete its count before I
announce the results of the voting in the Security
Council. The Council will remain in session.

>l<>l<>l<


The President: The result of the voting is as
follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Number of abstentions: 0
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:

Mr. Abdul G. Koroma 8

Ms. Julia Sebutinde 7

I wish to inform the Council that I have received
from the President of the General Assembly the
following letter:

"I have the honour to inform you that, at the
55th plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
held today for the purpose of electing five
members of the International Court of Justice, the
following candidate obtained an absolute
majority of votes in the General Assembly:
Ms. Julia Sebutinde."

Accordingly, no candidate has received the
required majority of votes in the Council and in the
General Assembly. As fewer than five candidates have
received the required absolute majority of votes in both
the Council and the General Assembly, the Council
shall proceed to a fourth ballot for the remaining
vacancy, in accordance with Article 11 of the Statute of
the Court. I shall adjourn this meeting, and call to
order the fourth meeting to elect a candidate by further
ballot, after a brief recess to allow for the preparation
of new ballots.

The meeting was adjourned at 4.45 p.m.
11-58826

