Ms. Rice (United States of America): It was
indeed an honour to lead the leg of the trip that went to
Liberia. I want to begin by expressing publicly our
gratitude to and admiration of Ellen Loj, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, who, despite
the most adverse circumstances - including our whole
programme having to be scrapped at the last minute
due to thunderstorms - had in her pocket a very well
crafted plan B that enabled the Council mission
nonetheless to have a successful visit to Liberia.

The purpose of our visit was to help reaffirm the
Council's support for the Government and people of
Liberia and for the efforts of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) to promote peace and
security. We also sought to assess the capacity of
Liberia's national security sector and to learn more
about efforts to combat gender-based violence.

We met with the United Nations country team on
the night of our arrival and the International Contact
Group on Liberia, a group of ambassadors and
representatives of international organizations who are
empowered to support the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement in Liberia. The group warned that peace
and security in Liberia remain extremely fragile,
largely because of the country's weak national security
institutions, and that the justice and corrections
systems are inadequate, all of which we had the
opportunity to witness for ourselves on the following
day.

On that next day, 20 May, we met with, in the
first instance, an inspiring group of women: the Indian
formed police unit, which is an all-female force that
consists of women who are simultaneously samurai -
who can use their bare hands to break bricks that are
burning - and beautiful dancers and artists. That was
quite impressive. This all-female police unit protects
key installations in Monrovia, conducts joint patrols
and mentors the unarmed Liberian National Police. The
high visibility of this Indian formed police unit, we
have learned, has helped motivate more Liberian
women to apply for law enforcement jobs. In sum, we
applauded that unique unit, and we hope that others
will be inspired by it, as we were.
We then visited the Monrovia Central Prison and
I think it is fair to say that we were shocked and
concerned by the state of the older male wards there,
which are remarkably congested, with limited sanitary
facilities, far too many inmates crammed into too few
spaces and not enough corrections officials. Several of
the prisoners told us about the extraordinary length of
their pre-trial detainment. And, according to Liberia's
Minister of Justice, the prison does not always hold its
captives. Indeed, a few days before we arrived, there
was yet another jail break from that facility, involving
more than 100 prisoners.

We then visited a training centre for former
combatants, part of a United Nations-supported
reintegration programme. About 375 predominantly
female former combatants have benefited from this
programme, which includes vocational training, adult
literacy classes, business values training, computer
literacy and health and HIV education.

The Security Council mission also had the
opportunity to meet with representatives from the
international business community in Liberia. Those
individuals noted that a strong, stabilizing United
Nations presence had helped sway their decision to
invest in Liberia. We cautioned them not to grow too
dependant on UNMIL, since eventually, obviously, it
will have to be withdrawn. But it was interesting to
witness representatives of the business community
engaged in renewable energy technologies as well as in
traditional sectors such as rubber and mining.

We met with UNMIL, of course, and its senior
military and police commanders gave us a sober
assessment of the security situation in Liberia. They
characterized the overall situation as calm but
unpredictable. They noted that demonstrations often
turned violent. Crime, gangster activities, armed
robberies and sexual violence remain widespread, and
rape, as we heard repeatedly, is a particularly urgent
challenge, with most reported victims under the age of
14 and some victims under the age of 2. UNMIL noted
several potentially destabilizing events on the
horizon - including the anticipated release of the final
report of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in
June, the trial against former President Charles Taylor
and Liberia's presidential and legislative elections in
2011 - that could stoke tensions and potentially be
exploited by spoilers. They also informed us that more
than 14,000 former Liberian soldiers and police
personnel had not found alternative livelihoods since
the end of the war.
At the Police Training Academy, we witnessed
police recruits from the Emergency Response Unit
engage in hostage rescue and law enforcement
exercises. This Emergency Response Unit is meant to
be a mobile armed force - an elite force within the
police - to respond to large-scale internal security
incidents. But of the 500 officers planned for this
contingent only about 200 had been trained and vetted.
The United Nations commanders also noted that the
Armed Forces of Liberia, which comprise 2,000 vetted
personnel trained by the United States, are progressing
but are not expected to be fully operational until 2012.

Finally, towards the end of the day we met with
Liberia's Truth and Reconciliation Commission, or at
least three representatives of the Commission, who
explained that they had identified up to 100,000
alleged perpetrators of crimes during the conflict. They
had taken some 20,000 statements from witnesses and
were planning a national conference on reconciliation.
They warned of the potential for violence once their
report is released, but affirmed that despite the risk of
violence they would publicize their findings and
recommendations unvarnished. They also argued
against the easing of Security Council sanctions on
named individuals under the Liberian sanctions regime,
stressing that those individuals had been given the
opportunity, and had been encouraged, to come before
the Commission and share their experienced but had
refused to do so, and that the maintenance of those
sanctions was an important part of the effort to combat
impunity.

Of course, the highlight of our visit was our
meeting with President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf and
members of her Cabinet. The President noted that the
past six years had brought continued progress towards
national recovery and a consolidated peace, but that the
country's security situation remained fragile and its
challenges major. The President outlined the four
elements of Liberia's poverty reduction strategy: peace
and security; economic development; governance and
the rule of law; and infrastructure and basic services.
Her Ministers discussed the tenuous security situation
and their efforts to establish viable national security
forces and to establish the rule of law. Finally, the
President also outlined the Government's efforts to
reduce sexual violence against women and noted the
economic potential of the country in the mineral,
agricultural and forestry sectors.

In conclusion, we found that the Security
Council, having urged the Government of Liberia to
step up its efforts to assume full security
responsibilities, had a substantial distance yet to go.
UNMIL's presence remains of critical importance at
present, but the Government needs to be supported and
encouraged to take accelerated steps to build the
security capacity of its police and army so that UNMIL
can complete its mandate in a timely fashion.

