Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
I would like to thank Special Representative Jan Kubis
and Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for
their briefings. I also thank Ambassador Tanin for his
remarks.

Having held its run-off presidential elections,
Afghanistan is at a critical juncture in its political
transition. We recognize the high turnout in
Afghanistan's presidential elections despite threats by
the Taliban and other terrorist groups. The Afghan-
led efforts for the electoral process, including those
of the Afghan electoral institutions and Afghan
National Security Forces, are also commendable.
As a contributor to the project of the United Nations
Development Programme to ensure women security
officers in polling centres, we particularly praise the
courage of the Afghan women who cast their ballots in
the elections.

Despite those laudable efforts, it is imperative that
the transparency and integrity of the entire electoral
process be ensured. In the final stage of the run-off
presidential elections, all stakeholders, including the
candidates and their supporters, should refrain from
any acts of incitement, violence or disorder. The
electoral institutions and processes established in line
with Afghanistan's laws and Constitution must be
respected. Any complaints about the electoral process
should be addressed through institutional mechanisms
and procedures.
With regard to Afghanistan's security situation,
we are deeply concerned about the increase in civilian
casualties as compared with the same period in the year
2013. We strongly condemn the indiscriminate attacks
on civilians, including through improvised explosive
devices, and those aimed at disrupting the electoral
process. Furthermore, the ongoing grave violations of
children's rights, such as the killing of children, as well
as attacks against schools and educational personnel,
are a matter of grave concern to us.

On the narcotics issue in Afghanistan, we note
the devastating effects that opium production and
consumption have on the stability and development
of Afghanistan. A comprehensive and coordinated
response is essential in order to address that chronic
issue, as it is linked to terrorism, transnational
organized crime and money-laundering. We recognize
the narcotic drugs control strategy of Afghanistan and
the regional cooperation in the area of drugs control.
We also appreciate the important role of UNODC in
tackling that issue, including the publication of the
annual World Drug Report. We call on the international
community to further support Afghan-led efforts to
that end as well.

Finally, in the light of the drawdown of the
International Security Assistance Force from
Afghanistan, it is important for the international
community to keep its commitments to supporting
the country. The NATO Summit in south Wales in
September and the first ministerial review of progress
on the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, to
be held in London later this year, will be important
opportunities to reaffirm those commitments. The
Afghan Government should also redouble its efforts for
good governance, including its fight against corruption
in the illicit economy.

The Afghan people demonstrated their aspiration
for a democratic political transition during the electoral
process. We support the peaceful and smooth transition
in Afghanistan and look forward to the key role of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and the sustained contribution of the international
community in that regard.

