We would like to thank the briefers for their statements and valuable considerations. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic caught us by surprise, without warning, and the measures to face and halt it simply overwhelmed the world. As we navigate the current sort of suspense mode that we are in, we cannot be sure whether the aftermath will be even worse than the pandemic itself. But before we continue, the Dominican Republic would like to express its deepest condolences to the families of all those who have lost the battle to the virus, including, very sadly, 754 Dominicans. COVID-19 is racing around the world. The potential and unprecedented magnitude of its outbreak globally constitutes a threat to international peace and security and could critically harm human security across the world. It is already strangling the world's economy and putting enormous strain on health resources. International cooperation is essential and should continue to be strengthened. We reiterate that a coordinated, global and people-centred response, with a renewed sense of solidarity and common humanity and with particular emphasis on those most vulnerable, is crucial. In that regard, we commend the Secretary-General, the World Health Organization and other humanitarian organizations for their leadership and efforts to organize and coordinate a global approach to this global pandemic, which has brought to the surface existing needs and created new ones; it has added yet another layer of suffering for the already extremely vulnerable populations that live in a state of humanitarian crisis. People living in conflict situations are deeply vulnerable to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly persons with disabilities, children, women, older persons, refugees, internally displaced people and those in overcrowded detention centres, camps and densely populated areas. We must ensure not only that their protection and needs are prioritized and that ongoing humanitarian aid distribution and access are in line with international humanitarian law, but also the safety and health of aid workers and first responders. If appropriate prevention and response measures are not put in place urgently, food security is more at risk now than ever before. Yemen, already weakened by hunger and disease and with a health system devastated by the conflict, is now bracing for the impact of the threats associated with COVID-19. Similarly, in Afghanistan and many other contexts, including in Latin America and the Caribbean, COVID-19 is developing into a complete nightmare for millions of people, including children. We welcome the $2 billion global humanitarian response plan to fund the fight against COVID-19 in the world's poorest countries, which also should take into account countries in transition, and we also commend the efforts that the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the Peacebuilding Fund are making in this respect. Developing countries must be able to count on better access to COVID-19 research data and affordable access to medicines, vaccines and medical equipment, as outlined in General Assembly resolution 74/274, which was proudly endorsed by the Dominican Republic. Education has been harshly impacted around the world. While the closing of schools and universities is part of the mitigation measures, alternative educational opportunities should be put in place. Lockdown exacerbates the vulnerability of women and girls in armed conflict, bringing about other types of dangers, such as gender-based violence. The pandemic has wider impacts for gender-based violence prevention and response efforts. Therefore, all decision-making related to COVID-19 must involve the participation of women, youth and civil society. Young people are mobilizing their communities to help stop the spread of the virus, building trust and triggering community action. Partnerships with young people to shape the response must be prioritized. We must articulate lessons learned and best practices, departing from those of the Security Council in addressing SARS and HIV/AIDS and responding to the Ebola outbreak crisis. Finally, we reiterate the call made by the Security Council in its resolution 2532 (2020), adopted yesterday, for all parties to conflict to put an end to all hostilities and facilitate the much-needed humanitarian operations that serve the needs of the peoples affected.
