Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): I would like to start by
expressing our deepest condolences to our good friend
Ambassador Yehuda Lancry, the Permanent
Representative of Israel, for the untimely demise of his
niece, who lost her life in a terrorist attack last week.
Such untimely deaths bring home once again how
important it is to stop the cycle of violence, which
seems to have become the order of the day in the
region. Neither side in this conflict will be able to
advance its cause through violence and military
assault; such acts can bring only destruction, loss and
suffering to both sides.

At the end of the Security Council debate on the
situation in the Middle East that took place on 9 April,
the Permanent Representative of Israel expressed
dismay at the statement made by Mauritius during the
debate, claiming that it was one-sided. It is obvious
that my good friend had not taken into account the
specific context in which the statement was made. Our
colleague is certainly aware of our unequivocal
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms, as well as of
suicide bombings; we have expressed that position in
many statements, both here and elsewhere.

The statement we made on 9 April came at a time
when the entire international community was calling
upon Israel to stop its military assaults in the occupied
Palestinian territories; when Israel was turning a blind
eye and a deaf ear to the pressing calls made by the
Security Council and the international community as a
whole for withdrawal from the Palestinian cities; and
when violations of international humanitarian law by
Israel were taking place in defiance of the calls of the
international community.

On 10 April, the Commissioner-General of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), Mr. Hansen, said
that "the situation in the Jenin refugee camp is fast
turning into a catastrophe". UNRWA press reports
indicated that Israeli tanks and bulldozers were
intensifying their demolition of shelters in the Jenin
camp and that bulldozers were "shaving off" shelters.
Humanitarian workers were being denied access to the
refugee camps and were prevented from providing
basic necessities - food, water and medicine - to
those in need. Ambulances were being shot at and
doctors killed. In other words, Israel continued to flout
Council resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002).

Let me also recall that the heads of the major
international humanitarian agencies have expressed
their deep dismay and outrage at the military actions in
the occupied Palestinian territories and the
consequences of such actions in exacerbating the
humanitarian crisis. They also noted increasing and
worrying incidences of flagrant disrespect for
international law and the security of humanitarian
personnel. Even the Secretary-General, in his address
to the Commission on Human Rights in Geneva, stated
that in the Middle East international norms of human
rights and humanitarian law were being violated on a
massive scale. He also added that targeting civilians
and the disproportionate use of force beyond legitimate
military objectives are a violation of international
humanitarian law and must be rejected.

In Madrid the Secretary-General stated that

"respect for international humanitarian law and
the humanitarian organizations is the most basic
requirement for any nation that lays claim to
democracy and membership of the international
community."

Given the human tragedy that was unfolding in
the Palestinian refugee camps, especially in Jenin,
where women and children were falling victim to
indiscriminate attacks by the Israeli Defence Forces,
the position of Mauritius can certainly be well
understood.

Mauritius is a law-abiding country which believes
strongly in the sanctity of international institutions and
has the greatest respect for international law and for the
decisions of the Security Council. This is the principled
position that guides us and will continue to guide our
decisions and our statements for the rest of our tenure
in the Security Council.

Today, with Israel only partially easing
restrictions on access to the Jenin refugee camp, we are
already hearing reports of the horrific scale of the
devastation perpetrated by Israel in that area. The
Special Coordinator of the United Nations for the
Middle East, Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, stated yesterday
that the scene in Jenin was "horrifying beyond belief,
as if there had been an earthquake there". This, sadly,
reminds us of the devastation of 11 September, which
occurred closer to us. It is still unclear how many
innocent Palestinians were killed in Jenin. It would be
worth finding out from the Israeli authorities how
many innocent Palestinian civilians had to be sacrificed
in the process of targeting the suspected terrorist
elements in Jenin.

Mauritius believes that there should be a full-
scale international investigation of the events that took
place there. Furthermore, Israel should cooperate with
the fact-finding mission that Ms. Mary Robinson, the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, intends to lead
to the occupied Palestinian territories.

While we await the investigation, the
humanitarian situation in Jenin should be addressed
immediately. Israel should immediately lift the curfew
on Jenin, and it should cooperate fully with the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian
Refugees in the Near East and the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), which are trying
to rescue the civilians who remain trapped in the rubble
and to alleviate the sufferings of those left in the area.

While we understand Israel's preoccupation with
eliminating terrorist elements, it has clearly made no
distinction between those who are engaged in terror
and innocent Palestinian civilians. The deliberate and
systematic humiliation of the Palestinian people and
their leader will result only in the creation of many
more militants and extremists, as was stated by the
representative of Ireland during our most recent debate.
Besieging Chairman Arafat, as has been done for four
months now, can only add to the growing anger of the
Palestinians and to that of the Arab world. It is unwise
and a clear miscalculation to sideline him, as he
remains, as even foreign Minister Peres has admitted,
the only avenue for any peace negotiation with
Palestine.

We call upon Israel once again immediately to
withdraw from all the Palestinian cities and
immediately to implement Security Council resolutions
1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002).

We condemn the siege on the Church of the
Nativity just as much as we condemn the use of the
Church as a sanctuary by militants.

Secretary of State Powell, to whom the Council
gave its full support through its resolution 1403 (2002),
is now back from his mission in the Middle East. While
he may have made some progress towards a path to
peace, it is clear that the main objective of resolutions
1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002) concerning a ceasefire
and the withdrawal of Israel from the Palestinian cities
has not been achieved, nor has the siege on Chairman
Arafat ended, despite the statement he made last week
denouncing all acts of terrorism. We welcome that
statement, and we urge the Palestinians fully to abide
by it.

It is time for us carefully to examine what needs
to be done to ensure a complete Israeli withdrawal, as
called for in Security Council resolutions 1402 (2002)
and 1403 (2002). We need to reflect on what further
action should be taken by the Security Council to pull
the two parties out of the cycle of self-destruction and
to bring them to the negotiating table, thereby leading
to a political settlement based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and the vision
envisaged in resolution 1397 (2002).

In this context, the proposal outlined by the
Secretary-General before the Council yesterday to put
together a robust and credible multinational force to
assist the parties in ending the violence appears to be
not only timely but the only solution to this crisis. We
share the View of the Secretary-General that left alone,
the parties will not be able to extricate themselves from
the current impasse.

We therefore call on all the members of the
Council, as well as on the international community, to
give careful consideration to this proposal, in order to
avert any further aggravation of the situation, which
could lead to full-scale disaster in the region.

The Middle East peace process is going through a
very difficult time, and the credibility of the Security
Council is being affected. It is very important that we
all work together in the interest of international peace
and security.

