Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
I should like to thank you, Mr. President 4 the
Permanent Representative of India - in your capacity
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001). My thanks go also
to the Ambassador of South Africa, Baso Sangqu, and
to the Ambassador of Germany, Mr. Peter Wittig, for
their briefings on the activities of the Security Council
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1540
(2004) and 1267 (1999). I should like, with respect
to the presentations made to the Council at this six-
monthly briefing, to pay well-deserved tribute to them
for the leadership and commitment shown at the helm
of their respective committees.

We also support the efforts made by the three
Committees and the expert groups assisting them
to ensure greater coordination, consistency and
interoperability in the implementation of their
respective mandates. We support the promotion of
greater transparency and intensified dialogue with
Member States in order to identify their needs and
respond appropriately to their requests for assistance.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
established more than a decade ago, remains a key
mechanism in our actions to counter terrorism. Morocco
supports the general line of action taken by the CTC,
which is aimed at consolidating a strategic, transparent
approach and at strengthening the facilitation and
coordination of the provision of technical assistance
so as to enhance Member States' capacities to counter
terrorism. We also support the CTC's intention to
consider the possibility of cooperation with the
Inter-Parliamentary Union. The support of members of
parliament for the efforts made by Governments and
their interaction with our civil societies and citizens
are basic building blocks in the strengthening of our
common commitment to counter terrorism.

We also welcome the holding of workshops at the
regional and trans-regional levels aimed at building the
capacities of Member States in terms of the practical
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). We welcome also the workshops held on
capacity-building for the Sahel and Maghreb countries
in order effectively to counter the terrorist threat and
associated activities.

In that context, and as you yourself have
emphasized, Mr. President, last July Morocco hosted a
regional workshop for the Maghreb and Sahel countries
on the implementation of resolution 1624 (2005). That
workshop enabled Government administration and
civil society representatives to hold comprehensive
discussions on their experiences in combating
extremism and in promoting tolerance and peaceful
coexistence.

Morocco remains convinced that the individual
actions taken by the Maghreb and Sahel countries must
be accompanied by continuing dialogue and concerted,
coordinated and inclusive action involving all countries
of the region. In that respect, we believe that given the
concerns expressed by Council members at previous
meetings regarding the critical situation in the Sahel
region, the CTC and the 1267 and 1540 Committees
must focus in particular on that region, which has
witnessed a recent increase in the frequency and
degree of sophistication of terrorist attacks perpetrated
by groups operating in areas suffering from political,
economic, social and climate-related vulnerabilities.
Morocco remains committed to supporting concrete
action by the Council, together with the countries
of the region, aimed at combating the growing and
increasingly urgent threat terrorist.

The sanctions regime established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) represents one
of the most effective tools for combating terrorism
and continues to reflect our collective will to counter
the threat posed by Al-Qaida and associated entities.
We will continue to urge greater cooperation with
Member States in order to help them to implement
their obligations under the sanctions regime, taking
into account the specific context of each region and
the particular challenges facing each of the countries
therein.

The periodic review of the listing procedure
remains an important tool for continuing to ensure
the accuracy of information relating to individuals
and entities included on the list. The completion of
the three reviews regarding persons who supposedly
have died, entities that supposedly have ceased to exist
and entries that lack sufficient information should
encourage us to deploy even more strenuous efforts
to help Member States to implement the sanctions
regime and maintain the effectiveness and credibility
of the list. That exercise must continue with the same
perseverance and discipline, in order to be in line with
the developing threat and the significant changes in
the modus operandi of terrorist groups. In that regard,
we pay tribute to the commitment and work of the
Ombudsperson, Ms. Kimberley Prost, and assure her of
our support as she continues to implement her mandate.

The ongoing reform of the Committee's procedures
in order to make it more equitable and transparent
remains a strategic goal and continues to arouse
the interest and mobilization of all members of the
Committee. In the context of the upcoming consultations
of the renewal of the Ombudsperson's mandate, we are
ready to consider any proposal that could contribute to
meaningful progress in achieving that objective.

With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), Morocco, which has
presented an initial report and additional information,
welcomes the work of the Committee and commends
its role in combating the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and in preventing their acquisition
by non-State actors. In that regard, we would like to
underscore the importance of strengthening activities
related to assistance and international cooperation
in order to meet the needs of States. The guidelines
established by the Committee should serve as a basis
for dialogue with Member States in order to identify
the shortcomings and difficulties in implementing
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1977 (2011).

We are delighted by the contribution of the
Committee's panel of experts to numerous activities
and underscore that such participation should continue
on the basis of their respective mandates and in full
respect of the international reality.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that,
regardless of the context or the area in combating the
scourge of terrorism, Morocco will remain an active
and committed partner of the United Nations and the
entire international community in order to tackle this
challenge and its consequences.

