Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): You
were right, Sir, to schedule this debate. The United
Kingdom was one of the first to call for it. The Council
needs to hear the voice of the wider membership,
particularly when we are on the edge of decisions that
could make the difference between war and peace.

It is a debate, clearly, that is about more than
Iraq. The delegation and I have been listening carefully
to it. The issues in our minds, whether we all refer to
them or not, go much wider: the security of the whole
neighbourhood of Iraq; the reinforcement of our
collective effort to eliminate terrorism; justice for
Palestine and security for Israel within the law; the role
of the Security Council when serious matters of
national security are before its members and the overall
effectiveness of the United Nations itself.

I wish to be very clear. The United Kingdom's
firm objective is the complete disarmament of Iraq in
the area of weapons of mass destruction, by peaceful
means. I repeat, our first preference is a peaceful
solution to the current crisis surrounding Iraq. Ensuring
that there is such a solution lies in the hands of Iraq.

In 1991, following the Gulf War, the Security
Council set out the conditions governing the ceasefire
between Iraq and the international coalition. Sadly,
over eleven years later, Iraq remains in material breach
of these obligations. We all know of the myriad ways
in which Iraq sought, almost immediately after
inspections began, to frustrate inspections and
intimidate inspectors.

We all know of the succession of allegedly final
declarations submitted by Iraq after inspectors
discovered some new incriminating fact or evidence.
We all know how Iraq tried to limit and hinder
inspections to the extent that in August 1998 the then
head of the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) said it was impossible for him to do his
job. We all know of the outstanding weapons of mass
destruction for which UNSCOM. was unable to
account. We all know of the multiple warnings sent to
Iraq in resolution after resolution and presidential
statement after presidential statement.

No shadow of a doubt remains that Iraq has
defied the United Nations - not any particular Member
State, the United Nations - over the whole of this
period. As Prime Minister Blair has said

"it is not that for 10 years Saddam Hussein has
not been a problem, he has been a problem
throughout the last 10 years. What has changed is
first, that the policy of containment isn't any
longer working, certainly without a massive
change in the way that the regime is monitored
and inspected; and secondly, we know from 11
September that it is sensible to deal with these
problems before, not after."

Iraq could have invited the inspectors back
without conditions at any time in the last few years.
Sanctions could have been lifted and Iraqis restored to
a normal life. They are a talented and spirited people;
but they have been betrayed and stunted by a
Government unworthy of them. Only Baghdad's
insistence on retaining weapons of mass destruction
capability has blocked that path of good sense and
humanity. Only under the recent intense diplomatic
pressure, and particularly the threat of military action,
has the Iraqi Government's letter of 16 September 2002
emerged.

These Iraqi words, while necessary, are of
themselves not enough. We remain deeply perturbed by
evidence that Iraq believes it can hide its weapons of
mass destruction rather than declare them, that it can
again fool the inspectors and play games with them.
The United Kingdom analysis, backed up by reliable
intelligence, indicates that Iraq still possesses chemical
and biological materials, has continued to produce
them, has sought to weaponize them, and has active
military plans for the deployment of such weapons.
The United Kingdom analysis, backed up by reliable
intelligence, shows that Iraq has in recent years tried to
buy multiple components relevant to the production of
a nuclear bomb. The United Kingdom analysis, backed
up by reliable intelligence, points to the retention of
extended-range missiles and to the employment of
hundreds of people in projects to develop weapons with
a range of over 1,000 kilometres that could carry both
weapons of mass destruction and conventional
warheads.

It would be an abdication of responsibility to
ignore this challenge to the international community.
We cannot afford to bury our heads in the sand and
pretend the problem does not exist. We cannot accept
the Iraqi Government's word at face value, knowing
what we know.

We wish to see the Security Council, which Iraq
has been defying for so long, express its will and its
unity in a clear, strong resolution. That resolution must
give the regime in Baghdad an unequivocal choice:
complete weapons of mass destruction disarmament
and normal membership of the international
community, or refusal and the inevitable consequences.
The United Kingdom has made it clear to Iraq,
privately at a senior official level, that this choice is
being offered genuinely. It represents a single, final
chance for Iraq. If this is understood, and if the Council
keeps its nerve, then maybe there is a prospect that Iraq
will finally comply with its obligations and that
military action can be averted. If we fail to send that
tough signal, we shall be ignoring the realities. The
weaker we collectively appear, the more probable it is
that military action will be the outcome.

An essential component of this message is to
ensure that inspections - United Nations
inspections - are effective. That means giving the
inspectors the penetrating strength to ensure the
successful weapons-of-mass- destruction disarmament
of Iraq. We cannot afford a return to the ambiguous
modalities and memorandums of understanding
(MOUs) of the past; we cannot afford exceptions to
unconditional, unrestricted and immediate access; we
cannot afford to have inspectors again standing by
helplessly while crucial documents are burned or while
convoys leave from the back door as inspectors arrive
at the front; we cannot afford interviews compromised
by intimidating minders. The recent Iraqi letters on
practical arrangements, the language of which brings
back the obfuscations of the past, reinforce the need for
strengthened inspections and for practical arrangements
to be made legally binding. Stronger inspections will
be crucial to ensuring that all countries have
confidence in them and that Iraq makes the decision to
comply rather than to continue hiding its weapons of
mass destruction - crucial, if we are to succeed in
achieving a peaceful resolution of this issue.

I have heard loud and clear the concerns of many
speakers that, on a decision so crucial, we should not
rush into a war; that on a decision so crucial, any Iraqi
violations must be discussed by the Security Council.
Let me make totally clear that the United Kingdom
Government would expect there to be a detailed
Security Council discussion if either Mr. Blix or Mr.
ElBaradei, whose professionalism and independence
are not in question, reports that Iraq is not fully
cooperating with the inspections process. We would
want at that point to hear the views of all our Security
Council colleagues.

I have heard in a number of interventions a
concern that the non-permanent members of the
Council have been kept in the dark. Some have even
spoken of humiliation. I believe the facts have been
misrepresented. None of the permanent members has
been in a position so far to bring a draft resolution to
each other here or to the Council as a whole. The
permanent five have done no negotiating on a text in
New York. Discussion in capitals has taken place on
bilateral channels. Of course our Governments have
been working to make a negotiation worthwhile; proper
preparation is a responsible approach. We, the United
Kingdom and the United States, have met with the non-
permanent 10 twice as often since 12 September as we
have with the other permanent members. Once there is
a draft with a prospect of broad acceptance in the
Council, no Council member will be excluded from
discussion. Let us remain connected with reality in this
respect.

I could not close these remarks without referring
to the fact that Iraq is in breach of other Security
Council obligations, including on the repatriation of all
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and the return of
all Kuwaiti property. These other violations may not
threaten international peace and security in the same
way as the issue of Iraqi weapons of mass destruction,
but they are perhaps more important issues in human
and emotional terms, particularly for the families
concerned. There can be no humane reason why Iraq
has failed to comply for so long. We call on Iraq now
to rectify that non-compliance, including by resuming
its participation in the Tripartite Commission under the
auspices of the International Committee of the Red
Cross.

