Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Alexander Zouev for presenting the final progress
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) (S/2018/344). We also
thank Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni, who spoke on behalf of
the Chair of the Liberian country configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), for the plans
announced for the PBC's future participation in the
country's development programmes. We also listened
with interest to the statement by Mr. Chid Liberty, a
representative of Liberian civil society.

The Russian Federation greatly appreciates
UNMIL's efforts to stabilize the situation in Liberia,
of which a recent example has been the measures
undertaken by the Mission to assist in preparing and
conducting presidential and parliamentary elections.
The success of those events has helped to reinforce
State institutions in the country and led to a general
improvement in the situation. It is important that
the Liberian people have managed to settle their
election-related differences in a peaceful manner,
harnessing their existing legal mechanisms through the
Supreme Court.

Needless to say, today we should also remember
those who have sacrificed their lives in peacekeeping
missions in order to make it possible for us to consider
this Mission closed. We want to warmly thank all
of those who have contributed over the years to the
success of a mission that becomes part of history today.
In that regard, we want to particularly commend the
good offices of Special Representative Farid Zarif.
The United Nations presence has made a notable
contribution to maintaining calm in the country during
the post-election period.

We are satisfied with the security situation in
Liberia. On the whole, it appears that the authorities are
coping with the functions that were transferred to them
from the United Nations peacekeepers in July 2016.

The democratic transfer of power that took place
at the beginning of 2018 has made a considerable
contribution to State-building. However, Monrovia is
still facing the challenge of ensuring the establishment
of State institutions throughout the country. Until
then, it is difficult to see how the authorities will be
able to implement the provisions of the peacebuilding
plan. Furthermore, Liberians are showing insufficient
momentum in reforming law-enforcement bodies and
the justice sector, which are crucial to the State's ability
to maintain the necessary level of security. The new
president of Liberia has major tasks ahead with regard
to settling inter-ethnic and inter-communal conflict,
resolving land and territorial disputes, and, crucially,
restoring trust in the criminal justice system. It will
also be important to pay serious attention to finding
solutions to the underlying causes that led to the initial
outbreak of the conflict, especially issues linked to
land use.

We believe it is essential for Liberia to establish
effective cooperation with countries in the region,
particularly Cote d'Ivoire, in order to maintain
stability in the border areas. These issues are becoming
increasingly urgent in the light of the growing terrorist
threats in the region. We also want to emphasize the
importance of encouraging the process of returning
Ivorian refugees to their homes.

We were pleased to note that the national health-
care system has taken the lessons from the fight against
Ebola on board. However, the epidemic prevention
mechanisms must not be allowed to atrophy.

We hope that Monrovia will continue to work
to strengthen its State foundations, maintain
peace and stability and achieve consistent
socioeconomic development.

