Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We thank Joint Special
Representative Mamabolo for his comprehensive briefing.

We are pleased to note that the security situation
in Darfur continues to improve. With intercommunal
conflict remaining low and criminality decreasing, we
commend the efforts of the Government, as well as the
concerted engagement of State authorities, local leaders
and security elements. That is a testament to the decision
of the Security Council in laying down the conditions
for African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) to exit the Sudan, based on the
transition concept outlined in the special report of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
the Secretary-General on the UNAMID (S/2018/530).
The situation in Darfur can no longer be characterized
as an armed conflict between Government forces
and non-State actors. The problem now is a lack of
development, compounded by a protracted humanitarian
crisis and human rights violations.

The Government of the Sudan is making significant
efforts to find durable solutions to alleviate the suffering
of the people of Darfur. It is working to fill the void
that could be created by the closure of UNMAID's team
sites, by putting in place institutions to provide for law
enforcement and the rule of law. The weapons collection
campaign, for example, has considerably mitigated
intercommunal violence. However, it is clear that its
efforts have been constrained by a lack of capacity
and resources. The Government requires substantial
assistance from the international community. So far
that has hardly been forthcoming.

It is in that context that we commended the decision
of the Deputy Secretary-General and the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security to hold a high-
level event , on the sidelines of the General Assembly's
general debate, on the transition from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding and development in Darfur. The
meeting successfully underlined the critical need to
fund the transition in Darfur and support the whole-of-
system approach. We trust that the proposed pledging
conference, providing donors with the opportunity to
commit financial support, will be held soon.

That is of particular importance. The impressive
gains made in Darfur can be ensured only through
sustained financing to the development efforts of
the Government, as well as by appropriate funding
arrangements to enable and enhance the work of the
agencies and programmes of the United Nations
country team. The international community has
invested too much in Darfur, and it cannot risk failure
due to a lack of resources. Investment in recovery and
peacebuilding efforts in Darfur remains necessary to
avert the possibility of a relapse into conflict, and that
remains a prospect while significant progress in the
security situation is not accompanied by progress in the
political process.

The Darfur rebel groups show no meaningful
interest in ensuring peace in Darfur. They are amassing
huge benefits from criminal activities in neighbouring
States and have no real incentive to pursue peace. It
is time, we believe, to make a paradigm shift in the
approach to the political peace process in the Sudan
and apply real pressure on those groups. They should
not be allowed to benefit from their illegal activities in
neighbouring States, using the Darfur peace process as
a pretext. If they continue in their refusal to participate
meaningfully in the peace process, the Council should
treat them as transnational organized criminal groups,
not as Darfur rebels.

In that context, we commend the African Union
Peace and Security Council for its decision to seriously
consider taking appropriate action against those who
continue to obstruct efforts towards lasting peace and
security in Darfur. We urge the armed groups to join the
peace process before the expiration of the set deadline.
We sincerely hope that the Peace and Security Council
will immediately institute strict measures against those
groups that fail to heed its call for peace.
The activities of Abdul Wahid and his groups
in Jebel Marra are already taking a toll on civilians.
The Peace and Security Council has called on Abdul
Wahid to cease and desist from engaging in deadly
clashes, which continue to cause unnecessary deaths
and displace civilians. It has asked the Security
Council and the international community at large to
follow suit. Abdul Wahid has publicly admitted that
he has no interest in any peace process. There can be
no reason for the Security Council not to act against
such openly belligerent behaviour. Mr. Wahid should
face the consequences of his damaging and destructive
role. We look forward to receiving the statement of the
Panel of Experts on the Sudan and of possible options
in that regard.

We have no doubt that the overall improvements in
the situation in Darfur, which have led to the significant
drawdown of UNAMID and the plans for its eventual
exit in 2020, also allows for major changes in the Sudan
sanctions regime. The Security Council has already
agreed to review the sanctions regime in the light ofthe
positive developments that have occurred. We hope that
action will be taken in that direction sooner than later,
and we are ready to engage constructively in that, which,
we believe, is particularly important both because of
the significant improvement on the ground and because
of the Government's decisive role in dealing with peace
and security. That has included fighting terrorism,
combating human trafficking and illicit migration
and facilitating humanitarian relief. The Sudan's
role in reaching a breakthrough in the South Sudan
peace process has been enormous. The Government's
cooperation with the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan and
its Panel of Experts on the Sudan, as well as the wider
United Nations system, has also remained consistent.

The need to lift the arms embargo imposed against
the Government of the Sudan is urgent. The main
rationale for the imposition of the arms embargo no
longer exists, and the Government of the Sudan needs to
better secure and control its boundaries. Porous borders
pose a real threat to regional peace and security. Border
security requires effective military deployment, as well
as the free movement of troops and military equipment.
It is time to provide the Sudan with the means necessary
to protect its borders and security.

