At the end of the two years that we have been in the Security Council, we have to be honest: the Security Council has let the Syrian people down. Yes, there is a relative calm, but the suffering of the Syrian people continues, and millions have fled the country, in many cases living in precarious situations. We heard today that right now there are 11 million people in need of humanitarian aid, and there is no end in sight. When we speak about that conflict, we should remember how and why it began - when ordinary Syrians took to the streets in order to peacefully protest for change and reform. Let me stress: they were ordinary citizens, not terrorists. But the Syrian regime responded with more oppression, violence, torture and murder and by waging a brutal war against its own people. I think we have to be very clear that even those who are here today bear a direct responsibility for the suffering of the of the people and for the fact that Al-Assad bombs his own people, including with chemical weapons. Nobody has disputed that fact. The Al-Assad regime continues until today to kill its own population, abduct and torture people and use sexual violence against people. Two months ago, I quoted here in the Security Council a witness in the Koblenz trial of an Al-Assad official who was responsible for the torturing of Syrian people (see S/PV.8764). Council members may remember that the witness had to transport corpses - hundreds of corpses of killed, of tortured men, women and children - to mass graves in Damascus. The picture of a mother with a newborn in her arms whom he had to bury in a mass grave haunted the witness. I think that image should haunt us all. Ihave stated here in the Security Council time and again: without accountability, amid impunity, there can be no reconciliation. There can be no reconstruction, either moral or physical, of the country. That is why we urgently need the International, International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 to continue its work and to see to it that more people, more officials and more of those responsible for horrendous crimes actually face trial. Russia has not only supported Al-Assad but has itself contributed to the suffering and killing of people. My Council member colleagues may remember that last year in the Security Council I quoted a Pulitzer Prize-winning story in The New York Times that described in great detail how Russian pilots bombed hospitals in Idlib (see S/PV.8645). On sanctions, I cannot hear that anymore. We have discussed it over and over again. The Arria Formula meeting that was just alluded to very clearly showed that all the European Union (EU) sanctions do not hamper the delivery of humanitarian assistance. We asked for examples. There was not one example given of EU sanctions preventing humanitarian aid from getting into the country. Actually, I can tell the Council very clearly what stops humanitarian aid. I think it is very cynical to deplore that humanitarian goods cannot get into the country when, at the same time, we here in July witnessed how Russia and China blocked humanitarian aid from entering the country and providing humanitarian goods to hundreds of thousands of children and other people. Instead of endlessly complaining about sanctions, Russia and China should reconsider their decision and allow the opening of more crossing points so that people can actually get the food and medicine that they need. We have heard again how difficult the situation is for the people. The Al-Assad regime is also complaining about sanctions, and we will hear that probably again after my intervention. But let us just be aware of what the Al-Assad regime is doing at the same time. In mid-November, just a couple of weeks ago, the Syrian Arab News Agency based in Damascus informed the world about the opening of the Bassel Al-Assad Museum, a lavish shrine for Bashar Al-Assad's elder brother in the city of Latakia -350 square metres of marble and fine woods and a splendid garden of 8,000 square metres. At the opening ceremony, the local Baath Party Secretary explained that, "This museum is a message of love to the world that Syria is a country of love and peace". How cynical can one get? While the world is feeding the Syrian population, the regime is feeding its own ambitions and lies. The Council should not allow the regime to shift the blame for the plight of the Syrian people, which has been unnecessarily prolonged by the regime standing in the way of political solutions to that decade-long conflict. We owe it to the people of Syria that we keep that on the agenda, including the chemical track - and we heard again last week how Russia is undermining the Chemical Weapons Convention - the political track and the humanitarian track. To Special Envoy Geir Pedersen, I wish good luck. I encourage him not to give in, to be loud and clear and to call a spade a spade. It is very good that he includes civil society and women. I would ask that he also include the impunity aspect in his work. Germany will leave the Security Council. I would like to thank Belgium very much for its cooperation on the humanitarian file, as well as Kuwait, with whom we shared the file in the first year. Germany willremain engaged. We continue to be a major donor of humanitarian aid, and we remain politically engaged. We owe it to the Syrian people. They are wonderful human beings, and many of them have found their home in Germany.
