Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.

The frequency, scope, speed and severity of
climate-related disasters are a source of deep concern.
Such disasters occur almost everywhere, in both
developed and developing countries. However, their
impact on the lives of people is extremely different.

According to one of the most recent publications of
the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction,
over the past 20 years, people in the poorest nations
were over seven times more likely to die and over six
times more likely to be injured than the equivalent
populations in the richest nations as a result of such
disasters. That alone proves that our efforts must be
aimed at reducing the number of deaths and injuries in
disaster-affected areas.

We should also vigorously strive to address
climate change, thereby contributing to fewer
climate-related disasters. That, of course, must be done
based on the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities of States, as well as the availability of
related technologies.

Likewise, we should promote related multilateral
instruments and institutions. In that regard, any attempt
to undermine the relevant international instruments,
including by withdrawing from them, must be strongly
opposed. We also underline that developing countries,
in particular those that are more vulnerable to such
disasters, must be empowered through capacity-
building. That means the sharing of best practices,
exchange of experiences and the unconditional and
non-discriminatory transfer of financial resources, as
well as climate-friendly know-how and technologies.

That will enable such countries not only to
contribute to addressing climate change but also to
being prepared so as to save more lives in the event
of a disaster. Moreover, it will contribute to achieving
sustainable development in those societies by removing
the barriers resulting from climate change. That is the
case in our region with respect to sand and dust storms,
which challenge socioeconomic development in our
societies. Needless to say, capacity-building efforts
should be complemented by promoting regional and
international cooperation.

If those are the goals that we need to achieve, they
should be pursued in the relevant forums, including
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and other such bodies, not here in the Security
Council, which has neither the legal competence nor the
technical capacity to address this issue. In the related
meetings of the Council since 2007, there has been no
consensus either among the Council members or the
general membership of the United Nations stating that
this issue falls within the Council's purview. Rather, it
was considered by many countries as an example of the
Council's encroachment upon the powers and functions
of other United Nations organs. While the Council
has not even been able to fully address certain serious
conflicts, its insistence on delving into issues that are
not proved to threaten international peace and security
is incomprehensible.

We share the related concerns of small island
developing States and underline the fact that their
climate-related problems can be solved only through
capacity-building as well as financial and technical
assistance, which is beyond the competence and power
of the Council. With that in mind, we urge the Council
to stick to its core mandate only and to avoid making
promises of solutions that it cannot ultimately fulfil.

