I would like to start by thanking Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx for their informative briefings. We highly appreciate the Secretary-General's eleventh strategic report on the threat of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da'esh) (S/2020/774). We share the concern that, during the reporting period, the international community faced a two-pronged attack - from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and from new attacks by ISIL and its affiliates, especially in conflict areas. Terrorists are taking advantage of every opportunity to exploit and exacerbate the harsh socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic and prolonged conflicts, turning them to their advantage. They sow discord and radicalization by promoting narratives on inequalities, inequities, poverty, marginalization and discrimination. These are stark reminders that terrorism in all its forms and manifestations remains a serious threat to international peace and security. We take this opportunity to thank the Indonesian presidency for consistently focusing the Council's attention on addressing the threat of terrorism. In this regard, my delegation wishes to stress the importance of international and regional cooperation, as no country is safe until all are safe. That is particularly true when States have to stretch their domestic resources dedicated to meeting other priorities. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/774) confirms that the issue of foreign terrorist fighters returning to their home country or relocating to third countries is a growing challenge, in particular when countries reopen their borders. ISIL's financial reserves, worth some $100 million, together with various fundraising methods used by terrorist groups, add to the seriousness of the threat. It is therefore crucial to enhance the sharing of intelligence and analysis between and among States on terrorists' movement, imminent attacks, recruitment, financing and online propaganda, as well as on building national capacity in law enforcement. At the global level, the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy continues to represent a comprehensive and effective framework for eliminating the threat, with the United Nations assuming a central coordinating role. We welcome in particular the instrumental functions fulfilled by the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT), the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015), as well as various other relevant United Nations agencies, in providing technical assistance and capacity-building. Their efforts to ensure business continuity, deliver technical assistance and engage with Member States through online platforms deserve a special note. We wish to highlight the contribution of the recent Virtual Counter-Terrorism Week in maintaining the momentum in the fight against terrorism. We have listened to and welcome the emphasis on strengthening the coherence, coordination and effectiveness of United Nations counter-terrorism work, particularly between UNOCT and CTED. The COVID-19 pandemic shows how important it is to ensure synergies and coordination in our actions with limited resources. Last but not least, addressing the multidimensional threat of terrorism requires a comprehensive and holistic approach, which includes addressing the conditions conducive to terrorism. We must remain firmly committed to preventing and resolving conflicts, sustaining peace, promoting development and ensuring respect for human rights for all. Bringing terrorists to justice and preventing the return of terrorism continue to be of the utmost importance and must be carried out in accordance with national laws and international obligations. We are convinced that mutual legal assistance and the sharing of best practices in the prosecution, reintegration and rehabilitation of terrorists and their dependents, as appropriate, can prove beneficial and should be furthered. It is also critical to adopt a whole- of-society approach by involving all actors, especially women, young people, non-governmental organizations, the private sector and academia, in building balanced and cohesive societies that are resilient to terrorism and radicalisation. In closing, Viet Nam reiterates its firm position rejecting terrorism and will continue to be a devoted partner in advancing our common struggle against terrorism on the basis of the Charter of the United Nations, international law and our common values.
