Ms. Wensley (Australia): Australia has watched with
growing alarm and concern the developments that have
unfolded in East Timor over the last week. We are now
facing a serious crisis. Law and order have completely
broken down. Murder, arson, looting and acts of violence
and intimidation against innocent civilians continue
unpunished. Armed militia are running rampant, with
elements of the Indonesian security forces standing by
and making no attempt to intervene. As the Secretary-
General said yesterday and again today, the situation is
descending into a state of anarchy. A humanitarian crisis
is emerging. Hundreds of thousands of people have been
forced out of their homes. Many have been forced to
leave East Timor and those that remain are subject to
continued harassment and intimidation. The provision of
humanitarian assistance has halted because aid workers
are no longer safe.

The United Nations Mission in East Timor
(UNAMET) is now at the point where it has to consider
withdrawing completely from East Timor. Officials of the
Australian Consulate in Dili were also withdrawn two
days ago because we could no longer be assured of their
safety.

This deplorable situation has arisen because of the
failure of the Indonesian military to honour Indonesia's
commitment to provide security in East Timor for the
United Nations consultation and transition process. We
call on Indonesia to agree immediately to the deployment
of a United Nations-authorized international force to
provide the necessary security for UNAMET to resume its
role.

Let us not forget what the United Nations is actually
doing in East Timor, and why it is there. It is there
because it was asked - by the Government of Indonesia,
as well as the Government of Portugal - to play a role
in implementing the historic agreement between those two
countries on resolving the question of East Timor. It was
invited by the Government of Indonesia to assist in the
implementation of the popular consultation of the East
Timorese people.

We call on the Indonesian Government to give an
unequivocal commitment to respect the result of the 30
August ballot and to expedite the transfer of control of
East Timor to the United Nations, in accordance with the
provisions of the 5 May Agreement.

In the immediate future, the most urgent task is to
restore security in East Timor. The restoration of peace

 

and security in the territory remains, indisputably, the
responsibility of the Government of Indonesia. Indonesia
must do everything in its power to stop the violence, bring
the militias under control, allow the return of internally
displaced persons and begin the process of restoring
normality to the territory - and this must happen
immediately.
We are concerned at the discredit that the actions of
the Indonesian military are bringing to Indonesia as a
whole. We have made it clear to Indonesia, one of our
nearest neighbours, that we are ready to help. We are ready
to contribute to, and to lead, a multi-nation security force
to assist Indonesia to restore law and order and to enable
the full return of the United Nations. A number of other
concerned countries, from our own region and further
afield, have said they are ready to join us. But we need
Indonesia's cooperation.

The Secretary-General said in his statement yesterday
and he reiterated today that the time had come for
Indonesia to seek the help of the international community,
and in the form of such an international force. My
Government agrees, and we are ready to play our part.

We are also working with our United Nations partners
and with non-governmental organizations to address the
disastrous humanitarian situation. On 9 September Australia
announced an urgent package of humanitarian assistance for
the East Timorese people as an initial response to this
crisis. We are ready to provide further assistance as soon as
the security situation permits and as we obtain a better
picture of the needs of people throughout Timor.

A great deal has been invested in the popular
consultation of the East Timorese people. We have all
recognized it as an historic opportunity. So a great deal
stands to be lost. The East Timorese people have expressed
themselves overwhelmingly in favour of independence. The
failure of the international community to support them in
the realization of that goal would amount to turning our
backs on them.

Australia, for one, cannot and will not do that. We
urge Indonesia, as a friend and neighbour, not to do so.
And we pledge our readiness to assist them in restoring
peace and security to the territory and to creating the
conditions in which the East Timorese people can rebuild
their lives in accordance with the wishes they expressed so
clearly in the popular consultation.

I should say that Australia welcomes the important
changes that have occurred in Indonesia itself during the
past year, particularly the democratic elections that were
held on 7 June. The Indonesian economy is now
beginning to recover from the impact of the East Asian
financial crisis. Australia's interest is in an Indonesia
which is successful and is constructively engaged with the
international community, not an Indonesia which is
isolated and disadvantaged through confrontation over
East Timor.
