Mr. Hallergard: I have the pleasure to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, Armenia and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

Allow me, first of all, to thank you, Sir, for
taking the initiative to convene this open debate on an
important topic and for the very valuable concept note
(S/2016/586, annex). I also thank the Secretary-General,
the Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Kenya, in
her capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
and the African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace
and Security for their briefings, as well as the many
ministers who have spoken today, which is a testament
to the importance of this debate. I also welcome the
adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2016/ 12.
The timing of this debate is very opportune,
particularly in view of the recent decision by the African
Union Summit in Kigali to operationalize the AU Peace
Fund. The High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President
of the European Commission, Ms. Federica Mogherini,
and the European Commissioner for International
Cooperation and Development, Mr. Neven Mimica,
both welcomed that development. As they stated, that
decision represents an important step towards a system
based on the African Union's own resources.

The European Union is the African Union's first
partner, and EU cooperation on peace and security in
Africa is handled primarily through a continental and
regional perspective in the framework of the Africa-EU
partnership. The EU remains committed to work with
the African Union so as to ensure peace and security
on the continent.

With regard to institution-building, the European
Union has provided substantial financial support to a
number of subregional organizations in Africa in order
to increase their capacity to develop regional policies
and enforce their implementation, and that has not been
only in the field of peace and security. While there
has been relatively good progress in the area of peace
and security in our work with the AU, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), among others, which has sought to fulfil
clear functions, the progress of regional integration
initiatives and programmes has been undermined by
a multitude of interrelated factors. Specific challenges
vary from region to region, but overall some issues
can be found everywhere. Member States often belong
to various regional organizations with identical or
overlapping mandates that serve various domestic
objectives and agendas. Political mandates and regional
ambitions are often not sufficiently underpinned with
operational capacity and resources, which in turn limits
their capacity to absorb the aid provided.

The European Union supports the African Union
and its regional economic communities, first and
foremost through the African Peace Facility. Since
its establishment, in 2004, the African Peace Facility
has contributed almost €l.6 billion to the African
Union's peace and security agenda. Our support is
used to build the capacity of the AU and its regional
economic communities and to provide core funding for
their operational work, including addressing emerging
conflicts and ongoing crises. Recent examples include
South Sudan, where IGAD is supported by the
African Peace Facility to run the mediation process
in Addis Ababa, and Burundi, where the East African
Community is trying to contain the crisis. The African
Peace Facility has also been supporting peacebuilding
work in Somalia since 2007.

The African Peace Facility has been a game changer
in terms of making a growing number of African-led
responses to political crises on the continent possible.
By providing the resources needed for those bodies to
act, the Facility has enabled collective African security
actions anchored in the nascent Peace and Security
Council's political role, which has enabled it to be
tested and put into action.

As was confirmed by the recently adopted two
identical resolutions on the review of the peacebuilding
architecture, Security Council resolution 2282 (2016)
and General Assembly resolution 70/268, conflict
prevention has become part and parcel of sustaining
peace and peacebuilding. The capacity to manage
tensions in a swift and effective manner is critical
for the success of any peace process. Regional and
continental organizations are usually the best placed to
do so, as long as they have the necessary mandate and
capacities. Africa has several advantages in that regard
on which we can build.

Through its African Peace and Security
Architecture, Africa has a well-established framework
for conflict management, including conflict
prevention. Furthermore, the African Union and the
regional economic communities have a clear will and
mandate, expressed in the African Peace and Security
Architecture road map for the period 2016-2020, to play
a proactive role in preventing conflict on the continent
and to acquire the necessary capacities to do so.

Those efforts need to be supported. An effective
African preventive diplomacy capacity will no doubt
have a major impact on peacebuilding in the continent.
The European Union is already funding the development
of a continental early-warning system, complemented
by similar systems at the regional level, and the
strengthening of mediation support units able to act
on the basis of early warning analyses. The swiftness
in deploying conflict-prevention efforts is also key to
their success. It is therefore necessary that Africa's own
funding efforts be supplemented by flexible, quickly
disbursable funding. The African Peace Facility has put
in place an early-recovery mechanism aimed precisely
at that.

Peace-support operations that deploy deterrent
forces aimed at ensuring that political tensions do
not translate into open conflict can be critical to
peacebuilding in particularly fragile situations. They
provide the necessary time for national institutions
to be strengthened and for the necessary trust among
the parties to be established. That is an approach
that has worked well in Guinea-Bissau, where the
ECOWAS Security Mission in Guinea-Bissau, which
has been funded by the EU since June 2015, has
been instrumental in ensuring that tensions among
the democratic institutions are addressed within the
constitutional framework. South Sudan, unfortunately,
provides a negative example.

While the African Peace Facility cannot provide
direct training to national institutions, the mandate of
the peace-support operations that it funds can include
a component to train national-security institutions,
such as the army or the police, within the framework
of a wider State-building process. That is the case in
Somalia, where the EU supports the African Union
Mission in Somalia for the reconstruction of a training
centre for the Somali national army and provides
on-the-job training to police forces through joint
patrolling and other activities.

The EU's involvement in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding in Africa goes beyond the African Peace
Facility. Apart from bilateral development cooperation
programmes with many African countries that
support good governance and inclusive participation
through the European Development Fund, the EU
also uses other foreign policy instruments, such as the
instrument for contributing to stability and peace, EU
election observation missions and common security
and defence policy missions, such as in Mali and the
Central African Republic. These are complemented
by other instruments such as political dialogue, the
use of preventive sanctions, humanitarian assistance,
the work of EU special representatives and support to
civil society, allowing for a comprehensive approach in
fragile and conflict-affected situations.

The EU is also playing an active role as a full
member of all the configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission, where is it making constructive
contributions to support ongoing efforts based
on the comprehensive approach outlined earlier,
thereby helping configuration Chairs to coordinate
peacebuilding efforts and generate momentum and
resources for the countries on the PBC's agenda. In the
case of the Central African Republic, for example, the
EU, as the largest donor in the country, is hosting a
donors' conference in the fall to support the priorities
of the newly elected authorities and is doing so in full
coordination with United Nations interlocutors and the
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, with the aim
of agreeing on a compact.

To conclude, the EU will continue to be a strong
proponent of and contributor to peacebuilding efforts in
Africa, which is a challenge that we all need to tackle
in close coordination with international partners and
cooperation with ever more able African Governments
and institutions willing to take the lead.

