Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Mr. Tanin, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for his briefing. We welcome the presence and statement
of Mr. Dacic', First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia. I have also listened very
carefully to the statement by Ms. Citaku.

Tolerance, reconciliation and peaceful coexistence
serve the fundamental interests of all ethnic
communities in Kosovo and are necessary for achieving
development. Currently, the situation in the Kosovo
region continues to face complex challenges. China
hopes that the parties concerned will always put the
well-being of their people first, protect the legitimate
rights and interests of all communities, refrain from
actions and rhetoric that could escalate the situation
and work together to safeguard the peace, stability and
development of the Balkans.

Resolution 1244 (1999) provides an important
legal basis for resolving the issue of Kosovo. All
parties should act in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and,
within the framework of relevant Security Council
resolutions, seek a solution that is acceptable to all
parties through dialogue and negotiations.

China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia, understands Serbia's legitimate
concerns about the question of Kosovo and commends
its efforts to pursue a political solution thereto. China
welcomes the efforts of Belgrade and Pristina to
continue to enhance dialogue. We hope that the two
sides will reaffirm their firm commitment to a political
solution, implement existing agreements, gradually
build mutual trust, contribute their political will
and wisdom and meet one another half way so as to
create conditions for finding a lasting solution that is
acceptable to all parties concerned.

The Security Council should maintain its attention
on the question of Kosovo and encourage both parties
to undertake sincere dialogue so as to promote a proper
settlement of the Kosovo question. China supports
UNMIK, under the leadership of Special Representative
Tanin, in discharging its mandate and cooperating
constructively with all parties. We hope that UNMIK,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
and the Kosovo Force will work in close collaboration
to play a constructive role in improving the situation
on the ground and achieving a proper settlement for the
Kosovo question.

