Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We express our
sincere appreciation to the Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacebuilding Support, Ms. Judy Cheng-Hopkins,
and to the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
configuration for Guinea, Ms. Sylvie Lucas, for their
briefings.

Today's briefing provides an opportunity to
reflect on what we have done as an Organization to
enhance our peacebuilding efforts and continue to
explore further measures to accomplish this important
task. At the centre of peacebuilding efforts lies the
crucial understanding that peacebuilding is the
responsibility of Member States. While we believe that
national ownership is at the core of the success of any
peacebuilding initiative, that does not negate the fact
that the international community has the responsibility
to assist and advise countries, based on their priorities
and policies, on how to consolidate and sustain newly
fragile peace. Consequently, the United Nations should
acknowledge already existing national programmes and
build on them, instead of introducing new programmes,
which are usually complicated and cumbersome.

While we are pleased that progress has been
made in the area of leadership for peacebuilding, we
believe that more can and will be done. The progress
report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2010/386)
identified challenges such as poor coordination or the
lack of it, accountability and effectiveness. The
complexity of peacebuilding tasks requires better
coordination, especially in the field. In the selection
and deployment of leadership, greater flexibility that
takes into account the uniqueness of circumstances
should be maintained.
Furthermore, we commend the action taken to
strengthen cooperation between United Nations
Headquarters and country teams on the ground.
However, we believe that more needs to be done to
provide support to country-level leadership in order to
enhance coordination, effectiveness and accountability.

South Africa recognizes the importance of the
close cooperation between the United Nations and
other international organizations, especially the Bretton
Woods institutions. The World Bank's World
Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security and
Development shows that more collaboration between
the United Nations and those institutions could
optimize our peacebuilding efforts. In that connection,
we have noted with appreciation the World Bank's
fragile States hub established in Nairobi.

With regard to Africa, we would like to
encourage greater cooperation with the African Union,
its regional economic communities and the African
Development Bank. In forging such a partnership,
coordination is crucial in order to facilitate strategic
synergy and avoid unnecessary duplication. We believe
that timely, sustainable and predictable financing
remains a crucial element in realizing the objectives of
post-conflict peacebuilding.

While we acknowledge the funding of the
Peacebuilding Fund secured through donations, we
emphasize that the United Nations should consider
using more sustainable mechanisms to kick-start
peacebuilding activities in countries emerging from
conflict. We welcome plans to implement the
recommendations of the Senior Advisory Group in its
independent review of civilian capacities last year. We
look forward to a comprehensive progress report on
this process. We believe that we have not sufficiently
tapped into the existing international civilian
capacities, especially those from the global South. As
we seek to broaden the pool of civilian experts, we
cannot overemphasize the importance of partnerships
at local, regional and subregional levels in order to
exploit the unique advantages inherent in human
capacities at these levels.

The relationship between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission is crucial. The
growing number of peacekeeping operations and
integrated peacebuilding and political missions with
considerable peacebuilding tasks provides the Security
Council with an opportunity to make optimal use of
Peacebuilding Commission advice. The Council could
seek the Commission's advice when considering
peacebuilding tasks in specific missions. Peacekeeping
and peacebuilding should be mutually reinforcing in
the pursuit of lasting peace in post-conflict countries.
In that regard, we welcome the recent Council decision
to include peacebuilding mandates in the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan and
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya.

In the long term, it is our belief that all United
Nations peacekeeping missions should have some
peacebuilding elements. Based on our past experience,
South Africa is conscious of the centrality of women as
peacemakers and facilitators in political processes and
peacebuilding initiatives, particularly at the grass-roots
level. Women at all levels of society have a role to play
in conflict prevention and peacebuilding. An important
dimension in advancing peace and preventing conflict
is to ensure greater and more equitable economic
justice and development.

Despite the advances that have been made in
positioning women to assume leadership roles in
conflict prevention and mediation, these will be
meaningless if the root causes of conflict, which by
and large are economic in nature, are not adequately
addressed. We look forward to the next comprehensive
report of the Secretary-General in 2012, and hope that
by that time we will have made significant progress in
our peacebuilding efforts.

