Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to offer you my warm congratulations,
Madam, on the Federal Republic of Nigeria's accession
to the presidency of the Council for the month of April,
and to express our appreciation for the outstanding way
in which Luxembourg led the work of the Council last
month.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative for the work his team
is doing on the ground and for the quality of the report
presented to the Council this morning (S/2014/229).

I think it would be useful to call the Council's
attention to some developments that have occurred in
Mali since 16 January, when the Secretary-General's
third report (S/2014/1) on the implementation of the
mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
was presented (see S/PV.7095). Those changes are
related particularly to the political process, security,
stabilization, the strengthening of State authority,
human rights, economic recovery and reconstruction
projects, the humanitarian situation, international
coordination and MINUSMA.

As the report prepared pursuant to resolution 2100
(2013) and under review today indicates, remarkable
progress has been made in the negotiations between the
Government and armed groups, thanks to the support
of our partners. For its part, the Malian Government
is determined to spare no effort to reach a definitive
solution to the crisis affecting the North of Mali that
respects our sovereignty, territorial integrity and
unity. The Government will pursue those efforts with
the support of the international community, including
MINUSMA, whose mandate, I recall, is designed to
strengthen the Malian Government in order to enable
it to assert its sovereignty over the whole of its national
territory, without exception.

In that regard, the Government and MINUSMA have
conducted joint preparations for inclusive peace talks
by organizing a series of workshops and activities on
lessons learned from previous agreements; cantonment
and the demobilization, disarmament and reintegration
(DDR) process; reinstatement of the administration and
the resumption of social services; women and young
people's national days of action for peace and national
reconciliation. The workshop on the DDR process has
resulted in a document on preparing for cantonment,
signed by representatives of the Government,
MINUSMA and armed groups, which focuses on the
objectives, principles, eligibility criteria, cantonment
sites, procedures, logistical and financial resources and
the timing of the process's implementation. It is based
on resolution 2100 (2013), the Ouagadougou agreement
of 18 June 2013 and recommendations made as a
result of the Security Council visit to Mali from 1 to
3 February. The Council's visit and that of Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon from 4 to 6 November last year
were yet further demonstrations of the international
community's solidarity with Mali, a country rich
in history and cultural diversity that is resolutely
committed to a future of solidarity through the inclusion
of every element in the country.

In support of the joint actions of our Government
and MINUSMA, the President and Head of State of
Mali, Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita. has been in talks
with the supreme authorities of Mali's neighbours and
other countries of the region, including Algeria and
Morocco, who have expressed their willingness to work
towards peaceful resolution of the problems in northern
Mali.
My delegation fully agrees with the observation
made by the Secretary-General in paragraph 69 of his
report, deploring the fact that some armed groups have
demonstrated a lack of consistency or refused to take
the opportunity offered by the informal talks in the
process aimed at emerging from the crisis. While it is
clear that this lack of consistency has helped to slow
the development of constructive and inclusive dialogue
leading to formal negotiations, it is also true, as noted
in the report under consideration, that there can be no
lasting solution to the security problems in the north
of Mali in the absence of an inclusive political process
that paves the way for the restoration of public order,
equal access for all Malians to public services and
reconciliation among communities.

The Government of Mali therefore once again calls
for restraint and good faith in order to enable us to
reach the goal of peace as soon as possible, to which
the Government remains strongly attached. That is why
Mali's President, His Excellency Mr. Boubacar Keita,
since the formation of the new Government, on 5 April,
of which I am part and which is headed by Prime
Minister Moussa Mara, has pledged to work diligently
to achieve peace and security throughout the whole
country, including the north of Mali.

Along the same lines, the Head of State has
reiterated the commitment of the Government of Mali
to respecting the Ouagadougou Agreement, including
the provisions of article 21 thereof. In that regard, the
country has just entrusted the conduct of talks with the
rebel groups to former Prime Minister Modibo Keita, a
person whose sense of State and country, integrity and
political courage are well known. It is understood that
the talks will be held, as mentioned earlier, in respect
of the unity and territorial integrity of Mali and in
accordance with resolution 2100 (2013).

My delegation also shares security and
humanitarian concerns mentioned in the report of
the Secretary-General, including the resumption of
activities by terrorist groups, mainly Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb and the Mouvement pour l'unicite et le
jihad en Afrique de l'ouest (MUJAO), using improvised
explosive devices and rockets against the Malian armed
forces, MINUSMA and the forces of Operation Serval
in the north of Mali. In addition, the Government of
Mali is particularly concerned by the deteriorating
situation in Kidal and other northern communities
owing to various instances of intercommunal violence.

With regard to MINUSMA, my delegation regrets
the low level of force generation and the lack of attack
helicopters and military transport in a context marked
by the intensification of the activities of terrorist groups,
the most notorious of which to date was the murder of
the French hostage Gilberto Rodrigues Leal, which
MUJAO has claimed. Against that tragic backdrop,
through me, the Government of Mali condemns in the
strongest possible terms this heinous act, which belongs
to another era. We commit ourselves to deploy all efforts
to hunt down, arrest and prosecute the perpetrators. To
the Government and the people of France and to the
family of Mr. Rodrigues Leal, we extend our most
sincere condolences. We are praying for the repose of
the soul of the deceased and all those who before him
paid with their lives for their commitment to a better
world free of terrorism and violent extremism.

Similarly, we condemn this morning's terrorist
attack in Kidal. That event serves to underscore the
urgency of speeding up the deployment of MINUSMA
and providing it with adequate means to carry out its
mission alongside Mali's armed forces and the French
forces. My delegation also supports the Secretary-
General's call on the international community, Member
States and donor countries for a significant increase in
their support to Mali's armed forces and for the scaling
up of adequate resources and troop deployments to
MINUSMA to enable it to build its force in order to
fully carry out its mandate.

The situation in Mali is symptomatic of the
challenges that the countries of the region face. My
delegation agrees with the importance of strengthening
international coordination and regional cooperation
within the framework of the implementation of the
United Nations integrated strategy for Sahel. To that
end, the first ministerial meeting on the establishment
of a coordination platform for the strategy was held in
Bamako on 5 November 2013. The aim of the meeting
was to identify common priorities in the areas ofsecurity,
governance, resilience and regional infrastructure in
order to better shape the implementation of the strategy
and the efforts of other multilateral and bilateral
partners in the region.

In its capacity as Chair of the plaform for the
coordination of the strategy, Mali will very soon convene
the second ministerial meeting, during which we will
present a road map aimed at generating a reasonable
level of sustainability in support in addressing the
problems to be resolved, keeping the focus on the
major challenges in the Sahel region continues to face,
adopting shared priorities for regional initiatives in the
Sahel, and monitoring the progress achieved, including
through coordinated support by the international
community as represented by the States Members of the
United Nations. The actions envisaged will also help to
build confidence among the countries of the region and
improve coordination among international partners in
order to address the multidimensional threats affecting
the region.

I cannot conclude without thanking, on behalf of
the Government of the Republic of Mali, the Economic
Community of West African States, particularly
its retiring President, His Excellency Mr. Alassane
Ouattara, President of the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire,
His Excellency Mr. Blaise Compaore, President of
Burkina Faso, and His Excellency Mr. Goodluck Ebele
Jonathan, President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria,
for their leadership in managing the crisis in Mali .

To conclude, I would like to reiterate the Government
of Mali's appreciation to the African Union, the United
Nations, the European Union, the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, France, Chad and all countries
contributing troops and equipment to MINUSMA for
their eminently important role they continue to play in
bringing permanent peace and stability back to Mali
and the entire region.

