The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

I wish to thank the Special Representative,
Mr. Kai Eide, for his insightful briefing. I also thank
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his statement.

In view of the upcoming elections, which we
hope will constitute a milestone in the transformation
of Afghanistan into a stable and democratic State, our
meeting today takes on additional significance. Indeed,
the holding of those elections in a free and fair manner
represents a high priority not only for Afghanistan, but
also for the entire international community.

Council members have already emphasized the
importance of the election process and expressed their
determination to help make it a success. Turkey joins
that commitment and reiterates its full support for
UNAMA's activities in that regard. In fact, UNAMA is
playing an essential role in almost all walks of social,
political and economic life in Afghanistan, and we
want that to continue unabated in the critical period
ahead.

In the light of the Secretary-General's
comprehensive report (S/2009/323), I will not go into
details of what further could and should be done. Let
me just underline that we fully agree with the
Secretary-General's observations and recommendations.

In that context, we particularly look forward to
agreed benchmarks being formulated and reflected in
the next report of the Secretary-General. We believe
that that exercise will result in further improving the
United Nations work in Afghanistan and will also
guide the Member States in their contributions.

As an active contributor to peace and stability
efforts in Afghanistan, Turkey pledges its full support
to the Secretariat in formulating those benchmarks. We
believe that the benchmarks should be concise and
achievable, reflecting the challenges and opportunities
on the ground. But, even more importantly, given the
need for a comprehensive strategy, including security,
governance, the rule of law, human rights and social
and economic development, the benchmarks must
address all those dimensions in a holistic, balanced and
realistic manner. Only through such a broad-based and
forward-looking strategy can we achieve our common
objectives.

Likewise, continued and enhanced regional
cooperation is another requirement to accomplish our
goals in Afghanistan. Recently, there are have been a
number of promising developments in that context,
particularly with respect to Afghanistan-Pakistan
relations. The international community should continue
to encourage and help those efforts to further advance
regional cooperation.

For its part, Turkey leads a trilateral cooperation
process that includes Pakistan, Afghanistan and Turkey.
Building upon our excellent relations with both
countries and our deep-rooted engagement in the
peace, prosperity and stability of the region, we hope
that that initiative will constitute another contribution
to the international community's joint endeavours. In
that context, I am pleased to report that the third
trilateral summit within that framework was recently
held in April in Ankara.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate once again
what we have been saying from the first day - that
failure is not an option in Afghanistan. Indeed, given
the stakes involved, we must succeed, and we are
confident that we will.

We have every reason to believe that the proud
people of Afghanistan, with the help of the
international community, will turn the challenges into
opportunities and will pave the way for a bright and
prosperous future. Our Afghan brothers and sisters,
who have suffered immensely from decades of war and
destruction, deserve no less.

Turkey will continue to contribute to the
collective efforts in that direction, and we will do
everything possible to make sure that we achieve our
common goals sooner rather than later.

Now, on a personal note, I extend my warmest
thanks and gratitude for all the comments of my
colleagues, who have bid me farewell. I must say that
they have all been extremely kind and generous in their
remarks about me.

On the last day of the Presidency of Turkey, I
wish to place on record my deep appreciation, and that
of my delegation to our colleagues on the Council, for
their cooperation and support. It was a great experience
for me and my Mission, and I must add that I and my
colleagues in our Mission enjoyed every moment of
our Presidency, since there was never a dull moment.

I also wish to thank our Secretariat colleagues for
their invaluable support. Their professionalism and
dedication are most commendable.

Indeed, this is my last appearance before the
Council in my capacity as the Permanent
Representative of Turkey, since I will be retiring as of
tomorrow. Therefore, taking this opportunity, I would
like to say that my four and a half years at the United
Nations, and especially the last six months in the
Security Council, have been the most interesting and
rewarding experiences of my 44 year-long diplomatic
career.

I thank all my colleagues at the United Nations
and in the Secretariat for their kindness and support.
Without their cooperation and understanding, I would
certainly have not enjoyed it as much as I did.

Last but not least, I want to thank our interpreters
for their tireless efforts. They are the invisible enablers
of our work at the United Nations. Without them, we
could not function.

I resume my function as the President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the Honourable Lawrence
Cannon, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Canada.

