Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, at the outset may I congratulate you on
Malaysia's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council in this month of August and assure you of the
full support of the Senegalese delegation. I would also
like to thank Malaysia's predecessor in the post, Japan,
for its outstanding presidency in July.

Ambassador Ibrahim, it is true that sometimes
one topic is hidden within another. By devoting an
open debate to the crucial problem of children in
armed conflicts at the beginning of your presidency,
you are demonstrating the remarkable leadership you
have shown and will continue to show at the head of
the Security Council Working Group on Children in
Armed Conflict. You have highlighted our humanity,
as Anthony Lake reminded us, as well as the humanity
of the Security Council by consistently promoting the
action of the Council for the protection of children in
armed conflict.
Stephane Hessel, a brilliant French intellectual
has said: "Be outraged". Here, in the Council, were
are outraged, but more than that, we are mobilized,
and we have chosen to act to improve the situation of
children affected by armed conflict. By inviting us this
morning to reflect upon children in armed conflicts,
you clearly intended, Mr. President, to call attention
to the three-fold tragedy of these children: as civilian
victims of the worst atrocities in theatres of operation;
as victims of forced recruitment by parties to the
conflict, particularly non-State armed groups; and as
victims of extreme physical and psychological trauma.

That is the reason the Senegalese delegation
welcomes the holding of this debate. We extend
heartfelt thanks to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
to his Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, Mrs. Leila Zerrougui, and to the Executive
Director of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake, for their
brilliant statements, which further elucidate the gravity
and scope of the phenomenon we are up against.

In looking at the Secretary-General's report
(S/2016/360) we see that children, in addition to
forced recruitment, killings, maiming, abduction,
displacement and sexual violence, are also victims
of violent extremism and of terrorists who cynically
exploit them as sexual slaves and, even worse, as
human bombs. They do so in flagrant violation of
international law, notably the four Geneva Conventions
and their Additional Protocols and of resolution 1261
(1999) - the first of its type adopted by the Council
on the topic. That is why the Senegalese delegation
endorses the words of the Secretary-General as he
affirms in his report:

"The impact on children of our collective failure
to prevent and end conflict is severe . Those
violations are directly related to the denigration
of the respect for international humanitarian
and human rights law by parties to the conflict."
(S/2016/360, para. 4)

The current debate is therefore a way to challenge
the universal conscience regarding the disgrace
represented by the fate of children in conflicts. It
is Senegal's belief that the situation has gone on far
too long. Senegal urgently calls for three-fold action:
first, guaranteeing the protection of children, then
strengthening preventive measures and, finally,
ensuring accountability for perpetrators of war crimes.

The Children, Not Soldiers campaign has had a
significant impact in the protection of child victims
of armed conflict, including through the signing of 25
action plans that contributed to the efforts that made
possible the freeing of more than 115,000 children
since 2000, including 8,000 in 2015 alone, if my figures
are correct. The campaign has also facilitated the
taking into account of the situation of children in the
drafting and signing of ceasefire and peace agreements
around the globe. This trend should be continued and
strengthened. Likewise, the integration of this matter
into the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
operations should be systematic, from the peacekeeping
phase to that of peacebuilding. And it should include
the deployment of child protection advisers.

Given the numerous challenges to the provision of
humanitarian assistance, my delegation believes that
humanitarian pauses are obligatory for the parties in
conflict. We take this opportunity to strongly condemn
the militarization of schools and hospitals. Firing on
ambulances and schools must cease.

This brings me to the second part of my statement,
namely, the prevention of conflicts, which should be at
the core of our concerns. This moves from promoting
ongoing and inclusive political dialogue to rapid alert,
via good offices, all in the framework ofa regional and
subregional approach supported by the international
community. Prevention should also involve tracking and
controling the flow of weapons, including small arms
and light weapons, so as to address their proliferation,
in accordance with the Arms Trade Treaty. Equally
important are the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes for child soldiers to prevent
their taking up arms again.

Speaking of the social reintegration of children
through psychological support, educational programmes
and professional training, I would like to note here
the creation in the member States of the Economic
Community of West African States, including Senegal,
of welcome and family placement centres for child
soldiers, as well as jurisdictions and specialized centres
for the detention of minors.

These different measures were introduced to
mitigate the disastrous impact of the conscription of
children on society, conscription that undermines the
social contract that links the security forces to the
civilian populations that they are supposed to protect. It is
imperative to ensure accountability for the perpetrators
of such atrocities. The success of the difficult process
of reconciliation depends on that. The determination of
warlords to continue to carry out abominable crimes
should be countered by our unshakable will and our
collective responsibility to halt impunity and to ensure
that justice is served. We owe this to the victims; we
owe this to current and future generations.

In conclusion, I wish to highlight the importance
of establishing a holistic strategy that takes into
account all of the elements I have mentioned. I would
like to reaffirm Senegal's determination to continue
to contribute to the work of eliminating this scourge.
That is how we will see the peaceful and inclusive
societies advocated in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1).

