Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen): I have the distinct honour
to speak on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC) on an important topic, namely the
Israeli military bombardment and starvation of the
Palestinian people.

But, it would be remiss of me if not to first
convey warm congratulations to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We are certain that, given your
diplomatic experience and your knowledge of the
issues, you will guide the Security Council's work to a
successful conclusion. Let me take this opportunity
also to express gratitude to the delegation of Argentina
for its fine handling of the Security Council's work
during its presidency last month.

I will refrain from repeating the arguments I
made on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference on this issue at the Security Council
meeting held on Thursday, 30 March 2006 (see S/PV.5404). Suffice it to reiterate the following points.

The resumption of the massive Israeli
bombardment of the Palestinian people in the Gaza
Strip, the extrajudicial killings and the policy of
starving the Palestinian people are motivated by the
erroneous belief that such policies might lead to the
capitulation of the Palestinian people and the
imposition of a unilateral settlement that would
disadvantage the Palestinian people and benefit the
occupier.

We in the Organization of the Islamic Conference
believe that those policies are misguided and will not
lead to a sustained, peaceful settlement of the dispute.
Quite the contrary - they will result in greater
bloodshed and instability in a region in dire need, and,
I daresay, will, in the final analysis, benefit neither the
occupier nor the occupied.

For peace to prevail, Israel, the occupying Power,
must be made to respect its obligations under the
Fourth Geneva Convention and the relevant norms of
international humanitarian law, and it must desist
forthwith from carrying out these misguided policies.

The intensification of the military campaign
against the Palestinian people in the occupied
territories, including East Jerusalem, as well as the
policy of blocking the import by the Palestinian
Authority of necessary food commodities, have no
explanation other than to punish the Palestinian people
for exercising their inalienable right to select their
representatives in free and fair elections.

We do not believe that this is the correct message
to send to the region. The international community is
therefore in duty bound not to condone a policy that
penalizes a people for exercising their right to free
choice. Therefore the Security Council - as the organ
entrusted with the preservation of international peace
and security and the body considered as the
cornerstone of the international order - must not fail
in its duty to put an end to Israel's aggression against
the Palestinian people.

Finally, it is our conviction that if peace is to
prevail in the tormented, vital region of the Middle
East, no country must be treated as if it were above the
law.

