Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): On
behalf of my delegation, I should like to express to
you, Sir, our pleasure to see you presiding over the
Security Council during the month of December. Qatar
is a country whose awareness of issues concerning
peace and security as they relate to civilian populations
needs no further proof. Your country has expressed its
commitment in that regard on numerous occasions,
particularly with respect to the upheavals that have
recently characterized the Middle East crisis.

I would also like to commend the Ambassador of
Peru and his team for the very professional job that
they did in presiding over the Council last month.

We would like to thank you, Sir, for beginning
your term at the head of the Council by taking the
initiative to hold this debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict - an issue whose
importance is clearly reflected in the number and the
06-6406]
gravity of situations in the world today that,
increasingly, highlight the vulnerability of civilians.

Mr. Jan Egeland briefed us with the expertise and
depth for which he is known, and our Organization has
every interest in making use of that information.

The most recent statistics put at 27 million the
number of people affected by war or similar disasters
in 29 countries throughout the world. These people are
described as refugees or displaced persons, and their
numbers clearly demonstrate the scope of this growing
phenomenon. No continent has been spared. Asia,
southern Europe, the Middle East and Africa have all
been affected, and it is women and children who are
the most vulnerable.

Armed conflicts are man-made catastrophes,
unlike so-called natural disasters - although the latter
can often be directly or indirectly attributed to human
responsibility. They have physical, moral and legal
consequences that affect the integrity, freedom and
basic rights of individuals.

With respect to conflict situations - which we
are dealing with here - the protection of civilians has
been made one of the core principles of international
humanitarian law. Accordingly, civilians who are not
taking part in hostilities should not under any
circumstance be attacked. Rather, they must be spared
and protected. That is set forth in specific international
instruments, including the 1949 Geneva Conventions
and the Additional Protocols thereto of 1977, as well as
Security Council resolution 1674 (2006). We must,
more than ever, ensure that concrete measures are in
place for follow up and compliance with those
instruments.

The Secretary-General launched a consolidated
appeal for 2007 to provide $3.9 billion in humanitarian
assistance to protect the thousands of persons in need.
We thank him for that.

I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the efforts made by a number of countries, in particular
Sweden, which is the only country to have devoted
0.05 per cent of its gross domestic product to
humanitarian assistance. We call upon other countries
not to weaken their commitments at a time of
increasing need for civilians affected by armed conflict
or natural disasters.
Another important aspect is the urgent need to
provide assistance to non-belligerent parties. I am

06-6406]

referring to the work done, often at great sacrifice and
with great courage, by intergovernmental organizations
such as the International Committee of the Red Cross
and the Office of High Commissioner for Refugees
and, increasingly, non-governmental organizations. We
must protect the men and women who work for those
organizations, who, often at great danger to their own
lives, provide assistance and hope to those who are in
need. We would like to pay them a well-deserved
tribute. We must increase awareness of the need to
provide optimal security conditions for humanitarian
workers so that they can carry out their noble mission.

The obligation to protect civilians rests above all
with Governments. Governments must therefore do
everything in their power to provide the most effective
protection to all those for whom they are responsible,
as the legitimate power invested with the necessary
latitude to provide for their citizens - as well as for
their partners - the highest possible level of security.

In this Chamber on 28 November, we discussed
the plight of children caught up in armed conflict. By
expanding the scope of the application of international
conventions to all innocent civilians, we are seeking to
highlight the importance of extending the rule of law.

At a time when so-called conventional wars
against what used to be called enemy armies or enemy
nations are often outnumbered by so-called civil
conflicts, there is a dangerous blurring of the line
between outright crime and what is euphemistically
called collateral damage. We can see that in Darfur,
with the sad and bloody escalation of conflict
orchestrated by armed groups with questionable
motives and a Sudanese Government whose
powerlessness verges on indifference and whose
nervousness borders on abdication of responsibility in
the face of atrocities that are becoming increasingly
intolerable.

In Africa, the conflict in Darfur is well on the
way to becoming the prototype of a situation
characterized by the denial of justice and by cynicism
that goes against the most basic values of human
dignity. It is true that a new chapter has begun - or is
about to begin - in Sierra Leone and Liberia, then in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where terrible
atrocities had been reported, as well as with regard to
the disastrous toll wrought by the Lord's Resistance
Army in northern Uganda.
The Security Council has on a number of
occasions deplored the fate of populations in the
Middle East, who are victims of military blunders or of
acts of terrorism, such as those directed at bewildered
civilians in Lebanon, Israel, Palestine and Iraq.
Likewise, in the former Yugoslavia, the international
community in recent years strongly deplored the
heinous crimes.

In such cases, as in others, the international
community is confronted by two different obligations
that, however, are not incompatible: the obligation to
prevent, and the obligation to act. My delegation, as
Chair of the Security Council Working Group on
conflict prevention, is currently working to determine
the various factors that might enable the Council to
work out a practical approach to help to prevent
conflicts whose main victims are civilians.

In conclusion, I would like to say that today's
discussion gives us an opportunity on the one hand to
reaffirm our shared commitment to the provisions of
international humanitarian law aimed at protecting
civilians in armed conflict - they must be protected in
all circumstances - and, on the other, to consider what
actions can be taken at a number of levels, as well as
their impact on the people involved.

In other words, we must prevent man-made
disasters from amplifying the effects of natural
disasters in a world already left so poorly protected by
human ambitions. But that is for another debate. For
the time being, we express our support for the draft
presidential statement, to which we will give
favourable consideration.

