The President (spoke in Arabic): Under rule 39
of the Security Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, to participate in this
meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Before I give the floor to Mr. Pascoe, I should
like to make some brief introductory remarks in my
national capacity as the Prime Minister of Lebanon.

I am pleased to participate in this meeting today. I
have come from a region where the winds of change
are blowing. Indeed, yesterday the Palestinian Spring
train left the station, with its people asking for an end
to decades of historical injustice and continued
occupation; appealing to the world to recognize the
Palestinians" right to have, as do all the peoples of the
world, an independent State on their land; and
requesting that such a State take its normal and natural
place as a full Member of the United Nations. This is
but an expression of the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination - a right that
was endorsed by the General Assembly more than a
quarter of a century ago.

Palestine, as all here may well know, meets all
the criteria required to become a State under
international law: a people, a land, a Government and
the ability to establish relations with other States. But
it is an occupied State, and we must therefore support
the efforts of the State of Palestine and its people to
end the occupation, achieve independence and return to
their homeland.

The Palestinians have chosen negotiations over
what have become known as final-status issues,
namely, Jerusalem, refugees, security, borders,
settlements and water. Those negotiations are still
coming up against Israel's negativity and intransigence.
The greatest danger to the future of peace on the land
of Palestine is posed by Israel's practices - its
violations of international law and of the resolutions of
2
the United Nations. It continues its settlement
activities, expelling people, demolishing homes and
confiscating land as well as controlling water
resources. It continues to build the separation wall and
to change the geographic and demographic features of
East Jerusalem, in an attempt to erase its Arab identity.

At their summit meeting held in Beirut in 2002,
the Arabs unanimously adopted a strategic decision to
achieve a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East on the basis of resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973), the Madrid terms of reference and the
principle of land for peace. That decision later became
known as the Arab Peace Initiative, which was
launched by the Saudi monarch, King Abdullah Bin
Abdulaziz A1 Saud, and endorsed by the countries of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference.

Such a comprehensive peace must also include
the full withdrawal of Israel from the occupied Syrian
Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967, in implementation
of international resolutions and under resolution 497
(1981), which declares null and void any act by Israel
that changes the legal, physical or demographic status
of the Golan.

In that context, Lebanon supports the right of
Syria to recover all its occupied land. Lebanon, having
witnessed the events in Syria today, reaffirms that it
wishes to see the territorial integrity of Syria and its
people and the safety and security of its citizens.

As far as Lebanon is concerned, a comprehensive
peace requires a full Israeli withdrawal from all
occupied Lebanese territory in the south, especially the
Shab'a farms, the Kfar Shuba hills and the northern
part of Al-Ghajar village. In that context, we reaffirm
Lebanon's commitment to resolution 1701 (2006) and
all its provisions. We reiterate our call on the
international community to bring pressure to bear on
Israel to fulfil its obligations under the resolution,
including full withdrawal; an end to its violations of
Lebanese sovereignty by land, sea and air; and
transitioning from a halt in hostilities to a full ceasefire
and complete cooperation with the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIF IL) in delineating the
remainder of the Blue Line. Lebanon reaffirms its right
to delineate its own maritime borders and to exploit the
natural resources, especially oil and gas, in its
territorial waters and exclusive economic zone.

Here, I pay tribute to the forces of UNIFIL and
reiterate Lebanon's condemnation of all aggression
11-5165]
against them. I honour their sacrifices and affirm the
ongoing cooperation and coordination between the
Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL, which will
always be welcome in the Lebanese South.

With respect to Lebanon's international relations,
I confirm the statement made a few days ago by
President Sleiman of the Lebanese Republic to the
General Assembly, to the effect that Lebanon, a
founding Member of the United Nations that respects
the primacy of international law, is fully committed to
respecting all resolutions of international legitimacy,
including those relating to the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon, in accordance with the ministerial statements
issued by successive Lebanese Governments.

We hope that the Security Council will always be
a bulwark of defence of the weak against the strong
and the victim against the usurper. Members of the
Council may rest assured that Lebanon will always
seek the path of justice towards peace and remain a
land of freedom, convergence and moderation.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Pascoe.

