Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank the High
Representative, Mr. Lajcak, for his briefing and

appreciates his efforts to promote the political process
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I also wish to welcome to
today's meeting His Excellency Mr. Nikola Spirie,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and to thank him for his statement.

Since last year, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
taken positive measures in the areas of police reform,
economic development, consolidating the rule of law
and national integration. The political process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has continued to yield
progress. However, elements of instability still exist.
Susceptible to developments in neighbouring regions,
the situation remains volatile and sensitive, as pointed
out by the High Representative in his report.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is uniquely vulnerable to
political instability in the region, as it and Kosovo are
closely related to each other in terms of geography,
history, religion and ethnicity. Kosovo's unilateral
declaration of independence on 17 February has had a
negative impact on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, leading to a number of worrisome
developments. China believes that all parties concerned
should, in considering relevant issues, remain focused
on the long-term peace and stability of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and of the Balkan region as a whole.

China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We hope that all
parties will, in accordance with the Dayton Agreement,
work together in a spirit of sincerity to promote the
political process and to make greater progress in the
fields of constitutional reform and institution-building,
with a view to maintaining lasting stability and
prosperity in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

China welcomes the prospects for the integration
of Bosnia and Herzegovina into the European Union
(EU). We believe that the High Representative should
continue his extensive consultations with all the parties
and, on the basis of the mandates provided for by the
Dayton Agreement, urge Bosnia and Herzegovina to
take constructive measures so that major steps can be
taken on its path towards joining the EU.

Meanwhile, we welcome the important role that
the EU continues to play in safeguarding security and
stability and promoting economic and social
development in Bosnia and Herzegovina. China will
continue to support the High Representative in carrying
out his mandate and is prepared to join the rest of the
international community in providing the assistance
necessary for the achievement of lasting peace,
stability and development in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

