Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I will say a few words on
behalf of the co-penholders, Sweden and Kuwait, and
follow up with a few remarks in my national capacity
as the representative of Sweden.

With the adoption of resolution 2449 (2018) today,
the Security Council has upheld its obligation to millions
of people in Syria. On behalf of the co-penholders,
Kuwait and Sweden, I strongly welcome this decision.
The renewal of the modalities of resolution 2165 (2015)
for an additional 12 months will continue to save lives
and alleviate suffering every day in Syria. The United
Nations does not have an alternative route for reaching
those people in need. It is an existential lifeline.

While the situation on the ground has changed much
over the past year, the humanitarian needs unfortunately
remain enormous. There are millions ofpeople who still
depend on humanitarian assistance. This resolution is
about ensuring that they receive assistance through the
most direct routes and that the relief reaches as many
people as possible throughout the country. The United
Nations cross-border operations, based on resolution
2165 (2015), are necessary as long as the humanitarian
needs remain and humanitarian access from within the
country is impeded.

As a co-penholder together with Kuwait, our
compass has been defined by the humanitarian
imperative to act. Over the past weeks, we have
consulted all members of the Council and other
stakeholders, including Syria and the neighbouring
countries. We have been committed to facilitating a
fair, impartial and transparent negotiations process. It
is well known that there are different perspectives on
the Syrian conflict in the Council and that discussions
can sometimes be heated. The adoption of today's
resolution demonstrates, however, that in the face of
urgent needs Council members can come together to
shoulder a collective responsibility.

On behalf of the co-penholders, I would like to
thank the representatives of all delegations for their
constructive engagement during the negotiations
on resolution 2449 (2018). I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and his team here
in New York for their support. Most important, I would
like to pay tribute to the staff of the United Nations
humanitarian agencies and their implementing partners
for their tireless efforts to help the Syrian people.

At this point, I would like to say a few words in
my capacity as the representative of Sweden. The
Charter of the United Nations places the people at the
forefront, but, far too often, the people are forgotten
or neglected during our deliberations in the Council.
Our meetings on the humanitarian situation in Syria
serve as a reminder that the Syrian conflict needs to
be first and foremost about the Syrian people. The
conflict in Syria has led to a humanitarian disaster,
with consequences far beyond Syria's borders. As the
conflict enters its eighth winter, 13 million people
are in need of humanitarian assistance and more than
5 million of them are children. Six million people
are displaced within Syria, many of whom have been
forced to flee more than once, and a further 5 million
have fled to neighbouring countries. Without a doubt,
a very heavy responsibility for this disaster inevitably
rests with the Government of Syria - something that
the international community will not forget.

For years, the Council has dealt with one crisis after
another in Syria - each a humanitarian catastrophe
in its own right. The conflict has been characterized
throughout by a blatant disregard for human dignity.
Homs, Aleppo and eastern Ghouta will not be forgotten.
Idlib, where 3 million civilians are trapped with no
safe place to flee, could yet be added to that list. It
is key to uphold the fragile ceasefire in Idlib, where
a military offensive would most likely result in a new
humanitarian disaster of unimaginable proportions.
We urge the Astana guarantors - Russia, Turkey and
Iran - to ensure that the ceasefire is upheld and that
civilians are protected.

The Council has on numerous occasions called on the
parties - in particular the Syrian authorities - to allow
safe, sustained and unhindered humanitarian access.
Yet substantial and arbitrary obstacles remain, which
are hindering the delivery of humanitarian assistance
throughout Syria. That includes areas that have
recently been retaken by Government forces and their
allies. Even if an occasional humanitarian convoy is
allowed to reach those most in need, the fact is that
the humanitarian actors do not have the access that the
Council has repeatedly demanded.

Syria is a clear case in point in which the international
legal order - built over decades to protect the most
vulnerable in times of conflict - has come under
threat. We have witnessed frequent violations of the
rules and principles of international humanitarian law.
We have witnessed indiscriminate attacks in densely
populated areas. We have witnessed the deliberate
targeting of schools and hospitals, as well as attacks
on humanitarian workers and medical personnel. And
we have witnessed, over and over again, the refusal
to grant humanitarian access to people in need of
assistance. The integrity of the international legal order
depends on our continuing to seek ways to ensure that
those responsible for those crimes are brought to justice
and held accountable.

During its two years on the Council, Sweden has
repeatedly underlined the importance of upholding
international law, including international humanitarian
law, international human rights law and international
refugee law, whether in Syria, Yemen or South Sudan.
Upholding the international rules-based order is pivotal
both to preventing and terminating conflict. The rules
and principles of international humanitarian law aim
to limit the suffering and effects of war. We call on all
parties to the conflict to comply with their obligations
to ensure the protection of civilians and humanitarian
and medical personnel, and to respect and protect
civilian objects, hospitals and medical facilities.

When taking up the co-penholdership for Syria
and the humanitarian track, Sweden clearly stated
that its commitment would be to the Syrian people
and humanitarian principles. We have sought to
depoliticize humanitarian matters and focus on the
humanitarian imperative to act. Nevertheless, we will
leave the Council with a strong sense of frustration. We
fully understand those who claim that the international
community has time and time again failed the Syrian
people. Yet, today's adoption of resolution 2449 (2018)
proves that when there is political will, the Security
Council can make a real difference on the ground for
millions of people.
I wish to pay tribute to Kuwait, our co-penholder,
for its excellent cooperation and, of course, to Egypt
and Japan, with whom we shared penholdership in
2017. I take this opportunity to affirm Sweden's full
commitment to continuing its strong and whole-hearted
engagement to alleviate the humanitarian suffering
in Syria and our support for neighbouring countries
affected by the crisis. The humanitarian community
has undertaken a Herculean task and we commend the
courageous and selfless efforts of all humanitarian
workers on the ground. Too many have paid with
their lives throughout the conflict. The humanitarian
appeal for Syria remains significantly underfunded,
as we have just heard. This year alone, Sweden has
contributed more than $50 million to the response in
Syria. We must all do our share in making sure that the
humanitarian agencies can continue to carry out their
critical work to help the Syrian people.

Finally, we express our full support for the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and its assessment that the conditions for the safe,
voluntary and dignified return of refugees are not yet
in place. It falls to the Syrian authorities to ensure
that those conditions are created. We also reiterate our
concern that the humanitarian situation will continue
to deteriorate in the absence of a political solution in
line with resolution 2254 (2015), which must be Syrian-
owned and Syrian-led, including the full and effective
representation of women. That is the only path to
sustainable peace and stability. We look forward to
hearing from Mr. Staffan de Mistura on that point next
week.

