The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

I would like to thank the Presidents and the
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their
introduction of the reports (see S/2009/252 and S/2009/247). Turkey acknowledges the progress made
by both Tribunals in the implementation of their
completion strategies. We commend the strong
commitment by the judges, the Prosecutors and the
entire staff of the ICTY and the ICTR to meet the
timelines set by the Security Council. However, it is
clear that neither of the Tribunals is able to meet the
target dates envisaged in the completion strategies. We
thus encourage the Tribunals to continue their efforts to
expedite the proceedings, without prejudice to the
principle ofa fair trial.

On the other hand, we should bear in mind that
speedy realization of the completion strategies does not
solely rely on the work carried out by the ICTY and the
ICTR. In particular, additional measures need to be
taken by the Security Council to match the judicial
capacity of the Tribunals with current circumstances.
Turkey is ready to support every step in that direction.

Cooperation is another essential element of the
successful completion of the Tribunal's work. Despite
a certain amount of progress, we have regretfully noted
that the number of fugitives has remained unchanged
since the last biannual reports of the Tribunals. In that
regard, we wish to appeal to all States to fully
cooperate with the Tribunals, particularly in the pursuit
and arrest of fugitives. All those responsible for
violations of international humanitarian law in the
territories of the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda must
be brought to justice.

Finally, referral of cases to national jurisdictions
also plays an important role in the fulfilment of the
Tribunals' mandates. Here too, we would like to appeal
to the international community to provide support,
wherever necessary, in order to strengthen the capacity
of national institutions of the countries concerned.

In conclusion, the Tribunals have so far made
important contributions to international criminal
justice. However, as we are now approaching their
closure date, much needs to be done regarding legacy
and residual issues. In that regard, we very much
appreciate the dedicated work of the informal working
group on the international tribunals to resolve the
remaining outstanding issues in the coming months
under its Austrian Chair.

Once again, I would like to thank the Presidents,
the judges, the Prosecutors and all other officials of the
Tribunals for their determined work and their efforts to
end impunity.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the Permanent
Representative of Serbia. Allow me to welcome him in
his new assignment and to wish him continued success.

