Mr. Jallow: I would also like to thank the
President and the members of the Council for their
support for the Tribunals. I too have been heartened by
the responses we have heard concerning some of the
specific issues and difficulties we have raised. I would
like to respond to two issues that have been raised.

I would first like to address the issue of the
investigations into the Rwandese Patriotic Front (RPF),
which was raised by the representatives of Romania,
France and the United States. We are deeply aware of
the fact that the investigation of those allegations falls
within our mandate and our duty at the Tribunal. We
are also conscious that the Security Council is
currently concerned about this particular issue.
Investigations have been conducted over a period of
many years.

At this stage, as I mentioned to counsellors at the
last meeting, we are not conducting any more
investigations, but we have started a process of
assessing what material has been gathered over the
years in order for me to be able to determine what
cases exist - and against whom - with regard to
those particular allegations of Rwandese Patriotic
Front (RPF) involvement. I have indicated to the
Rwanda authorities themselves that I am assessing the
material at the moment and will get back to them to
advise them of the outcome of my assessment in due
course. This will hopefully take place early in the year.
That is the situation as far as the RPF is concerned.

On the issue of the transfers, the assumption by
the Ambassador of the United Kingdom is quite
accurate, that out of the 41 persons or dossiers that are
earmarked for possible transfer to national jurisdiction,
the bulk would be directed to Rwanda, subject to the
conditions being satisfied for a transfer to be effected
by the Trial Chamber. Under the rules, the Trial
Chamber will make an order for transfer only if it is
satisfied that the person will have the benefit of a fair
trial in the country concerned and would not be subject
to greater penalty than he would have been subjected to
if he had been tried at the Tribunal. This means, for
instance, that the death penalty would be a bar to any
possible transfer.

The bulk of the transfers are identified for
Rwanda, largely for two reasons. First, it is the place
where the offences were committed, and secondly, it is
not proving easy to find other candidate countries that
are willing to accept these cases or that are able to
accept them without additional resources being
provided. Resources may have to be provided even in
the case of Rwanda, particularly with regard to the
establishment of a court that will handle the cases
when they are transferred. I have already initiated
discussions with Rwandan authorities and indicated to
them what measures need to be taken on the ground in
Rwanda in order to enable the Prosecutor to submit an
application to the Trial Chambers for an order for
transfer.

Among the measures, of course, is the fact that
we need to have a court in place in Rwanda that is
effective and operational and that can handle the cases.
We need to have an appropriate legal regime that will
guarantee a fair trial and will also cover the offences
that are within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. We also
need to have legislation in place that will exclude the
application of the death penalty to any of those
persons, if they were to be convicted after transfer. I
believe those issues are receiving the close attention of
the Government of Rwanda at the moment. As the
President has indicated, we believe the issue of the
death penalty should no longer pose a problem. There
has been an indication that it would be excluded in
relation to these cases.

The Tribunal itself, of course, cannot provide
resources to any country that wishes to take these cases
through transfer. We do not have the resources. What
we can provide, however, is training for their staff. We
have a number of Rwandan staff in the Office of the
Prosecutor and in other branches of the Tribunal. This
staff will be able to return to Rwanda and help there
with the handling of the cases. We have also indicated
that we are willing to take, on secondment, their own
prosecutorial staff in my Office over a period of time
and then release them to subsequently assist with the
handling of these cases. That is the situation at the
moment. Once the Rwandan side has attended to these
measures, we should then be able to proceed to make
the necessary applications in early 2005 for the Trial
Chambers to decide on the question of transfer.

I believe these were the two issues that were
raised specifically for my attention. I would like to
express my gratitude for your support and cooperation,
Mr. President, as well as for the support and
cooperation of all the members of the Council.

