Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): 1 am grateful for the opportunity to
participate in this Security Council debate.

We have listened closely to a number of statements
in the course of today's meeting that have served to
enrich this debate on the aspects that cause journalists
in armed conflict zones to be put in harm's way; the
need to distinguish between journalists and activists;
and the need to implement measures at the State level
and within the international community to protect the
lives of those individuals.

The Plurinational State ofBolivia ofcourse endorses
the language of resolution 1738 (2006), adopted in
December 2012, indicating that journalists, media
communications professionals and associated personnel
carrying out dangerous professional activities within
armed conflict zones should be considered as civilians
and afforded respect and protection as such. Since the
resolution was adopted, the safety of journalists in
armed conflict has been a matter of concern for the
Council and the entire United Nations.

Year after year, we learn that a growing number of
media professionals have been killed. We have heard
the Deputy Secretary-General state that 600 journalists
have been killed in the past decade and that, in over
90 per cent of those cases, the perpetrators have gone
unpunished.

In addition to highlighting the contributions made
in today's debate, Bolivia would like to emphasize a
few other points concerning the risks that journalists
face and the situations that put them at risk. Clearly,
one of those is increased war propaganda, which uses
information as a further weapon in armed conflict.

I recall that two years ago, before the fall of the
then-President of Libya, Al-Qadhafi, a number of
international news networks were transmitting images
of the arrival of the then-rebels in Tripoli's Green
Square. Soon afterwards, we learned that it had all
been staged, as if on a film set, and then broadcast
by a number of television networks. That type of war
propaganda - using journalism as an instrument - is
also one of the factors putting the lives ofjournalists
and media personnel at risk.

The second factor involves something mentioned
today by the representative of Argentina, namely, the
difficult, precarious working conditions in which many
journalists are forced to carry out their tasks, putting
their lives at risk. However, it also involves the economic
interests behind the major global communications
networks that, in many instances, are linked to one of
the parties to a given armed conflict. Rather than being
objective, neutral and impartial, they become a part
of the conflict, distorting reality and thereby putting
journalists at risk.

The third aspect I would like to mention in terms
of danger to the lives of journalists has already been
touched on by my colleagues from Brazil and Ecuador
and relates to a decision made by the Common Market
of the South that clearly condemns the massive
surveillance discovered worldwide in recent weeks.
Such espionage can also put journalists at risk, in that
their sources might be exposed; while it also endangers
their physical well-being and their work as journalists.

We fully agree with the need for the United Nations
to work to develop institutional structures to ensure
global governance of digital communication networks,
which, unfortunately, at the moment, reside either in
private hands or under the control of a handfull of
States.

Addressing the protection of journalists surely
involves the freedom of expression, which is recognized
under international law and by the vast majority of
the constitutions of the States Members of the United
Nations. But beyond freedom of expression there is also
freedom of the press, both of which concern journalists
and media professionals. However, those freedoms also
entail a fundamental counter-weight, which is the right
of societies to communicate and to receive information.
That right must therefore also be considered and
protected.

Recent months have proved that the flow of
information, which has revealed to the global public the
existence of massive, systematic and broad-reaching
spying networks, has exposed a situation that not only
endangers journalists or those providing information,
but that also threatens Heads of State members of the
United Nations. The arrogance of some has reached
such a level that it risks not only the lives ofjournalists,
but beyond that, the life of a Head of State - as in the
case of President Evo Morales Ayma. Some countries
denied him the right to overfly their airspace, while
others allowed him to do so on the condition that the
presidential plane, which, as everyone knows, enjoys
both immunity and inviolability, be inspected.

All of those issues are intimately related, forming
part ofthe same design. In that sense, we believe that it is
important, on the stage of the United Nations, to debate
on equal footing those topics related to strengthening
democracy, international governance and, indeed, the
Organization itself.

