Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to thank Mr. John Holmes for his
presentation and our colleague the Permanent
Representative of Chad for his statement. Those two
statements remind us of a harsh reality. The situation of
the civilian population in Darfur and in the border
region of Chad remains tragic, and it is on that subject
that I should like to focus my remarks.

First, I should like to address several problems
that arise both in the context of the Sudan and in that
of Chad. France's primary concern relates to the impact
of banditry and the acts of armed groups on the
security of humanitarian personnel. John Holmes quite
rightly stressed that point. We firmly condemn those
attacks, and those responsible for them must be held
accountable. In that regard, we should recall the
primary responsibility of host countries for the
protection and security of humanitarian personnel.

My second observation concerns the need to
respect the civilian and humanitarian nature of the
camps; the problem arises in Chad as well as in Darfur.
It is unacceptable that armed groups recruit within the
camps. I would add that that in no way justifies attacks
by Sudanese Government forces against the camps, as
we saw in Darfur at Kalma three months ago. That
situation illustrates the need on both sides of the border
for operations that can effectively protect the
population and create a safe environment so as to
permit the delivery of humanitarian aid and access by
the population to that aid. We will shortly have the
opportunity to revisit the subject of Chad when we
discuss the second United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT II).

My third observation concerns the recruitment of
child soldiers, which unfortunately continues to occur
on both sides of the border. France appeals to all
parties concerned to fully honour their obligations in
that regard and, in particular, to cooperate with the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict.

I should now like to make a second set of
comments, which apply more particularly to the case of
Sudan. We are very much committed to compliance by
all parties with their obligations under international
humanitarian law. I just referred to certain obligations
of armed groups. Moreover, we are particularly
disturbed to note that recently the Sudanese Armed
Forces and their auxiliary militias have continued,
despite the new announcement of a unilateral ceasefire
by President Al-Bashir, to carry out indiscriminate
attacks against civilian populations, including aerial
bombardments.
7

In that regard, this very morning, the Security
Council heard a very clear report from the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court, who referred to
continued grave and repeated violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law, in
particular against the most vulnerable populations,
women and children. Furthermore, I should like to
recall that the Council has demanded that the Sudanese
Armed Forces cease to use white aircraft, which are
easily confused with humanitarian and United Nations
aircraft. We note that the Sudanese Government
undertook clear commitments in that regard during the
meeting of the Tripartite Commission in October. We
attach the utmost importance to its full adherence to
those commitments.

I should also like to emphasize the need for the
cooperation of the Sudanese Government with
humanitarian workers. Darfur is the site of the largest
humanitarian operation in the world. It is unacceptable
that the Sudanese Government, which has failed to
carry out its responsibility to protect its own civilians,
should further aggravate the situation by impeding the
activities of humanitarian workers. We note that the
Sudanese authorities renewed the moratorium on
humanitarian access earlier than they did last year.

But in addition to that, they must put an end to
the bureaucratic red tape that non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) face daily from junior
administrative officials. This red tape is endless; NGOs
tell us about it every day. In particular, we deplore the
restrictions placed by the Government on the activities
of NGOs that have protection programmes, given the
scope of the needs in Darfur, where the victims of
Violence - particularly sexual violence - are
innumerable and continuously increasing. In all those
areas, the Sudanese authorities, like all the parties, will
be judged by their actions, not by their intentions.

Finally, I wish to refer briefly to Chad. First, I
refer to the assessment made by Mr. John Holmes,
according to whom, despite the difficulties that persist,
the situation has improved. France and the European
Union - which, together with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
Government of Chad, were involved in the
establishment of the MINURCAT operation - share in
that measured optimism. We highly commend the
mobilization of Chadian authorities and civil society
and the efforts of international organizations, the
8
United Nations and NGOs, supported by a very strong
European commitment.

Moreover, my delegation fully agrees with
Mr. Holmes's comment that the return of displaced
persons needs to be on a voluntary basis. Mr. Bernard
Kouchner, Minister for Foreign Affairs of France,
recently went to eastern Chad to evaluate the situation.
He had occasion to see for himself that voluntary
returns, while certainly still limited, were taking place
locally. The discussion about the voluntary nature of
returns cannot, however, be used as an excuse to
conceal the sometimes too slow response by certain
United Nations agencies in assisting returns through
appropriate emergency relief activities.

Finally, when the Council prepares to soon
discuss the resumption by the United Nations of the
European Union military operation - EUFOR - I
should like to offer France's support for Mr. Holmes's
observations about the importance of the international
presence and of the integrated Chadian security force
in the protection of civilian populations. We must not
waver in our efforts in that regard. Just a moment ago,
the Permanent Representative of Chad reiterated his
hope for the continued mobilization of the Security
Council. We must shoulder our responsibilities by
responding favourably to that request.

