The Secretary-General: I thank Kuwait and His
Excellency the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs, for this opportunity to brief
the Council.

I welcome two representatives of The Elders, former
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and former President
Mary Robinson. I also see before me the former
President ofColombia, His Excellency Mr. Juan Manuel
Santos Calderon. I welcome them to the Chamber today
and thank them for contributing with their personal
Wisdom to support to the debate.

Conflict prevention and mediation are two of the
most important tools at our disposal to reduce human
suffering. When we act early and are united, we can
successfully prevent crises from escalating, saving
lives, reducing suffering and fulfilling the most
fundamental mandate of the United Nations, as set out
in the Preamble to the Charter. We are working with
parties to conflict and other partners in regions and
countries around the world to further these aims.

There are some encouraging signs, including
successful constitutional transfers of power in Mali
and Madagascar. The rapprochement between Ethiopia
and Eritrea and the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan have also created a sense of renewed hope. And
after decades, the name issue in south-eastern Europe
was resolved with an agreement between Athens and
Skopje, allowing the designation of the Republic of
North Macedonia to be internationally recognized.

Elsewhere, we face serious challenges to our
efforts but we continue to push on all tracks. The
agreement reached in Stockholm by the parties to the
conflict in Yemen was an important step that must now
move to a negotiated settlement. My Special Envoy
is working extensively with the parties to support the
implementation of the Al-Hudaydah agreement and to
prevent a return to open conflict as a basic condition
to allow political negotiations to take place afterwards.

In the Central African Republic, the United
Nations is helping the parties to implement the African
Union-mediated Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation, conducting robust operations to
ensure armed groups' adherence to the agreement
and facilitating local peace accords. And in Burkina
Faso, we are working with a wide range of national
stakeholders, including civil society and women's
groups, to strengthen local infrastructures for peace
as part of the response to rising sectarian Violence
and terrorism.

Despite these efforts, peace faces enormous
obstacles. Divisions in the international community
mean that wars continue to rage as external actors dither
or even fuel the violence. Civilians pay the price. The
fragmentation of non-State armed groups and militias
causes even greater chaos. There is a resurgence of
populism and policies that contribute to resentment,
marginalization and extremism, even in societies that
are not at war. There are attempts in some countries to
roll back human rights and the progress that has been
made over recent decades on gender and inclusion.
Space for civil society is shrinking.

My Special Representative in Libya has detailed
to the Council the heavy toll in human lives resulting
from armed clashes and fighting in that country and the
lack of moral motivation to end the war. He is working
for a ceasefire and a return to the negotiating table.

The continuing crisis in Venezuela and its
humanitarian impact are a grave concern. I support
ongoing international efforts to find a peaceful,
negotiated solution reached by the main Venezuelan
political actors, and have been closely following the
process in Norway. My good offices remain available
to support serious negotiations, when required, by
the parties.

In Syria, we face a scenario of ongoing cycles of
instability, Violence and suffering. We cannot have a
sustainable peace if different parties continue to conduct
military operations in the country. There is no military
solution to the conflict. Without a comprehensive
political solution, based on resolution 2254 (2015), that
addresses the root causes ofinstability, Syria will never
know stability or peace. My Special Envoy for Syria is
working to build trust with all parties, to signal that a
future that takes into account the legitimate needs and
aspirations of all Syrians is possible, and to launch a
credible and balanced constitutional committee to open
the door to a Syrian-led political process, facilitated by
the United Nations.

Chapter VI ofthe Charter ofthe United Nations sets
out a broad range of tools for parties to use to prevent
and resolve conflict. These include

"negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional
agencies or arrangements, or other peace means of
their own choice".

I urge Governments to make full use of these tools and
the Council to use its own authority to call on parties
to pursue them.

My own good offices and those of my envoys aim
to help parties peacefully resolve differences. Members
of my High-level Advisory Board on Mediation have
provided discreet counsel to me and my representatives
on various political processes. Our mediation advisers
on the Standby Team have supported processes from
Afghanistan to South Sudan, Papua New Guinea
to Syria. We have also deepened our strategic and
operational partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations, with a particular emphasis on Africa.
From the Central African Republic to South Sudan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Madagascar,
increased interaction with the African Union has
fostered trust and enabled us to supportjoint approaches
and viable solutions.
The United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia is working to resolve
transboundary issues and to implement our Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Our peacekeeping
operations and special political missions undertake
vital conflict prevention and resolution efforts. In some
situations, the prospect or application of well-targeted
sanctions regimes, in accordance with the United
Nations Charter, can help move parties towards peace.

Sustainable development is an end in itself, but it is
also one of the most effective tools we have to prevent
conflict. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
is our blueprint for creating resilient, stable societies and
for addressing the root causes of violence of all kinds.
This means a strong focus on inclusivity, with a special
emphasis on mainstreaming women's rights and gender
equality across our prevention and mediation work.

Progress on women's participation in formal peace
processes is still lagging. We will continue to use
creative strategies to advance women's participation,
building on previous efforts, including the Syrian
Women's Advisory Board and the Yemeni Women's
Technical Advisory Group. Regional women mediators'
networks like the African Union's FemWise-Africa
network are an important development. My High-level
Advisory Board on Mediation is available to support
their efforts.

Some 600 million young people living in fragile
and conflict-affected States have a vital contribution to
make to mediation and peacebuilding processes. The
first International Symposium for Youth Participation
in Peace Processes, held earlier this year, was an
important step forward. Independent actors and
non-governmental organizations, including The
Elders, who are represented here today, are a critical
complementary element to our efforts.

The human and financial costs of conflict are high
and rising. Forced displacement is at the highest levels
since the Second World War and hunger is resurgent
after years of decline. We cannot afford to reduce
the energy and resources we invest in prevention
and mediation.

But let us not fool ourselves. Prevention and
mediation will not work without broader political
efforts. I urge Council members and all Member States
to strive for greater unity so as to ensure that prevention
and mediation efforts are as effective as possible. That
is the only way to meet our responsibilities to the
peoples we serve.

