Mr. Eler (Turkey): Allow me first to thank you,
Sir, for organizing this open debate. I would also like
to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his comprehensive briefing.

Amid the ongoing turmoil in the Middle East, the
Palestinian question continues to lie at the heart of the
challenges that we face in the region. Turkey has always
supported a two-State solution based on the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as the capital of the State
of Palestine, sitting side by side with us on an equal
footing under this roof and living side by side in peace
and security with Israel. The revival of the Middle
East peace process and the successful completion of
comprehensive peace negotiations between the parties
for ajust and lasting solution have become increasingly
critical against the backdrop of the recent developments
in the region.

The denial of the right of the Palestinians to have
a State of their own has no justification on any moral,
political or legal grounds. In the absence ofan immediate
and comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question,
the prospects for regional peace, cooperation and well-
being will be only an elusive dream.

In this respect, we welcome and support the ongoing
peace talks that were relaunched last July by the
Palestinian and Israeli leadership. We also appreciate
the commitment and efforts of the United States
Secretary of State. We view as a positive development
the statement issued by the Quartet in September on its
determination to lend effective support to the efforts of
the parties and commitment to reaching a permanent
status agreement within nine months. However, it is
also apparent that the window of opportunity for a
comprehensive solution narrows as time goes by. We
cannot afford to miss another opportunity for peace and
stability in the region.

We therefore encourage the parties to continue
negotiations in a sincere, decisive and dedicated manner
and to vigilantly avoid actions that might jeopardize
the process. The parties must act in good faith, build
confidence through a settlement freeze, prisoner
release and security arrangements for both sides. We
also believe that any provocative step against holy
sites, especially the Al-Aqsa Mosque, must be avoided.
I would like to reiterate once again that, as always,
Turkey, is ready to contribute to all international efforts
towards a just and lasting settlement.

We are concerned, however, by Israel's continuing
illegal settlement activities in occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. Israel's
expansionist policy remains a major obstacle to
meaningful negotiations and undermines the prospects
for a negotiated two-State solution. We are dismayed by
the approval of more than 3,000 settlement units since
the announcement of the resumption of the negotiations.
We continue to be worried by Israeli settler violence,
as reflected in land usurpation, the destruction of olive
trees and provocative actions against the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, together with the harsh measures taken by
Israeli security forces. Those actions may trigger a
widespread reaction and be detrimental to the ongoing
talks.

The situation of Palestinian prisoners, including
children and women, under Israeli custody remains
another source of concern. The Palestinian Ministry
of Detainees recently announced that currently
5,200 Palestinians were being kept in Israeli prisons,
detention camps and interrogation facilities. UNICEF's
latest report reveals ongoing violations against children
in Israeli military detention.

The international community must be firm
in its condemnation and rejection of those and
other unacceptable Israeli actions - inter alia,
restrictions on the freedom of movement of people
and goods - which constitute attempts to artificially
change the demographic and multicultural identity of
Jerusalem.

The illegal blockade of Gaza is another issue
of major concern. All restrictions on Gaza are
unsustainable and counterproductive. As the ceasefire
persists, a further easing of restrictions must follow.
The deteriorating economic, social and humanitarian
conditions in Gaza as a result of the restrictions
adversely affect the already fragile situation in the
region. We have noted with concern the recent reports
by various international organizations, including the
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and
United Nations agencies, that restrictions on Palestine
are the primary source of the continued deterioration of
the Palestinian economy.

Turkey has taken urgent action to alleviate some
emerging vital shortages, including providing fuel for
generators for critical services such health, water and
sanitation in Gaza. We have decided to send another
urgent dispatch of flour supplies to Gaza, amounting to
10,000 tons this year, via the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
the transfer of which will start on 28 October.

As part of the peace efforts, we welcome the
economic initiative of the Quartet, which aims at
bringing economic growth to the Palestinian economy.
However, any economic initiative alone cannot
be regarded as a substitute for a genuine political
settlement. Unless there is substantial progress towards
a just and lasting peace based on a two-State solution,
economic initiatives will hardly be a substitute for
freedom, independence and full sovereignty. Only
a political solution can pave the way to a sustainable
economic life and prosperity in Palestine.

In the meantime, Turkey will continue to fully
support Palestinian reconciliation, which we believe
constitutes one of the pillars for lasting peace in
the Middle East. We strongly support the goal of
establishing a unity Government that embraces the
Palestinian people as a whole.

The situation in Syria continues to be the greatest
humanitarian tragedy of the twenty-first century. The
crisis continues to threaten regional peace and security,
while inflicting a grave burden on Syria's neighbours.
The number of Syrians in neighbouring countries has
reached more than 2 million, 600,000 of whom are
currently in Turkey.
The report of the investigation mission that was
made public on 17 September serves to confirm our
general evaluation of the 21 August incident with regard
to the use of chemical weapons by the regime in Syria.
We welcome the fact that, following that report, the
Security Council was finally able to act in unity on the
issue of Syria, with a view to the elimination of Syria's
stockpiles of chemical weapons. We also welcome the
establishment of the United Nations-Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Joint Mission,
tasked with guiding that process. However, we firmly
believe that the rapid and unconditional implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013) is crucial and that there should
be consequences for noncompliance.

Having said that, the conflict in Syria neither began
with the use of chemical weapons, nor will it end with a
resolution to eliminate them. The agreement to destroy
Syria's chemical arsenal must not allow the regime to
avoid responsibility for its other crimes. We should not
lose sight of the fact that more than 100,000 people have
been killed by regime's use of conventional weapons.

There is therefore an immediate need for a political
solution that paves the way for a democratic transition
in accordance with the legitimate demands of the
Syrian people. We therefore repeat our support for the
establishment of a transitional governing body with full
executive authorities, in line with the provisions of the
Geneva final communique (S/2012/522, annex).

Let me conclude by reiterating that 2013 is a vital
year for peace in the Middle East. It is now time for
sincere and concrete action. We need to seize any
momentum that would help to revitalize the talks
between the parties and take concerted action towards
a two-State solution in accordance with United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the road map
and the Arab Peace Initiative. The success of future
efforts mainly depends upon the Israeli Government's
acceptance of the establishment of a viable, contiguous
Palestinian State. There is also a need for the presence
of a reconciled and unified Palestinian front under the
leadership of President Mahmoud Abbas. Turkey is
ready to contribute to all international efforts to that
end.

