Mr. Gambari: The presence of the Secretary-
General at this open meeting is a clear manifestation of
his personal commitment, as well as the institutional
commitment, to peace and the prospect of prosperity in
Angola. He has instructed that we in the Secretariat
must respond positively in addressing the several
important issues in Angola which will be discussed
today and in the future.

The Security Council's decision to hold an open
meeting on Angola is a very timely one. The people of
Angola have been deprived of peace for almost three
decades. On 11 November 2000 Angola will celebrate
its twenty-fifth anniversary of independence. But sadly,
in the last twenty-five years, Angolans have not
witnessed a single year of complete peace. On the
contrary, for a quarter of a century they have seen
destruction following destruction, countless deaths and
the loss of young people, waste of talent and atrocity
after atrocity.

The world has also seen several thousand
refugees and hundreds of thousands of internally
displaced persons in Angola. We have also seen
landmines take many lives and mutilate several others.
Indeed, mining of the territory of Angola has taken on
a cyclic character. For example, from 1994 to 1998
substantial progress was made in demining some of the
most affected areas of the Angolan territory. With the
resumption of war, however, landmines were again
planted in some areas that had previously been
demined and in some new areas, thus making it
difficult for the population to resettle and use the land
for farming, especially for food production.

Sadly, this is the overall picture of Angola that
remains in our minds. Yet, if peace is given a real
chance, Angola's endowment in mineral and human
resources provides the country with a great potential to
eradicate poverty in a relatively short period and
promote the well-being of all Angolans.

After all, Angola is an important oil-exporting
country. The country is also one of the world's richest
countries in diamonds, and, at one point, was one of
the world's largest coffee producers. Hence, it is
possible to make Angola a prosperous country again if
there is the political will to take concrete actions to
bring this about.

First, this requires an effort from all of us to help
bring this protracted war to an end sooner rather than
later. There is a need to stop the fighting, all the
fighting, everywhere in Angola. In this regard, the
primary responsibility lies with all Angolans. However,
their efforts deserve appropriate support from the
international community. The starting point is the need
to convince ourselves that military force in itself is not
sufficient to bring about durable peace in Angola.
There is a need for an increased effort in the political,
social and economic spheres in order for peace to
become a permanent reality in the country. There is a
need to adopt a spirit of reconciliation for all Angolans
and to instil belief in a common and better future and
destiny for all the people of Angola.

Therefore, we must welcome the statement made
by President Jose Eduardo dos Santos on 19 June in
Caxito, Bengo Province, in which he expressed the idea
of pardoning all the members of UNITA, including
perhaps Savimbi, if they decide to lay down their arms
and commit themselves to peace, reconciliation and the
rebuilding of Angola. This attitude will indeed
contribute to the promotion of peace and reconciliation
in the country.

As the Secretary-General indicated in his last
report (S/2000/304) to the Council, the continuing
fighting and its devastating effect on the population is
deeply disturbing. Last week United Nations agencies
reported that there had been an attack by a UNITA
contingent of about 100 men 6 kilometres from the city
of Huambo, in which a number of people were killed,
while others, including children, were kidnapped.
Furthermore, the conflict in Angola continues to
impact negatively on neighbouring countries,
particularly Namibia and Zambia.

These developments, which we are witnessing
every day, reinforce the urgent need to put an end to
this war. I sincerely trust that soon, with the
participation of all the peace-loving people in Angola,
we can take meaningful steps towards the settlement of
this conflict. In this regard, again the statement made
by President dos Santos in Caxito, reaffirming the
commitment of his Government to the Lusaka Protocol,
is indeed a good basis for the political settlement of the
conflict in Angola.

Secondly, we must reaffirm the fact that UNITA
bears the primary responsibility for the return to war in
Angola. Its refusal to comply with key provisions of
the Lusaka Protocol - in particular, its failure to
demilitarize and to allow the State administration to be
extended throughout the country - precipitated the
resumption of war. UNITA is also to be blamed for the
failure to implement the Bicesse Accords in 1991 and
the Lusaka Protocol in 1994. It is this failure to live up
to voluntarily signed peace agreements that is primarily
responsible for the renewed violence and the
continuation of the war in Angola.

These are some of the reasons that led the
Security Council to apply sanctions against UNITA and
to tighten further those sanctions. The reports from
Angola on sanctions are that they are producing the
desired results. They are limiting the possibilities of
UNITA to procure weapons, thus making it difficult for
the movement to rearm and resupply its forces.
Sanctions have thus been an important instrument of
pressure to force UNITA to commit itself to peace. The
report by the Panel of Experts established by the
Security Council pursuant to resolution 1237 (1999)
and the enormous work of the sanctions Committee,
under the very able chairmanship of Ambassador
Fowler of Canada, exposed the weaknesses of the
implementation of measures imposed against UNITA
and named the alleged sanctions violators. These are
important reminders that, as members of the
international community, States should act responsibly
and avoid actions that would facilitate the continuation
of war in Angola. I am confident that the recent
appointment of the sanction monitoring committee and
its work will contribute further to promoting peace in
Angola by tightening the mechanisms for verifying the
implementation of measures against UNITA.

The situation of internally displaced persons is
illustrative of the disastrous consequences of the war in
Angola. At the end of June the number of internally
displaced persons was estimated at 2.5 million,
approximately 20 per cent of the total population in
Angola. Of these, just over a million were officially
registered by a United Nations agency or non-
governmental organization. The situation in Khaala,
which I visited during my last mission to Angola, a
situation that I understand is replicated in other places
in the country, is truly appalling and should be
considered as an affront to all decent men and women
everywhere.

While the primary responsibility for addressing
the plight of internally displaced persons lies with the
Government of Angola, and we are encouraged by the
positive steps that the Government has been taking in
this regard, the international community has a critical
supporting role. In this regard, some of the work done
by United Nations agencies and by some national and
international non-governmental organizations in
supporting internally displaced persons is truly
encouraging. The recent bilateral agreement between
the United States Government and the Government of
Angola aimed at facilitating the resettlement and
rehabilitation of communities in areas that were
previously under UNITA control will certainly give a
boost to some of the positive results achieved in this
area.

However, the problem of Angolans in distress and
in need as a direct consequence of the war is enormous.
Therefore, the full support of the international
community, as well as the increased participation of the
private sector and of the civil society in the country, is
required.

The civil society organizations in Angola have
made important contributions to bring about peace and
reconciliation in Angola. Recently they have taken a
number of important initiatives in this regard. The
march organized on 11 June 2000, which culminated in
an open-air ecumenical service at which various
political parties and civil society organizations
participated marks an important milestone in the public
pressure for peace. All Angolans were called upon to
lay down their arms, abandon violence and live in
harmony. It shows the commitment of civil society
organizations to the promotion of peace. And they are
doing this as a matter of urgency.

Furthermore, just a few days ago the Catholic
Church organized in Luanda the Congress for Peace
and Democracy. This event was attended by several
members of Government, political parties and civil
society organizations representing a good and broad
cross-section of Angolan society. It marked one of the
rare occasions on which the Government and
opposition parties sat side by side with members of
organizations representing different segments of
Angolan society to discuss the common issue of peace.
The event marked a moment of reflection in which
Angolans reminded each other that the most important
thing is what each one could do to bring peace to the
country. The participants adopted a final communique
in which, inter alia, they called for a ceasefire and the
resumption of dialogue and the process of national
reconciliation.

In Angola, the civil society organizations,
particularly the Church, can also play a key role in
promoting peace, reconciliation and reintegration,
especially in areas formerly under the control of
UNITA, where there are reports of serious human
rights violations. They can also play an important role
in the education of youths and children, thus
complementing the actions of the Government in a
society that has been too long torn by war.

On the economy, the Government of Angola has
been making commendable efforts, despite the war, to
improve its management and performance. As reported
in the Secretary-General's report in document
S/2000/304, the Government has signed the Staff
Monitored Agreement with the International Monetary
Fund (IMF). The Government is committed to greater
transparency, especially in governmental financial
transactions. This commitment needs to be backed with
concrete actions. Hence it is encouraging that the
Government has also introduced some important
reforms in the diamond production sector, while it
continues to reform the petroleum industry. In March
this year the Government released some of the funds
earmarked in previous years for the development of
small and medium enterprises in agriculture and agro-
industry.

Unfortunately, however, the efforts to rehabilitate
the economy tend to be offset by the continuation of
hostilities. Seventy per cent of the Angolan people
continue to live below the poverty line, because
financial resources normally available for the social
sector are being diverted in part to finance the war.
This has resulted in a deterioration in the quality of
services in education, health and sanitation.

With respect to democratization, the Government
of Angola has announced its intention to hold national
elections towards the end of the year 2001, as I
mentioned in my last oral briefing to the Council. It is
comforting to note that the country's authorities are
working on the various logistical, security and
constitutional challenges to be met so that the elections
can be credible, free and fair. During my last visit to
Angola, I reiterated the readiness of the United Nations
to work closely with the Government and to assist in
meeting some of the challenges that I indicated earlier.

Meanwhile, I am delighted to inform the
members of the Council that the head of the United
Nations Office In Angola (UNOA) has been selected
and that his appointment will be communicated to the
Council very soon - perhaps as soon as tomorrow. He
is expected shortly to resume his duties in Angola and
this will help to strengthen the growing cooperation
between the United Nations and the Government of
Angola. The mandate of UNOA, as defined by the
Security Council resolution, is focused primarily on
humanitarian issues and capacity-building in human
rights. However, the new Head of UNOA and the entire
United Nations system will continue to work closely
with the Government, as requested, and other interested
parties to seek ways to support the current efforts
aimed at achieving peace in Angola in the context of
the Lusaka Protocol.

Finally, I would like to state that it is my sincere
hope that this open meeting will be an important
turning point in the search for durable peace in Angola.
The members of this Council, we in the Secretariat and
the international community as a whole need to be even
more creative and to redouble our efforts to help the
people of Angola to find the peace which has eluded
them for far too long. We can do no less.

