Mr. Dauda (Sierra Leone): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of March. I also wish to extend a warm welcome to the
representatives of the new members of the Council. I
would also like to thank you, Sir, for convening this
meeting on the situation in Sierra Leone, as well as for
giving my delegation the opportunity to contribute to
this debate.

On behalf of my delegation, I wish to express our
sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
detailed report (S/2011/119) on the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL). Among other things, the report highlights
the important developments that have taken place in
the country, the challenges to surmount and, of course,
the activities of UNIPSIL during the period under
review. I would also like to thank the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General for
introducing the report.

In a similar vein, we appreciate the Council's
sustained engagement and interest in Sierra Leone as
we continue to work in partnership to ensure
sustainable peace and development in the country. We
are also grateful for the indomitable efforts of the
Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), through the tireless efforts of its
Chairperson, Ambassador John McNee of Canada, to
maintain the momentum. We also thank him for his
progressive and innovative efforts and his instructive
remarks in contributing to this debate.

We take note of, and acknowledge with
satisfaction, the reference made in the report to some
of the progress and achievements since September
2010 and the challenges that we still have to contend
with. Those achievements are the product of the joint
efforts of the Government and people of Sierra Leone
and the United Nations, through the United Nations
Joint Vision aligned with the Agenda for Change and
development partners. To that end, I would like to
express my appreciation for the investment that has
been made in successful peacebuilding efforts and to
encourage the further consolidation of the gains made
by continuing to stand by Sierra Leone as it deals
comprehensively with the remaining challenges and
invests and builds on the success already achieved.

His Excellency President Ernest Bai Koroma, in
partnership with the international community, remains
fully committed to consolidating peacebuilding and the
sustainable economic development of Sierra Leone as
mapped out in the Agenda for Change. Youth
unemployment, corruption and illegal narcotics were
the three risks identified in the Agenda for Change and
endorsed by the Sierra Leone PBC configuration in its
outcome document of September 2010.

As reflected in the report, we are making steady
progress in the fight against corruption and, with the
support of development partners and the United
Nations, we have created the structures at the local and
regional levels to stem drug trafficking and organized
crime. In response to youth unemployment, which
remains a significant challenge to the peace
consolidation process, a new Ministry of Youth
Employment and Sports has been established and a
national Youth Commissioner and Board have been
appointed to provide the policy framework and
implementation that would pave way for the
meaningful participation of young people in national
development.

The Government is fully cognizant of the
importance of some of the issues raised by the
Secretary-General in the report regarding the
implementation of the joint communique of 2 April
2009 and has, in that regard, with UNIPSIL's support,
established the All Political Parties Youth Association
and the A11 Political Parties Women's Association aimed
at preventing political violence, fostering inter-party
dialogue and, in the case of the Women's Association,
further enhancing women's participation in politics.
Here, I am happy to report that 14.5 per cent of political
offices are now held by women, almost halfway to our
target of 30 per cent. We also continue to make progress
towards the education of the girl child and providing
free health care to pregnant women, lactating mothers
and children under the age of five.

The Government remains committed to the
conduct of peaceful, free, fair and transparent elections
in 2012, and we welcome the support of the United

Nations and development partners in passing what has
come to be identified as a key test for the consolidation
of peace and stability in Sierra Leone. The National
Electoral Commission and the Political Parties
Registration Commission enjoy the independence to
deliver effectively on their constitutional mandates,
free of interference. Additionally, structures, such as
the former national broadcasting service, which was
recently transformed into the Sierra Leone
Broadcasting Corporation, the Independent Media
Commission and the Editors' Guild are also of added
value.

President Ernest Bai Koroma recently made his
Cabinet more inclusive by appointing ministers from
across political and regional divides to further promote
national unity and cohesion. He has equally been
responsive to concerns regarding the mining sector by
taking measures to improve the governance of the
sector, ensure greater transparency and maximize
benefits from the country's mineral resources. To that
end, we have sought the support of development
partners to build the capacity of the Ministry of Mines
and Mineral Resources.

Despite all these efforts of the Government and
the progress that has been made to date in addressing
the many problems that led to the civil war, the
sustained support of the international community and
our development partners is required if we are to build
on the gains made and to further consolidate
peacebuilding in Sierra Leone, as well as to enhance
the country's capacity to absorb shocks, be they
economic, social or political. Support is still required
in several areas, in particular youth unemployment; the
provision of vehicles to the Sierra Leone Police to
enhance their capability and visibility during and after
the elections; drug trafficking; and the reparations
process as recommended by the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission.

On the socio-economic front, prevailing global
economic and financial uncertainties are seriously
undermining our efforts to turn the economy around as
8

quickly as we would wish. In the light of the severe
impact of these uncertainties on our efforts and in
support of the strides we have made in socio-economic
development, we urge and support the appeal that
urgent and appropriate attention be given to the
delivery of pledges made at the most recent
consultative conference on Sierra Leone, held in
London.

His Excellency President Ernest Bai Koroma is
committed to reducing aid dependency through
partnership with the private sector, in particular in the
mineral and agricultural sectors, and recognizes the
importance of strengthening institutions that will drive
the economy, leading to the ratification by Parliament
of the Public Private Partnership Act of 2010, which
aims at providing the legal framework for the private
sector to design, build and administer major
infrastructure development programmes with the
intention of attracting more foreign investment.

In conclusion, we welcome recent developments
in Guinea resulting in the conduct of peaceful, free and
fair elections and the smooth transfer of power to an
elected Government. This development will contribute
to peace consolidation efforts in Sierra Leone.
However, we see the situation in C6te d'Ivoire as a
threat to subregional peace and security and we support
subregional, regional and other international efforts to
adequately address it before it escalates into a full-
blown conflict that could undermine the stability of its
neighbours, including Sierra Leone.

Once more, I wish to thank the United Nations,
the Peacebuilding Commission and all development
partners for their contributions to the peace we have
achieved so far.

