Ms. Habtemariam (Ethiopia): I would like to start
by thanking Judge Meron and Prosecutor Brammertz for
the assessment report on the work of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and for
their briefings today. I would also like to join other
speakers in commending Judge Meron for his work as
presiding Judge, and we wish the incoming President,
Judge Agius, every success. I will just make four
brief points.

First, we welcome the measures taken by the
Mechanism, including the Office of the Prosecutor,
to further enhance its efficiency and streamline its
internal working methods, despite its small staff and
tight resources. We note with appreciation the work
done by the Mechanism since assuming its residual
responsibility, and the measures taken by the Office of
the Prosecutor to assist and build capacity in national
criminal-justice sectors with a view to supporting
the prosecution of war-crimes cases arising from the
conflicts in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia.
Secondly, we have noted the challenges raised in the
assessment report in relation to the General Assembly's
decision not to approve the Mechanism's biennium
budget for the period from 2018 to 2019. While we
welcome the measures taken by the Mechanism to
reduce the impact of that decision, its implications for
the Mechanism's long-term planning and operations
and the completion of its functions in a timely and
effective manner, as well as its impact on the protection
of victims and witnesses, require further attention.

Thirdly, we continue to note with concern that
eight fugitives indicted by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) remain at large. In that
regard, we welcome the measures taken by the Office
of the Prosecutor to track and arrest the remaining
fugitives, including by establishing a tracking team and
cooperating with relevant actors such as INTERPOL. In
our view, the cooperation of such relevant international
organizations and States remains critical to pursuing
the remaining eight fugitives. We therefore join the
call for assistance from relevant States in this task. It
is important that they continue to provide the necessary
assistance to the Office of the Prosecutor, including in
tracking those fugitives.

Fourthly, we note with concern some of the issues
that continue to be raised in relation to the early release
of people convicted by the ICTR or the Residual
Mechanism. We have particularly noted the concern
raised by the Prosecutor of the Mechanism regarding
unconditional early release, which has often led to
the denial of crimes and criminal responsibility. In
our View, consultation on early release between the
President of the Mechanism and the country concerned,
Rwanda, particularly its implications for victims and
the community at large, is extremely important. In
this regard, lessons could be drawn from the Residual
Special Court for Sierra Leone. We encourage the
incoming President and the Office of the Prosecutor to
look into this matter.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the need
for the Council to provide continued support to the
Mechanism so it can fulfil its mandated residual
functions. Iwould also like to encourage Member States
to strengthen their support for the Residual Mechanism,
including in relation to the tracking of fugitives and
relocation of acquitted or released persons, as well as
addressing budget-related issues.

