Mr. Vueic' (Serbia): Due to a lack of time, I will not
read out all of my statement. I hope that members will
receive it in its full written form.

First of all, I would like to point out that Serbia, its
President and its Government are fully committed to
peace and reconciliation in the region of the Western
Balkans and that we are building a modern State, ruled
by law, that promotes the fundamental principles of the
United Nations, one of the key aspects of which is the
implementation of international law and the pursuit of
justice. It appears, from the statement of the President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), that this meeting is one in a series
of regular meetings and that everything is as before and
is following the well-known and regular bureaucratic
procedure. For my country, Serbia, this is not an
ordinary meeting. It is an opportunity for us to state,
loud and clear, that international law should apply to
all evenly, rather than selectively and more to some
than others. For Serbia, law and justice trump politics.
However, we consider that law and justice have not
always been the guiding principles of the ICTY.

I would like to bring to the attention ofthe Council
the results that the Republic of Serbia has achieved in
its cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia in preceding years, not only
in the course of fulfilling its international obligations
but also with respect to its goodwill to contribute to
achieving international justice and reconciliation in the
region.

With the arrest of Goran Hadzie in July 2011, the
Republic of Serbia completed its cooperation with the
ICTY in terms of handing over all fugitive indictees to
the Tribunal. Among the 45 indictees that the Republic
of Serbia has transferred to the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal were two former Presidents of the Republic,
a former Prime Minister, a former Deputy Prime
Minister, three former Chiefs of Staff, a former head
of the State security service and numerous military and
police generals.

With regard to cooperation on access to documents,
archives and witnesses, I must say that the Republic of
Serbia has replied to almost all the 3,200 requests for
assistance received from the Office of the Prosecutor
and the defence teams. Only newer requests are in the
process of being met. Not a single request of the Office
of the Prosecutor for assistance regarding access to the
State archives has been denied.

The information presented clearly points out the
commitment of the Republic of Serbia to determining
the truth about the crimes perpetrated during the armed
conflicts on the territory of the former Yugoslavia.
That includes punishing those responsible for crimes
regardless of their ethnicity or the ethnic origin of the
Victims.

Taking those words into account, our faith in
international justice suffered the severest possible blow
in the wake of the shameful judgement of acquittal
rendered by the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia's Appeals Chamber on
16 November, which absolved Ante Gotovina and
Mladen Markac of responsibility for the crimes
committed against the Serbian civilian population in
the offensive by Croatian forces code-named Operation
Storm. The judgement, which provoked understandable
acrimony in many parts of the world - including
reactions by both officials of the Republic of Serbia
and, more importantly, the people of Serbia, as well as
international experts - caused great damage, first and
foremost to the families of the victims of the crimes
committed during Operation Storm.

It is very relevant to raise some questions. Do
Serbs, too, have a right to justice? Who is responsible
for the numerous killings of Serbian civilians in Croatia
and for the largest and most extensive ethnic cleansing
on European soil since the Second World War?

The general attack on the Republic of Serbian
Krajina began on 4 August 1995 at 5:06 am. with the
indiscriminate bombing of military and civilian targets
in Sectors North and South - the zones under the
protection of United Nations forces. More than 250,000
Serbs were expelled or fled the territory of the Republic

of Serbian Krajina taken by the Croatian military.
Representatives of the United Nations and the European
Union Monitoring Mission in Zagreb witnessed
numerous crimes against the Serbian population
during Operation Storm, which is evidenced by reports
sent to their superiors. The decision to forbid United
Nations representatives from leaving their barracks at
Knin to patrol the area at the beginning of Operation
Storm leads us to believe that the decision was made to
prevent them from witnessing the killing and expulsion
of Serbs from the Republic of Serbian Krajina.

The international community was faced with the
largest humanitarian catastrophe since the beginning
of the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia, while United
Nations staff reported that serious crimes were being
committed against captured Serbian soldiers and
civilians as well as reporting the removal of bodies and
the destruction and looting of Serbs' property.

I would like to bring to the Council's attention
some of the crimes and murders committed against the
Serbian population by the forces under the command of
Mladen Markac and Ante Gotovina. In Sector South, at
about 10.00 a.m. the Seventh Brigade - the so-called
Pumas - entered Knin and immediately blockaded
United Nations forces with five tanks, and then
proceeded to "mop the terrain" - meaning to liquidate
the remaining Serbs. As a result, the lifeless bodies of
dead civilians could be seen on 4 and 5 August 1995.
They were removed by night on 5 and 6 August 1995.

On 4 August 1995, at 11.15 a.m., United Nations
forces tried to force their way to a hospital in five
armoured personnel carriers to evacuate the wounded.
They were prevented from doing so by the Pumas. The
"mopping" ofthe other parts of Sector South was carried
out on 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 August 1995, in an ongoing
attempt to kill all remaining Serbs. Entire villages
were looted and burned before the very eyes of the
representatives of the United Nations. One example of
those crimes is the town of Kistanje, which was burned,
leaving no survivors. The same fate befell the Village
of Kosovo and the village of Parcice. On 10 August,
United Nations forces found the decomposed bodies of
seven Serbian civilians in the village of Uzdalje.

A 2.5-ton refrigerated truck and an ambulance were
used to ferry the bodies of killed Serbian civilians to be
buried in the local cemetery near the Knin church on
10 August. The operation was once again commanded
by the Puma commander. United Nations staff members
were prevented from testifying about the event.

The same types of crimes were committed in Sector
North. Crimes against the Serbian population took
place in other areas targeted by Operation Storm in
the immediate aftermath of the operation. On 6 August
1995, Euro Borojevie, from the Village of Borojevie, in
the municipality of Kostajnica, was killed in front of
his house. His home was set on fire. Milos Borojevie,
born in 1948, from the same village was also killed. He
was slaughtered and burned with his house.

Husband and wife Luka and Milica Dobre from the
village of Prukljen were killed and burned with their
house in the village of Josevci, in the municipality
of Glina. When the old man's body was found he
was decapitated and both his arms were cut off. The
remains of at least four burned persons were found in a
haystack. Two of them were identified as husband and
wife Cvijo and Desanka Matijevie.

Who killed those people? The question remains
unanswered.

On 6 August, Mara Ugarkovie, 74 years old and
bedridden, was burned in her home in the village of
Komie, near Udbina. Petar Lavmie and his mother
Sava and Mika Pavlica were also killed and burned.
Boja Mirkovie was killed in the hamlet of Poljice. On
27 August in the Village of Gosie, near Djevrska, eight
civilians were killed, aged about 70, seven of them
from the Borak family - Savo, Vasilj, Grozdana,
Mania, Kola, Milka and Dusan. The eighth casualty
was Joko Mazibrada. All of them were buried secretly
at the Knin cemetery under serial numbers 550 to 557
without first or last names. The Ministry of the Interior
of Croatia refused to give the bodies to the relatives, in
an attempt to hide the crime.

Who killed those people?

In the report of the representatives of the Monitoring
Mission of6 September 1995 it is stated, inter alia, that
United Nations military observers inspected about
10,000 houses in 140 small villages and found that
69 per cent had been partially or completely destroyed
or burned. The report proceeds to describe the looting
and burning of Serbian houses at Petrovac that took
place at the beginning of September, a month after
Operation Storm.

Those arejust a few important pieces ofinformation
about the crimes committed against the Serbian people
during Operation Storm.

I shall end my presentation by raising the question
once again: If Gotovina and Markac are not guilty of
the crime, who is? The question has not been answered
by the Tribunal.

It is important to emphasize several striking facts
and controversies related to the acquittal judgement.
The judgement was rendered by three votes to two
of the Appeals Chamber judges. The two dissenting
judges explained their dissenting opinions in an
unusually fierce tone. Judge Fausto Pocar, one of
the dissenting judges and a former President of the
Tribunal, emphasized that the verdict was contrary to
any sense ofjustice, and he described it as grotesque.
It is also surprising that the majority of the judges of
the Appeals Chamber - which was established by the
United Nations - have little confidence in the generals
and other high-ranking United Nations Member State
officials who were in the field under the United Nations
flag at the time of the events that were the subject of
the Trial Chamber's decision and who gave testimony
about the events before the Trial Chamber. All those
testimonies were dismissed in the Appeals judgement.
In addition, both the former and present Prosecutor
of the Tribunal expressed their disappointment in the
judgement and emphasized that the verdict was unjust.

In assessing the effects of that judgement, we
have to emphasize that, considering the results of the
Tribunal's work, the Tribunal failed to sentence the
perpetrators responsible for more than 1,500 Serbs
from Croatia killed, for more than 250,000 Serbs
from Croatia forced to leave their homes - expelled
from their thresholds - and for various other crimes
committed against the civilian population in Operation
Storm, regardless of the fact that the Tribunal found in
its judgements, with absolute certainty, that the crimes
were committed during that period. I deeply thank
Mr. Brammertz for confirming that today.

It should be emphasized that this is not the first
time that the Tribunal has concluded in its practice that
crimes took place but found that neither the indictees
nor anyone else was responsible for the crimes that
were perpetrated.

The second decision, a retrial by the Trial Chamber,
acquitted of all charges Ramush Haradinaj, a former
commander of the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army,
Idriz Balaj and Lahi Brahimaj for crimes committed
in the Jablanica camp in 1998 against ethnic Serbs and
others in the Metohija area of the Serbian province of
Kosovo and Metohija.

The judgement of acquittal in the proceedings
Prosecutor v. Ramush Haradinaj, Idriz Balaj and Lahi
Brahimaj, which was rendered on the retrial based on the
six counts ofindictment for the crimes perpetrated in the
Kosovo Liberation Army camp in Jablanica in Kosovo
and Metohija in 1998 had similar effects. The Trial
Chamber allowed the provisional release of Haradinaj
and permitted him to engage in political activities,
which represents a unique case in the Tribunal's
practice, even though at the time the Tribunal must
have been aware of the fact that there was a problem of
witness protection in the case. The attitude of the staff
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) towards the case and towards the
accused Haradinaj was very strange as well. In spite
of the obvious problems, UNMIK provided assurances
for Haradinaj's provisional release, while the UNMIK
Head at the time, Mr. Petersen, publicly declared
Haradinaj his friend.

That decision added insult to injury, as it is well
known that a significant number of eyewitnesses were
killed under extremely suspicious circumstances or
refused to testify after heavy pressure was placed on
them. A few potential witnesses in the case died under
controversial circumstances, while several of the key
witnesses, according to the Office of the Prosecutor,
refused to testify before the Tribunal out of fear for
their personal safety. Despite the clear obligation to
protect witnesses, the Tribunal failed to do so.

Let me now give just a few examples of crimes
committed against the Serbian, non-Albanian and
Albanian populations in the territory of Kosovo and
Metohija under the command of Ramush Haradinaj.
In 1998 and 1999, Ramush Haradinaj organized and
carried out terrorist attacks against members of the
Army of Yugoslavia and the Ministry of the Interior
of the Republic of Serbia, including crimes against the
Serbian population and non-loyal Albanians.

On 22 April 1998, Slobodan Radosevic, Milos
Radunovic and Milica Radunovic from the village of
Dasinovac, Municipality of Decane, were kidnapped.
All of them were taken to the prison established by
Ramush Haradinaj in the village of Glodjane, in the
municipality of Decane, where they were abused.
Radosevic was brought back to the Village, where
he was killed. Radunovic was also brought back to
Dasinovac and killed and burned in his home, while
Milica Radunovic was killed in the village of Glodjane
and thrown into Lake Radonjic. Haradinaj and Balaj are
suspected of committing the crime.

On 18 June 1998, Vucic Vukovic, Novica Vujsic and
Izet Gutic were kidnapped in the village of Glodjane
and taken to the local prison, where they were killed
after being tortured. Ramush Haradinaj is suspected of
having committed the crime.

On 14 December 1998, six young men - Ivan
Obradovic, Dragan Trifovic, Zoran Stanojevic, Svetislav
Ristic, Vukosav Gvozdenovic and Ivan Radevic - were
killed in a terrorist attack on the Panda Cafe in Pee.
The perpetrators of the crime were under the command
of Ramush Haradinaj. My question today is: Who is
responsible for the deaths of those people?

Among 40 Serbian children who were killed,
massacred or kidnapped in Kosovo and Metojiha
was also little Ana Takic from Prizren, six-years old,
abducted with her 71-year old grandfather Veselin
by a group of Albanians on 28 August 1999. In
mid-September, Ana was found dead on the Prizren-
Zur road. She had one of her arms cut off. Who killed
little Ana and who is responsible for it?

The Sutakovic family - Nedeljko, his wife
Dara and their three sons Aleksandar, Djordje and
Radoman - from Djakovica were kidnapped on their
way to the church in Djakovica, where they wanted
to hide from Albanian terrorists. All of them are still
missing and unaccounted for.

We have to emphasize the fact that when the
results of the Tribunal's practice are summarized, it
becomes clear that despite the hundreds of thousands of
Serbian refugees, and thousands of dead and wounded,
the Tribunal has sentenced only a few guards from
the Celebici prison camp in Bosnia and two Kosovo
Albanians who were direct perpetrators of lower rank.

We emphasize that Serbia has never asked for
symmetry in relation to the Tribunal's indictments and
judgements. However, that outcome makes a case for
the claim that justice in the Tribunal's proceedings
has been selective, and it is clear that selective justice
cannot be regarded as justice. In conclusion, the result
of the Tribunal's work in relation to justice served for
the numerous Serbian Victims of the armed conflicts
that occurred in the territory of the former Yugoslavia
can be described as grotesque - the exact same word
that Judge Pocar used to describe the judgement entered
by the Appeals Chamber in the case of Prosecutor v.
Ante Gotovina and Mladen Markae.

The most important task before the Tribunal was to
contribute to the reconciliation efforts in the Western
Balkans. In its more than 10 years of existence, it has
convicted a number of former Serbian political and
military leaders for war crimes. At the same time, it has
failed to convict a single senior official from Croatia
or Bosnia, and failed to convict a single senior Kosovo
Albanian official for war crimes or crimes against
humanity.

In View of the recent judgement, the Serbian nation
has therefore been singled out as the sole perpetrator
of such acts and the sole people responsible for the
terrible violence that engulfed the former Yugoslavia
in the 1990s. That is manifestly not in conformity with
the facts. The Tribunal has failed to deliver justice by
failing to adequately apportion blame.

It is to be underlined that the wars in the former
Yugoslavia were civil, ethnic and even religious. There
was no innocence in the face of evil. All parties were
warring parties, and there were victims and criminal
acts on all sides.

We say all ofthis today before the Security Council
not because we expect the judgements of the Tribunal
so far can be altered, but because the Tribunal was
established by the Security Council. We recall that the
Tribunal was established for the purpose of bringing
peace and maintaining peace and security in the territory
of the former Yugoslavia. Today, almost 20 years after
the establishment of the Tribunal, the question arises as
to whether the Tribunal has succeeded in that intention.

The Government of the Republic of Serbia will
continue to cooperate with the Tribunal at the technical
level.

The Republic of Serbia believes that a full
understanding of the work of the Tribunal and the
consequences of its decisions need to be brought to
light before the entire international community so that
never again can evil deeds be amnestied or glorified
by those who defend them. That will only serve to
incentivize their repetition, the exact opposite of the
Security Council's intent when it established the ICTY.

With regard to the activities of the Tribunal, I
have to emphasize that the following issues are of the
utmost importance for Serbia: the initiative to allow
individuals convicted before the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia to serve their prison
sentences in the States that emerged in the territory of
the former Yugoslavia of which they are citizens, and
the future of the archives of the Tribunal.

With regard to the initiative to allow individuals
convicted before the ICTY to serve their prison
sentences in the States that emerged in the territory of
the former Yugoslavia ofwhich they are citizens, I recall
that the recommendation of the Secretary-General to
the Security Council contained in paragraph 121 of his
report dated 3 May 1993, in which he indicated that he

"is of the View that, given the nature of the crimes
in question and the international character of the
tribunal, the enforcement of sentences should take
place outside the territory of the former Yugoslavia"
(S/25704, para. 121),

remains in effect. Although that attitude could have
been justified in 1993 during the armed conflict in
the territory of the former Yugoslavia, it is clear that
it has lost its validity and that the circumstances have
changed.

I would like to emphasize that the primary motive
of this initiative is the readiness of the Republic of
Serbia to assume the responsibility of the prison
sentences imposed on the citizens of the Republic
of Serbia convicted before the Tribunal in The
Hague. In addition, it should be emphasized that the
purpose of the conviction, among others, includes the
resocialization of the convicts. In that context, we
consider it unlikely to expect that convictions will be
effective in cases when convicts serve their sentences
in remote countries, without knowing the language and
where Visits by family members are rare. We therefore
strongly appeal to the Security Council to urgently and
favourably consider that request.

Also, I would like to reiterate that Serbia is highly
interested in the issue of the future of the Tribunal's
archives. The official position of Serbia relative to that
issue was provided to the Security Council in October
2008. Serbia is ready to actively participate in all
future discussions regarding that matter and continue
its cooperation with the Security Council Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals in relation
to those issues.

It is our belief that the accomplishment of the
aforementioned aims is of exceptional importance,
primarily in order to ensure that justice is done for
the victims of the gruesome crimes that I have spoken
about, but also for the future of the region of the
Western Balkans. If the Security Council is serious
about furthering reconciliation in the Balkans, it is
critical now to avoid any perception of impropriety or
undue influence. That is why the Security Council must
remain actively involved.

Serbia is on its road to Europe and is interested
in cooperating with all peoples and countries of the
region. It has undertaken to fulfil all of its international
obligations. It conducts dialogue with Pristina under
the oversight of the European Union, and the only thing
that Serbia is asking for is justice - nothing more,
nothing less.

Finally, it has been my honour to address the
Council today.

