Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me begin by warmly
greeting His Excellency Minister Ambassador Rassoul
and Special Representative Staffan de Mistura. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2011/590) and the Special Representative for his
briefing.

Before I go any further, I would like to express
once again our sorrow and indignation at the
assassination of Mr. Burhanuddin Rabbani, Chairman
of the High Peace Council and former President of
Afghanistan. We strongly condemn this heinous attack
and offer our deepest sympathy and sincere
condolences to his family as well as to the people and
the Government of Afghanistan. We also wish a speedy
recovery to Mr. Mohammad Masoom Stanekzai, Chief
Executive of the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration
Programme.

It is incumbent upon Afghanistan and all of us to
make sure that Mr. Rabbani's death will not have been
in vain. Such attacks will not and cannot deter the
Afghans and the international community from the
pursuit of a peaceful, secure and democratic
Afghanistan. It will certainly take time and dedicated
efforts, but it is critical that credible progress be made
towards reintegration and reconciliation. Thus we
continue to strongly encourage Afghanistan's regional
and international partners to continue to provide the
necessary support to these efforts as requested by
Afghanistan.

In addition to Mr. Rabbani's assassination, we
have seen a recent spate of attacks by the insurgents
against high-profile Afghan and international targets,
as also enumerated in the Secretary-General's report.
These attacks show that the security situation remains
fragile. They are also an indication that recent
developments, both in Afghanistan and in the region,
increase the risks and challenges faced in the transition
process that has recently been put into motion. A
careful handling of these challenges will enable us to
correctly identify the problems and find the necessary
solutions. At the same time, we are convinced that the
response of the Afghan military and police to the
attacks have overall been effective. We consider this to
be an important indicator of the fact that the training
provided to the Afghan National security forces has
begun to bear fruit. We should relentlessly continue our
efforts in this area.

Our common objective in Afghanistan is to
ensure that the Afghans have the means and
capabilities to take charge of their future in a fully and
meaningfully sovereign Afghan State. Afghanistan's
neighbours and partners have important contributions
to make and should continue their multidimensional
efforts towards the solidification of Afghanistan's
sovereign institutions.

Two important events relating to Afghanistan
scheduled for later this year will provide opportunities
to realize these goals. In December, we will meet in
Bonn, at the gracious invitation of the German
Government, to discuss and to define the long-term

engagement of the international community in
Afghanistan. We have established 2014 as the target
date for the transfer of security responsibilities to
Afghanistan. However, as we have said numerous
times, this is not the date for an exit and the end of our
commitment to Afghanistan. After 2014, the
international community will continue to be engaged
comprehensively in Afghanistan, albeit in a
transformed manner.

Before the Bonn meeting, on 2 November we will
hold the Istanbul Conference on Afghanistan, on the
theme "Security and Cooperation in the Heart of Asia".
We hope that this meeting will be a milestone event in
terms of charting the way forward for regional security
cooperation.

Afghanistan today is at a critical juncture. It still
faces significant security, political, economic and
development challenges that transcend its borders.
Those challenges cannot be addressed without the
constructive support of Afghanistan's neighbours and
regional partners. Efforts to meet such challenges are
most effective when they are regionally owned and
driven and pursued in a transparent and constructive
manner. In that regard, the conference will be an
essentially Afghan-led event with Turkish facilitation,
but it will be critical for all participants to display full
ownership, leadership and vision. Therefore, it is most
encouraging that all the participants have told us that
they are ready to show the necessary level of
commitment.

There have been a number of initiatives so far
that have been aimed at contributing to enhanced ties
among the countries of the region. All of those
initiatives have been pertinent to our joint endeavours.
What we will try to do in Istanbul is not duplicate them
but rather borrow their most useful aspects and try to
build on them in order to achieve complementarity and
added value. What we hope to achieve is the creation
of a regional security and cooperation initiative, with a
view to building greater confidence in the political,
security and military fields and to strengthening
cooperation in the economic, trade, environmental,
cultural, energy and drug-control fields.

As always, we look forward to the strong support
of the international community. We have already
started the preparations and are working closely with
Afghanistan, the United Nations and all other relevant
countries and organizations. As we speak, our
representatives are travelling to Oslo for a preparatory
meeting tomorrow, which will be followed by another
one in Kabul on 15 October. My country remains
steadfast in its commitment to, and support for,
Afghanistan. In that vein, we will do our utmost so that
the conference brings forth concrete deliverables that
reflect Afghan goals and visions.

Last but certainly not least, I would like to
acknowledge once more the dedicated and outstanding
work that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) is carrying out in fulfilment of
its mandate in the face of very real and serious threats
in Afghanistan. We are particularly grateful for the
effective leadership shown by Special Representative
Staffan de Mistura. We are also thankful to him for his
valuable contributions. UNAMA's work in Afghanistan
is critical now, and will remain so later on. As such,
UNAMA has our full support.

