Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): I
would like to start by expressing my delegation's deep
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your initiative to
organize today's open debate on conflict prevention.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his
insightful statement and the efforts he has made to
strengthen the activities of the United Nations, in
particular those of the Security Council, in monitoring
potential conflicts and devising preventive measures.

Despite numerous discussions about the culture
of prevention both within and outside the United
Nations, armed conflicts and insurgencies are still
occurring in many regions at an alarming rate.
Moreover, peace is all too fragile in many parts of the
world. In Sierra Leone the Security Council recently
embarked on the delicate task of bringing stability to a
country torn by years of brutal internal conflict.
Despite its dedication to the cause of peace, however,
the peacekeeping Mission in Sierra Leone has met with
serious challenges. Of course, many peacekeeping
efforts have proved successful. But others have raised
important questions about mandates and resources that
have yet to be answered.

Effective conflict prevention is certainly a
challenging and complex endeavour extending to the
broader horizons of international peace and security. In
our view, conflict prevention entails substantive
measures, including political dialogue, arms control,
the rule of law, respect for human rights, and economic
and social development. The issue of sovereignty is
often delicately linked as well. Although conflict
prevention is obviously far more cost-effective than
post-conflict management in both financial and human
terms, it is often difficult to assess the optimum level
of engagement when exercising preventive measures.
The true costs of inaction can only be felt after disaster
has already occurred.

The Security Council, in close collaboration with
the Secretary-General, must therefore upgrade its
capabilities to assess the likelihood of armed conflict in
volatile situations and devise clear short- and medium-
term strategies for identifying suitable measures at
each step of evolving crises. Emphasis should be
placed on an effective early warning mechanism, on a
more proactive use of preventive monitoring and on
preventive peacekeeping missions. The successful
experiences of the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force could be applied to other unstable
situations. Effective joint measures should also be
taken to control the illicit exploitation of, and trade in,
natural resources, as well as to prevent trafficking in
small arms.

For a longer-term strategy the United Nations
system should continue to make efforts to identify the
root causes of conflicts. The Security Council, for its
part, should take a more comprehensive and integrated
approach to conflict prevention, building stronger
cooperation with the Secretariat and with relevant
United Nations bodies, including its funds,
programmes and specialized agencies. Moreover, it
should seek to establish a close working relationship
with major organizations, not to mention the
Governments and other parties involved. We encourage
the Council's efforts to engage itself more directly in
such situations as East Timor, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Kosovo.

My delegation believes that strengthening the
international legal framework is another fundamental
element in preventing conflicts. In this regard, we
expect that the International Criminal Court will in the
future play an important role in eradicating the current
culture of impunity. We all agree that the Security
Council's initiatives to establish ad hoc tribunals for
the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda were necessary. My
delegation is also of the view that such legal
instruments set important precedents for deterring
would-be perpetrators of genocide and war crimes.

Last year's open debate of the Security Council
on its role in the prevention of armed conflicts, and the
subsequent presidential statement, duly emphasized the
importance of the Secretary-General's role in conflict
prevention. My delegation welcomes on-going efforts
by the Secretary-General to realign the Organization
with a view to enhancing its early-warning capacity for
a more prevention-oriented approach. My Government,
for its part, has continued to contribute to the United
Nations Trust Fund for Preventive Action since its
inception in 1997.

As several previous speakers have indicated, the
United Nations, as the major Organization responsible,
is not able to prevent every conflict in the world,
particularly without strong will on the part of the
parties concerned to resolve problems through peaceful
means. Directly concerned parties must therefore
pursue dialogue and reconciliation first and foremost
on their own initiative, albeit with the encouragement
of the international community.

I am pleased to report to the Council that the
Republic of Korea is doing its part within its own
capacity in this regard, by engaging North Korea in a
continuous process of building a genuine peace on the
Korean peninsula. These crucial efforts seem to have
made possible last June's inter-Korean summit in
Pyongyang, the first since the division of Korea more
than five decades ago. We believe that the inter-Korean
summit constitutes a major milestone in the pursuit of
peace, not only in the region but also in the world as a
whole.

Finally, I wish to conclude by reiterating my
delegation's strong support for, and firm commitment
to, the common cause of preventing armed conflicts,
particularly by strengthening the involvement of the
Security Council in preventive measures.

