Mr. Acharya (Nepal): First of all, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of January. I
would also like to acknowledge the presence of the
new members of the Security Council and wish them
all the best in their new responsibilities.

We have taken note of the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN) contained in document S/2010/658, which
highlights his assessment of the situation of Nepal's
peace process over the past four months. Likewise, I
wish to take note of remarks just made by Ms. Karin
Landgren, Representative of the Secretary-General.

The way it has been presented, it looks as if we
are moving towards a failure. I would like to state here
in no uncertain terms that we are not looking at the
failure of the peace process; we are working hard to
ensure the successful transition towards the
consolidation of peace. It is a natural shift from one
stage to another. That is why there are certain
complexities, which, I think, is only natural in any
post-conflict situation, especially when that post-
conflict situation is giving rise to an historic
transformation.

The United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN)
was established on 23 January 2007 through resolution
1740 (2007) as a special political mission to assist
Nepal in its homegrown peace process. The United
Nations was invited pursuant to the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement signed on 21 November 2006
between the Government of Nepal and the then-
Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist. UNMIN's planned
one-year term has seen seven extensions and now
extends to 15 January 2011.

I concur with the view of the Secretary-General
that UNMIN has been a positive factor in the difficult
context presented by the peace process during this
period. On behalf of the Government and people of
Nepal, we would like to express our sincere
appreciation to the United Nations, and in particular to
UNMIN and its dedicated staff, for their contributions
in the mandated areas to consolidating peace in Nepal.
They helped us move towards a post-conflict situation
on solid ground.

Now, we are preparing for the takeover after a
four-year contribution of UNMIN to Nepal's peace
process. The Government of Nepal has made every
effort to ensure a smooth handover of all the works of
UNMIN to the Special Committee, which is formed
under the provision of article 146 of the interim
constitution of Nepal. Representation on the Special
Committee is comprised of major political parties,
including the Unified Communist Party of Nepal-
Maoist.

Resolution 1740 (2007) mandated the UNMIN to
monitor the management of arms and armed personnel
on both sides, assist in the monitoring of the ceasefire
arrangements, and provide technical support for the
planning, preparation and conduct of the election of a
Constituent Assembly in a free and fair atmosphere.

UNMIN provided considerable assistance to the
national authorities in conducting the historic
Constituent Assembly elections and, prior to that,
assisted in monitoring the ceasefire. In the aftermath of
the successful elections to the Constituent Assembly,
UNMIN has monitored the arms and Maoist army
combatants cantoned in the 7 main and 21 satellite
camps in different geographic areas of the country, and
chaired the Joint Monitoring Coordination Committee.

After the signing of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement on 21 November 2006, Nepal's peace
process has achieved historic progress on several
fronts. The promulgation of the interim constitution,
the election to the Constituent Assembly and the
declaration of a Federal Democratic Republic are
crucial milestones in the contemporary history of
Nepal. This has been possible with the courage,
determination and understanding of the people of
Nepal, led by the political parties, with the firm
support of the international community.

The release of approximately 4,000 disqualified
combatants in the beginning of 2010 was another
significant step forward in our peace process. Among
the released 4,008 disqualified ex-combatants, around
3,000 were identified as minors. I am happy to note
that the Security Council team led by His Excellency
Ambassador Claude Heller of Mexico Visited Nepal in
November for the first field visit of the Council's
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

After the promulgation of the interim constitution
of Nepal in 2007 and the Constituent Assembly
election, Nepal's peace process entered into the new
stage of peace consolidation. The Constituent
Assembly has the primary function of writing a
constitution for the Federal Democratic Republic of
Nepal that guarantees multi-party democracy, human
rights, a federal structure and inclusive governance for
the historic transformation of Nepal's political,
economic and social landscapes. But at the same time,
the Constituent Assembly is also working as a
legislature-parliament and is therefore engaged in the
parliamentary business, including the formation of a
new Government.

Nepal's peace process will reach its culmination
following the reintegration and rehabilitation of
combatants and the promulgation of a new constitution.
We are working hard on both these fronts. I would
therefore like to assure the Security Council that we
will be doing this with diligence and with devotion.
The high-level committee comprised of top leaders
from major political parties has succeeded in ironing
out many of the differences - in fact, out of 180,
already more than 130 have been taken care of - in
the thematic reports of the Constituent Assembly.
There are a number of issues that need to be settled in
the months ahead by the parties at the Constituent
Assembly. If it is taking more time, it is only because
of the historic task of transformation that the new
constitution is going to usher in the political, social and
economic spheres in the days ahead.

We are fully cognizant of the fact that there are
some concerns that Nepal's peace process has
sometimes stalled or not moved forward as quickly as
possible. But we believe that, given the necessary
courage, maturity and flexibility, which the political
parties have exhibited in times of need in the past, all
the parties will muster a high level of maturity and
understanding and move towards the logical conclusion
of the peace process. This is so because the people of
Nepal, more than anybody else, look forward to the full
transition to a normal situation at the earliest possible
time. That would effectively stimulate rapid and
inclusive economic development and accelerate the
building of necessary infrastructure within a
consolidated atmosphere of peace and security. It
would also contribute to strengthening stability and
prosperity on a sustainable basis in the economically
vibrant neighbourhood of Nepal. We are aware that this
is what the international community is looking forward
to in Nepal as well.

The Government has already made the necessary
preparations with a View to making the constitutionally
formed Special Committee a body capable of taking
over all the works of UNMIN in a seamless manner
after the Mission's withdrawal. The Special Committee
will supervise arms and Maoist army combatants as per
the guidelines laid out in the directives for supervision,
control, direction and code of conduct for the Maoist
Army combatants, which were adopted unanimously on
17 September 2010. I repeat that these directives have
already been approved unanimously by the Committee.

The Special Committee will itself be a place to
settle disputes and any other issues that may come up
in the course of the peace process onwards. The
Government of Nepal has already sent a letter to
UNMIN and, through it, to the United Nations on
issues related to the monitoring of Maoist army
combatants and arms, on the Nepal Army and arms, on
the Agreement on the Monitoring of the Management
of Arms and Armies, on the dispute resolution
mechanism, and on the request for the transfer of the
updated records of Maoist arms and army combatants
and all the materials, equipment and logistics used by
UNMIN for monitoring tasks.

The Government and people of Nepal remain
grateful to the United Nations, particularly the Security
Council, for providing continued support for our peace
process from the beginning. I wish to take this
opportunity to express our gratitude to the Council as a
whole and to each and every member of the Council
for extending excellent cooperation in Nepal's peace
process.

I would like to express my Government's
gratitude and sincere thanks to the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his personal
interest in the success of Nepal's peace process. He
visited Nepal during UNMIN's mandate in October
2008, and expressed his firm commitment to its
success. My sincere appreciation and thanks also go to
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
consistent involvement and several important visits
that contributed to consolidating Nepal's peace
process. I would also like to thank Ms. Karin Landgren
for leading her able team and for their dedicated
service in Nepal.

I also take this opportunity to thank her
predecessor, Mr. Ian Martin, for his contribution in
Nepal, first as the head of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights in Nepal, and later as
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of UNMIN during the crucial phases of our
peace process. My thanks also go to Mr. Tamrat
Samuel for his contributions in his capacity as Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Director of the Asia and Pacific Division of the
Department of Political Affairs. UNMIN and its leaders
will be remembered for their contributions to Nepal's
peace process and contemporary developments.

Finally, we are confident that we will continue to
enjoy international support and goodwill to consolidate
peace, stability and economic development in Nepal. It
is incumbent upon me, on behalf of my Government
and people, to assure the Security Council that Nepal is
committed to the path of peace, stability and
development and will remain fully engaged with the
international community in the days ahead. Peace,
development and human rights are indivisible, and they
10

need to be supported coherently to ensure the
sustainable progress of all countries around the world.
This is even more true for countries emerging from
conflict. We look forward to working together in the
days ahead to ensure a better and prosperous future for
all the Nepali people within a more peaceful and secure
world.

