Mrs.Schwalger(NewZealand):Wetoo congratulate
Angola on its assumption of the presidency of the

Security Council. New Zealand welcomes the adoption
of resolution 2270 (2016), imposing strengthened
and expanded sanctions on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. Our long-standing commitment to
the nuclear non-proliferation regime and to the goal of
a world without nuclear weapons is well known.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
continued pursuit of its nuclear weapons programme,
as demonstrated by its most recent nuclear test and
ballistic-missile launch, represents one of the most
serious threats to the international nonproliferation
regime. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
actions stand in defiance of international law and the
Council's resolutions.

When the Council met on 6 January, following the
latest nuclear test, we committed to beginning work
immediately to agree further significant measures in
response. Today's resolution represents the fulfilment
of that commitment. New Zealand co-sponsored today's
resolution in recognition of the continued threat the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's actions pose
to international peace and security and to the security
of our Asia-Pacific region. We do so with a heavy
heart, wishing that the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea would choose a path of providing for the
well-being and basic needs of its citizens, rather than
preoccupying itself with the development of a nuclear
weapons programme.

The measures contained in the resolution will
send a clear message to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, specifically that it will not benefit
from its provocative and combative behaviour and
that the best path available to it is a return, in good
faith, to negotiations on the denuclearization of the
Korean Peninsula.

We commend the United States and China for the
leadership they have shown in preparing the measures
contained in today's resolution. It is now incumbent on
all Member States to ensure they are implemented fully
and effectively.

