Mr. Theron (Namibia): I wish to thank Mr.
Vieira de Mello for travelling to New York to brief us
today. His briefing is certainly timely because of the
important considerations by this Council following the
recent tragic events in West Timor, his subsequent talks
with the Indonesian authorities and the Council's
meeting with the Special Envoy of President Wahid.
Furthermore, the Council will soon have a follow-up
meeting with Foreign Minister Shihab. Our exchanges
today have provided a clearer idea of the situation on
the ground.

I wish to say a few words on the work of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET). My delegation remains satisfied
with the progress by UNTAET in the execution of its
mandate. We note the continuing positive
developments in East Timor's administration process.
The continuing high priority that is given to efforts
towards reconciliation is commendable. My delegation
also disagrees with those that allege that nothing is
being done in this regard. Similarly the further increase
in economic activities is encouraging since it will have
a vital role in the future prosperity of the East
Timorese.

UNTAET should be commended for acting firmly
against militia incursions from West Timor, as in the
case of the recent killing of a militia member in a
firefight. Increased militia activities have provided
more urgency for the establishment of an East
Timorese national defence force, and we welcome the
Cabinet decision in this regard. However, it is our hope
that the current actions by the Indonesian Government
to disarm the militias in West Timor will normalize the
situation. We call on the Indonesian authorities to leave
no stone unturned in this effort, as well as in
disbanding the militias.

With regard to the situation of the camps in West
Timor, my delegation remains concerned about the
plight of the refugees. We also call on the Government
of Indonesia to provide them with all the necessary
humanitarian assistance in the absence of the United
Nations agencies. We welcome the efforts made by the
Government to provide safety to the refugees. It is
however, important, that all the provisions of Security
Council resolution 1319 (2000) be fully implemented.
In this regard, those responsible for the brutal murders
of United Nations staff on 6 September should be
brought to justice swiftly.

We know that the return of refugees has been
extremely slow. However, we would appreciate it if Mr.
Vieira de Mello could elaborate a little more on
UNTAET's plans in the event of a rapid and large-scale
return of refugees to East Timor.

In conclusion, my delegation looks forward to the
meeting with Foreign Minister Shihab. I would also
like to take this opportunity to reiterate our strong
support for Mr. Vieira de Mello and his staff.

