Mr. Lie Cheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like at the outset to thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.

The stability of the situation in Lebanon is
conducive to promoting overall peace and stability in
the region. China calls on all relevant parties in Lebanon
to continue strengthening dialogue and cooperation and

enhancing unity. China commends Lebanon's efforts to
advance the process of cabinet formation.

China is following closely developments along the
Blue Line and has taken note of the actions pertaining
to the construction of tunnels. We hope that the
countries concerned will work closely with the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) to conduct
a comprehensive, objective and impartial investigation.
China appreciates the rapid response by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and UNIFIL
in undertaking active coordination and communication
with the parties concerned, with a view to maintaining
regional stability.

Given the current situation, China calls on Lebanon
and Israel to remain calm and exercise restraint so
as to prevent any escalation of tensions. The two
sides should focus on maintaining regional peace and
stability, stop the accusatory rhetoric, abide in earnest
by the cessation-of-hostilities agreement and strictly
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.

The international community should respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of the countries concerned and continue to support
Lebanon in building its security capacity and border-
control capabilities.

The parties must refrain from unilateral actions so
as not to exacerbate the situation. The Security Council
should exert a positive influence aimed at promoting the
use of dialogue and consultation by Lebanon and Israel
so that they can properly address their differences.

UNIFIL continues to play an important role in
maintaining overall calm in the mission area along the
Blue Line, for which China expresses its appreciation.
UNIFIL should continue to give full play to the role
of the tripartite mechanism in promoting strengthened
dialogue between Israel and Lebanon in order to ease
the current tense situation. As one of the countries
contributing troops to UNIFIL, China will continue to
fully support the work of the mission.

China stands ready and willing to work with
the international community to continue to play a
constructive role in the maintenance of regional peace
and stability.

