Mr. Amendola (Italy): I thank you, Sir, especially
for convening this meeting and focusing on the need
for action. I thank the Secretary-General for his update
on the situation in South Sudan and reiterate Italy's
appreciation of and support for his plan of action, as
it marks a first step towards the way out of the current
crisis. I also thank President Mogae and Ms. Sunday for
their insightful remarks.

With regard to the need for action, as we have heard
today, the security situation in South Sudan continues
to deteriorate. The political landscape is increasingly
fragmented along ethnic lines. The nation is being
undone by widespread violations of human rights,
impunity, gender-based violence and the recruitment
of child soldiers, and the humanitarian crisis is
reaching a tipping point. Famine has already been
declared in some parts of the country. The staff of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, humanitarian
personnel - including religious volunteers - and
their facilities have been attacked, looted and impeded
in their efforts to provide relief to the population. As
you have said, Mr. President, time is running out.
Clearly, the Security Council needs to pursue a strategy
following up on what we agreed on today in presidential
statement S/PRST/2017/4.

We are friends of South Sudan. In 2011, we all
supported South Sudan's independence. We welcomed
President Kiir's announcement of the national dialogue,
but for a dialogue to be credible and effective, it requires
two preconditions and a clear and common objective.
First, there is the matter of the ceasefire. Along with
the Secretary-General and other Council members, we
believe that the only possible solution to the conflict
is a political one. To achieve that, the parties have to
stop fighting. For that, South Sudan's regional partners
are the actors with the greatest potential influence.
The African Union Special Representative's shuttle
diplomacy, the United Nations engagement in the
country and the Security Council itself can also make a
significant contribution. In the Council, we are working
to maintain our focus on a first concrete step, which is
key to moving the process forward. We therefore support
President Konare's request to the South Sudanese
Government to announce a unilateral ceasefire.

Secondly, there is the issue of inclusivity. Our
engagement is aimed at promoting a truly inclusive
national dialogue, open to all national political
stakeholders, as well as to representatives of civil
society and religious leaders. A dialogue could be
the tool needed to end the conflict and help respond
to the profound impact of the current humanitarian
crisis. We can step up our political engagement with
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development in order to lay the foundation for
achieving that goal. But we must first establish security
guarantees. The current progress on deploying a
regional protection force is still limited. We call on
the South Sudanese parties to cooperate constructively
with the United Nations so as to improve security
standards in Juba, and to refrain from obstructing
humanitarian access.

Thirdly, there is the issue of the implementation
of the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan, which the parties
to the conflict signed in 2015. Few of its elements

have been implemented - the proposed hybrid
court and the reconciliation process come to
mind - and implementation of some of the others

should be relaunched. The success ofa national dialogue
will depend on achieving those goals.

Italy continues to provide humanitarian support
to the people affected by the famine and the tragic
situation in South Sudan. We have just announced a
new contribution in response to the Secretary-General's
appeal, but the humanitarian crisis in the country is
mostly man-made. It is time for action. Let us work
seriously, cooperatively and jointly in the Council, as
well as at the regional and international levels, to return
peace to South Sudan.

