Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank you, Sir, for instigating this important debate
today. I also thank the Secretary-General, the Under-
Secretaries-General and the Special Representatives for
their important remarks and for bringing their expertise
to the Council.

We have been looking at peacekeeping issues in a
more systematic way for over a year now, and we have
made some progress in this Council, but today's
speakers have identified an issue that goes to the heart
of the Council's role in peacekeeping, which is how the
United Nations presence should evolve to support a
country's progress from conflict through post-conflict
to peace consolidation. We have heard today about how
this is an essential challenge to three important United
Nations mission - in Sierra Leone, where a series of
successful transitions have taken us from a
peacekeeping operation to an integrated peacebuilding
mission; in Liberia, which has begun the process of
drawdown and transition; and in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where the forthcoming
strategic review will be an important opportunity to set
a new course for peace consolidation.

I have one strategic point and five practical
suggestions to make.

The strategic point is that transition - as Ms. Loj
explained - is not about a linear progression from one
kind of activity - peacekeeping - to another -
peacebuilding. Peacebuilding is the objective at the
outset, and a peacekeeping operation is often important
but only a part of achieving that objective. Thus,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding must form part of a
single, comprehensive and integrated plan. And that
plan should have a political settlement at its heart. As
all three Special Representatives have stated, it should
unite the efforts of all United Nations actors and the
broad international community, and it should
strengthen national capacity.

All actors must understand the overall objective
and their role in contributing to it. Ms. Loj has worked
hard to ensure that we have such a strategy in Liberia
under the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the staff of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) have
created such a plan in the first integrated strategic
framework. In Sierra Leone, we have the join Vision
drawn up by Mr. Von der Schulenburg. Without these
overall strategies, peacekeeping efforts can lack
coordination and risk duplicating effort in support of
some priorities, while neglecting others.

In our View, to make this work in practice, we
need five things. First, we need a clear understanding
from the outset of the outcome we seek from the
peacekeeping operation. The overall objective should
be to help create the conditions for a peace process to
prosper. The Council needs to get better at defining
what that success will look like in each individual
case. As Mr. Doss said, sometimes we concentrate too
much on the urgent at the expense of the important,
and we need to ensure that the Council has enough
time to discuss and monitor at a strategic level what a
United Nations operation is trying to achieve.

Secondly, we need a clear and prioritized set of
tasks that fall to the peacekeeping operation and a way
to measure their progress. I think that we are getting
better at this, including through the use of
benchmarking, but we still have a long way to go in
developing flexible but effective ways of evaluating
success.

Thirdly, we need to be clear about what
peacekeepers can do and cannot do. There is much that
peacekeepers can do to support peacebuilding, as the
Secretary-General set out in his report. This can
include providing a minimum level of sustainable
security or helping to restore core Government
functions, but peacekeepers cannot deliver an entire
peacebuilding strategy.

Fourthly, the Security Council needs to focus its
attention on the critical obstacles to achieving the
strategic objectives. Sometimes we will need tougher
political messages; sometimes we will need to
reconfigure the mission, as we have done in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We spend too
much time talking about what is happening now and
not enough about what is required to get to sustainable
peace.

Lastly, I think we need to make better use of the
Peacebuilding Commission. At its conception in 2005,
we wanted the Commission to help the Council manage
the drawdown and transition of successful
peacekeeping operations, and it has done a lot of
admirable work. But like the Secretary-General, we
would like to see an even sharper focus on what
concrete action needs to be taken by the Council, by
peacekeepers and by the rest of the United Nations
system to achieve that strategic objective. There is a
broader point here. We need to draw in advice more
regularly from across the range of military, police,
development and other expertise available.

We should celebrate the many successes of
United Nations peacekeeping. It has been a remarkable
institution, but we often ask too much of it and expect
it to deliver what only national authorities can deliver:
security and prosperity. We should give the
peacekeepers clear and achievable goals, and recognize
when their work is done and it is time for others to take
up the burden. That will often involve a degree of risk,
and we must be realistic about that risk. But the
alternative is overstretch and failure to achieve the
unachievable. And that, in our view, is the biggest
threat to United Nations peacekeeping.

