Mr. Feltman: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on recent developments in
Somalia and on the findings ofthe technical assessment
mission, as requested in resolution 2093 (2013).

I shall start with a briefpolitical update. The Federal
Government of Somalia has continued implementing
its six-pillar policy for stabilization and peacebuilding
in the country. Notably, it has been reaching out
beyond Mogadishu in an effort to realize its vision for
a federal State of Somalia. The agreement between
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud and the Somaliland
administration to continue dialogue and increase
cooperation, signed earlier this month, is a welcome
step forward. Similarly, Prime Minister Shirdon's
listening tour - aimed at building trust and consensus
between Mogadishu, existing regional administrations
and fledgling ones marks an important step in the

 
national reconciliation and federal State-building
process.

However, the Government's approach to building
new regional administrations is not accepted by all. An
interim draft charter to establish a so-called Jubaland
state in southern Somalia was ratified by representatives
from three regions on April 2 and is expected to result
in the election of a president for Jubaland state in
the coming days. While the draft charter envisages
Jubaland state as part of the federal system, the Federal
Government regards it as unconstitutional, and efforts
to find a compromise have reached an impasse. A
great deal more work is needed to tackle the inevitable
challenges that will arise in the development of a federal
system in Somalia.

There have been several alarming reminders
of the fragile security situation inside Somalia. On
17 March, Al-Shabaab retook the town of Hudur hours
after Ethiopian National Defence Forces withdrew.
Multiple suicide bombings carried out by Al-Shabaab
have claimed the lives of innocent Somali civilians
in Mogadishu. The most recent, on 14 April, involved
several coordinated attacks, including a double suicide
bombing at the regional court in the capital. More than
50 people were reportedly killed.

The courthouse attacks were more sophisticated
and coordinated than the previous attacks in Somalia,
indicating external support, but have so far failed to
undermine the optimism that permeates Mogadishu.
However, they underscore the need to rapidly strengthen
security in Somalia.

The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
is reaching its operational limit in terms of holding and
expanding areas under its control. Innovative thinking
is required to address that challenge. Additional
resources, including enablers and force multipliers, as
well as the means to reconfigure the AMISOM. forces,
are required ifit is to maintain the impressive momentum
of the past year. The anticipated withdrawal of the
Ethiopian National Defence Forces will add further
strain. We remain concerned about the clear challenges
faced by AMISOM. and the Somali national forces in
their current state. A better funded and coordinated
strategic approach that recognizes that well-trained and
equipped Somali forces are the ultimate exit strategy
for international military operations in Somalia is
required by the international community.

The United Nations has continued dialogue with
the Federal Government, as well as the countries of the
region and partner organizations. This week, I spoke
with President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. We discussed
the importance of developing mutually reinforcing
working relations with Somalia's neighbours. Today,
the Secretary-General and I had constructive meetings
with Mr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Foreign
Minister of Ethiopia, who is here with us today, where
we underscored the important role that Ethiopia is
playing in ensuring stability in Somalia. We urged close
coordination between the Ethiopians and AMISOM
regarding Ethiopia's planned withdrawal of its forces
from Somalia. I have also been in contact with the
African Union and the European Union to ensure a
coherent approach to our support to Somalia.

The United Nations continues to work with the
Federal Government and local authorities in Somalia
to establish a new United Nations mission to support
peacebuilding and state-building, as requested in
resolution 2093 (2013). We are now very clear as to how
the United Nations should support the Government
through 2016. In his letter to the Council (see S/2013/239, annex), the Secretary-General has outlined his vision
for a new United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNAMSOM) - the vehicle that is designed to deliver
that support.

For that and other reasons, the Mission's core role
will be to act as an enabler, helping to create and to
galvanize the political and strategic environment in
which stabilization and peacebuilding can proceed,
including by leveraging other parts of the United Nations
system and international partners. Substantively,
the Mission will have four key areas of focus. It will
provide good offices, support reconciliation efforts and
assist with the mediation of the politically sensitive
challenges associated with the constitutional review
and the question of federalism.

It will help to build national capacities in the rule
of law and the security sector and in the protection and
promotion of human rights at all levels of society. It
will also seek to enhance the Government's lead in
coordinating international assistance efforts through
the framework of the New Deal for Engagement in
Fragile States. Through joint task teams, the Mission
will also work with the country team and other partners
on urgent issues, such as stabilization in the newly
recovered areas, maritime issues, economic triggers of
violence and capacity development.
The guiding principles outlined by the Secretary-
General will be critical to the success of UNAMSOM
and, indeed, of the United Nations system as a whole
in Somalia. Building Somali capacity and supporting
Somali leadership will be central to our efforts to
strengthen the peace process. In the longer run, we
hope that it will be Somali solutions that will bring
an end to conflict and determine the best models for
Somalia's development. That is at the heart of the new
United Nations Mission's approach.

The new mission will need to be agile, flexible and
mobile to respond and adapt to evolving priorities. The
limited space and resources and the challenging security
environment mean that the mission will have a limited
number of permanent residential staff. However, it will
need the resources to bring in specialized experts to
support emerging priorities. It will also need a concept
of support and a range of security options to enable
the United Nations to work side by side with Somalis,
including in Villa Somalia.

Such a model may be expensive given the security
environment of Somalia but, for the United Nations
to be relevant, it will require the strong support of the
Council, in particular, and ofMember States, in general.

Collaboration and partnership will also be critical.
The Mission will rely on the United Nations country
team to bring programmatic support to the political and
strategic advice that it will provide, while ensuring that
the humanitarian space is protected. Joint leadership
and planning teams will guide the work associated with
the United Nations presence in Somalia. The Mission
will also have a core pillar of analysts and planners, who
will provide a multiplier effect, working to integrate the
Mission's capacity and that of the country team and to
link those capacities with what AMISOM. and other
partners would provide.

We look forward to strengthening our new strategic
partnerships with the African Union and AMISOM
through the new mission. We acknowledge that both
organizations play essential roles in supporting
Somalia's peacebuilding in all its aspects. We are
committed to realizing the synergies between those
roles and the United Nations Mission. UNAMSOM
and AMISOM. planners will meet as soon as the new
mission is up and running to work out the parameters of
our practical partnership on the ground. As in so many
areas, the United Nations partnership with the African
Union is vital to our ability to achieve our objectives.
We look forward to ongoing cooperation with the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, as well.
The United Nations will require a strong level
of commitment from the international community
if UNAMSOM. is to succeed in the coordination role
envisaged by the Council in resolution 2093 (2013).
That means a clear commitment to working coherently
and patiently to allow the Federal Government to
develop its plans and build its capacities. The current
spectre of fragmented and duplicative efforts at
international assistance is inefficient and could be
counterproductive. It risks overwhelming the nascent
national capacity. The President of Somalia has told
us that. We are hopeful that the conference to be held
in London next month and other meetings scheduled
in Brussels and Tokyo later in the year will help us to
agree on a framework for future coordination.

The new mission represents a fresh start for the
United Nations in Somalia and a renewed commitment
by the Council to support Somali-owned peacebuilding.
Results will not be achieved overnight. If we are
genuinely committed to Somali leadership, we must
be prepared to let Somalis set the timelines, as well as
the priorities, and to keep our expectations realistic.
However, we firmly believe that the design of the new
mission is grounded in real needs and a well-thought-
out analysis of the objective reality in Somalia today,
as well as in the great goodwill that exists in the
international community. With the Council's support,
we believe that we can help continue to move that
daunting agenda forward.

