Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I thank you, Sir, an Senegal
for convening this meeting. I also thank the Secretary-
General, Mr. Danilo Turk, Ms. Chrstine Beerli and
Mr. Sundeep Waslekar for their interventions.

The relationship between water, peace and security
should be considered with prudence and caution
by the Council. Like climate change, to which it is
intimately connected, water scarcity is primarily a
sustainable development challenge. While it may be
one element contributing to conflict and instability in
some particular circumstances, it does not necessarily
represent a threat to international peace and security.

General Assembly resolution 1803 (XVII) declared
that the right of peoples and nations to permanent
sovereignty over their natural resources must be
exercised in the interests of their national development
and of the well-being of the people of the State
concerned. Building on this legal right enjoyed by each
Member State, the Rio Declaration on Environment
and Development recognized that, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and the principles
of international law, States have the sovereign right
to exploit their own resources pursuant to their own
environmental and development policies. These
principles will have a key role to play in the universal
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), including SDG 6, on water and sanitation.

The logic of cooperation, not coercion, should
therefore guide efforts to ensure the just and efficient
use of limited water resources. Agencies and initiatives
such as United Nations-Water, the United Nations Food
and Agriculture Organization Land and Water Division,
the World Water Assessment Programme and the
International Hydrological Programme of UNESCO are
well placed to provide technical expertise to prevent and
resolve issues concerning water resource management.
The Peacebuilding Commission, its Support Office and
Fund can also contribute to designing and supporting
projects aimed at fostering peace and reconciliation
through the fair allocation and ownership of, as well as
access to, water resources at the national level.

Despite some misperceptions that transboundary
water basins tend to engender hostility rather than
collaborative solutions, water is mainly an untapped
resource of fruitful cooperation. Nurturing the
opportunities for cooperation in water management
among all stakeholders can help build mutual respect,
understanding and trust among countries, and maintain
public health, food security and social, environmental
and economic stability. It can also build sustainable
peace.

As my delegation highlighted during the Arria
Formula meeting on this subject in April, our regional
experience illustrates the potential of cooperation
concerning water resources. Brazil signed, in 1969,
the Treaty of the River Plate Basin with four of its
neighboring countries. Among other provisions, the
Treaty established an Intergovernmental Coordinating
Committee to promote joint projects in one of the
world's largest river basins. Two of these are the
Guarani aquifer and the waterway transport system
of the River Plate basin. A decade later, in 1979, a
landmark tripartite agreement among Brazil, Argentina
and Paraguay, regarding the hydroelectric power plants
of Itaipu and Corpus Christi, ended a long-standing
controversy and paved the way for deeper integration
and cooperation in our region.

Likewise, Brazil created, along with Bolivia,
Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru, Suriname
and Venezuela, the Amazon Cooperation Treaty
Organization, which has made great strides in
promoting cooperation and sustainable development in
the Amazon basin. These experiences and other regional
initiatives bear witness to the potential of coordinated
water management as an instrument to prevent and
resolve disputes, as well as a catalyst for prosperity.

Rather than treat access to water resources as a threat
to international, peace and security, our focus should
be on addressing serious violations of international
humanitarian law regarding water, particularly the issue
of attacks on water installations in armed conflicts. It is
of utmost importance that all parties to conflict abide
by their obligations not to attack, destroy, remove or
render useless drinking water supplies and irrigation
works, as expressly stipulated in Additional Protocols I
and II to the 1949 Geneva Conventions.

The securitization of sustainable development
issues is detrimental to the functioning of the Council
itself. This tendency detracts attention from the issues
on which the Council can and is mandated to make a
difference, namely, the protracted and more recent
conflicts that have resulted in the direst humanitarian
situation since the end of the Second World War.

