President Sall (spoke in French): At the outset, I
would like to thank Prime Minister Key for convening
this timely high-level debate on the human tragedy
ravaging the Syrian people. I would also like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his recent briefing
and Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Staffan
de Mistura.

Whatever one's point of view on the Syrian
conflict, which is entering its sixth year, there is one
clear image in all of our minds - a country ravaged by
war; a country in ruins; a land of fire, tears and blood.
The situation in Syria is one of the worst humanitarian
disasters of our time. Over 300,000 dead have left
behind broken families scarred by mourning and
suffering, and there is no end to the gruesome accounts
emerging. How many orphans, how many widows, how
many elderly people abandoned to their sad fate without
any assistance, how many wounded and disabled for
life, how many refugees and displaced people have
been created? No one really knows.

What is happening in Syria is untenable. Meeting
after meeting takes place, negotiation after negotiation
is held, and resolution after resolution is adopted
while thunderous bombs continue. Human lives have
been devastated and homes, markets, schools and
hospitals destroyed, in total violation of international
humanitarian law. Despite the laudable efforts of
humanitarian organizations of goodwill, an entire
people is dying and the economy and above the
centuries-old sociocultural heritage of an entire country
is collapsing. How much longer can this go on?

The cause that gathers us under one roof at the
United Nations is peace, which is not only desirable
but necessary. It is mandatory and it is achievable. The
price of peace is never higher than the cost of war. It
is certainly Senegal's hope that a negotiated solution
to the Syrian crisis is still possible. We saw evidence
of that recently with the first ceasefire agreement
on which the Russians and the Americans were able
to agree. Regrettably, it was quickly breached, but if
both were to take the necessary measures and shoulder
their share of responsibility in the tragedy, I believe
that they would be able to assist the Security Council in
discharging its mission.

In Africa, we say that when two elephants fight,
the grass suffers. The Security Council has reached
its limits. No resolution can be drafted because of the
right of veto. That is why the Security Council must
be reformed. Could a veto be vetoed, perhaps, when
there is a risk of genocide or crimes against humanity?
Should we allow the right of veto to prevent humankind
from ending the situation unfolding right in front of us?
We see the impact of the movement of Syrian refugees
to Europe. Many democracies could crumble under
the weight of extremism. We see its effects in North
Africa - terrorism is taking place in Syria and Libya
and has reached the Sahel and Somalia. Should we wait
until the world collapses under the weight of the Syrian
crisis to act? I believe that it is time for the Council to
take up the tools it needs to discharge its mission and
end the conflict.

Senegal supports the efforts of the International
Syria Support Group and all efforts needed to achieve
effective and lasting peace throughout Syria and
to allow for the unimpeded access of humanitarian
assistance. We also support the establishment ofajoint
command centre for information-sharing and improved
cooperation to combat terrorism. I welcome Egypt's
proposals, which could very much assist its neighbours
in the quest for peaceful solutions. Senegal welcomes
the adoption of a joint, consistent, global strategy to
ensure that the terrorists who are driven out of Syria are
unable to settle elsewhere in North Africa, in particular,
and in the Sahelo-Saharan region.

Similarly, peace must be made among all Syrian
parties in good faith towards a political solution to the
conflict. Such peace is possible because war cannot be
the future of an entire people. I hope for momentum
in the Russian-American dialogue because peace will
depend on a serious agreement being reached between
those two great countries. We should reflect on the
wisdom of a great man of the twentieth century, John
Fitzgerald Kennedy. Fifty-three years ago, in this
very Organization, he himself delivered the following
words, "Mankind must put an end to war, or war will
put an end to mankind" (A/PVJOIS, para. 40). Let us
make the right decisions.

