Mr. Catarino (Portugal): Mr. President, may I take
this opportunity to welcome your presence here today and
congratulate you on the manner in which Ambassador
Legwaila has been very ably steering the work of the
Council this month. A word of appreciation is also in order
for the excellent work of Ambassador Cardenas as
President during the month of January, when important
steps were taken towards improving the transparency of the
Council and its links with the rest of the States Members of
the United Nations. For this he has our sincere thanks.

I would like to salute the Ministers of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) delegation, whose presence here
today attests to the importance that organization attaches to
bringing peace to Angola and supporting the work of the
United Nations towards that end.

T 0 His Excellency the Minister of External Relations
of Angola, Mr. Venancio de Moura, I would like to extend
a very cordial welcome.

Our role in the Angolan peace process is well known
to everyone, and as one of the observer countries, Portugal
played an active part in bringing the Lusaka Protocol into
the light of day. It is the successful end of that very long
and arduous process of negotiations that brings us here
today, as the Security Council authorizes the launching of
a new, enlarged United Nations peace-keeping operation in
Angola.

The success of the Lusaka negotiations is the result of
a number of factors, not least of which is how serious the
Angolan Government and UNITA were about bringing the
fighting in Angola to an end. But the unswerving
persistence, dynamic skills and sheer wisdom of Maitre
Alioune Blondin Beye, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, was also - undoubtedly - a key
element in that success. Always supported by the three
observer countries, Maitre Beye was able to transform dim
hope into feasible reality. On behalf of my Government,
our most sincere congratulations and appreciation go out to
him.

Another very important factor contributing to the
success of the Lusaka process was the work of the
neighbouring States in demonstrating, through their
solidarity with the Angolan people, that peace was
possible and that it was an objective worth striving for.
The very important contribution of the Government and
the people of Zambia in hosting the negotiations can
never be overestimated.

The Government of Portugal supports the draft
resolution of the Security Council authorizing the
establishment of the third United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III). The negotiations are
over. It is now time to act. The tasks before UNAVEM
III, in the context of the "Acordos de Paz", the Lusaka
Protocol and other relevant Security Council resolutions,
have been clearly set out by the Council. Let UNAVEM
III not fail because the international community did not
give it the capacity to fulfil these tasks.

While we understand the rationale behind a phased
deployment of UNAVEM. III, we also believe that the
flexibility to deploy additional forces must be retained
and must not be allowed to be held hostage to delays
resulting from disagreements on whether one or another
of the conditions has or has not been met.

The Angolan Government and UNITA must
demonstrate that they understand what the United Nations
and the international community are doing towards
bringing peace to their country. They must show the
necessary will to cooperate in order to bring about a
successful implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and the
completion of the peace process. It is up to them to bring
peace to Angola.

But we must proceed with caution in establishing
conditions to be met before UNAVEM. III can move on
to its next phase. By giving the parties the opportunity to
challenge whether those conditions have been fulfilled, we
are not only allowing for delays in the deployment of
additional personnel but also threatening to derail the
peace process itself.
Above all, UNAVEM. III needs to be given a clear
mandate and the necessary means to achieve it. In
keeping with its constant support for the peace process in
Angola, Portugal stands ready to participate fully in that
peace-keeping operation. We will be ready to send
support units as well as military and civilian police
observers, and to participate in the force's command

 

structure. We appeal to the international community to
support UNAVEM. III in any way it can.

We have all travelled a long way to see peace come
to Angola, but none more so than the people of that
country, who deserve a chance to live a life different from
one ravaged by war. The Security Council has taken a very
important step towards peace in Angola. Let it be a firm
and decisive one.

