Ms. Mueller: The humanitarian situation in Syria
has seen some significant changes since I briefed the
Council in September (see S/PV.8622). My briefing
today will focus on three operational areas: first, the
deeply concerning and rapidly unfolding situation in
north-eastern Syria; secondly, the continuing crisis in
north-western Syria; and thirdly, an update on Rukban.
I will also give an outlook for the coming weeks.

The Secretary-General has expressed his grave
concerns about the escalation of the conflict in the north-
east and emphasized that any military operation must
fully respect international law, including the Charter of
the United Nations and international humanitarian law.
Civilians and civilian infrastructure must be protected.
Safe, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access must be
allowed so that United Nations and other humanitarian
organizations can carry out their critical work.

Since the beginning of military operations by
the Turkish armed forces and allied non-State armed
groups in north-eastern Syria earlier this month, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights has received concerning reports
of civilian casualties and damage to critical civilian
infrastructure. The military operation has severely
impacted the humanitarian situation. The United
Nations has received assurances from the Government
of Turkey that every effort is being made to ensure the
protection of civilians and the infrastructure on which
they rely.

The hostilities have triggered large-scale population
movements. In the past two weeks, almost 180,000
people, including nearly 80,000 children, have fled
south from the border areas between Turkey and Syria.
People must be allowed to seek safety and move freely.
Most are sheltering with friends and family, while
others are in displacement camps or collective shelters.
Given the fact that fighting has subsided in some areas
in recent days, some of those displaced have started to
return. More than 10,000 people have fled to Iraq since
the start of the military operations in the north-east.
The United Nations remains deeply concerned about
the prospects of further hostilities along the Turkish-
Syrian border and the impact on civilians, including
further displacements.

The latest surge in hostilities in north-eastern Syria
compounds an already dire humanitarian situation.
Of the 3 million people in the north-east, 1.8 million
were already in need of some form of humanitarian
assistance even before the recent developments. About
710,000 people have been displaced. Prior to the
escalation, the United Nations and its partners were
reaching 1.25 million people on average every month
with lifesaving assistance such as food, shelter, water,
sanitation, hygiene and health care.

Humanitarian actors continue to deliver, despite
facing serious challenges on the ground, including
hostilities and an unpredictable security environment.
Many organizations work cross-border from Iraq. They
have had to evacuate or relocate international staff. Some
have had to temporarily limit or suspend operations
due to the deteriorating security situation and concerns
about access because of new parties gaining control of
the areas where they operate. Organizations operating
cross-border from Iraq nevertheless continue to provide
humanitarian assistance, including trauma care, support
to health services and sustaining water supplies. While
national staff continue to work tirelessly to assist those
in need, their capacity is stretched.

To meet immediate needs, the United Nations has,
since 9 October, provided food to more than 286,000
people across Hasakah and Raqqa governorates as
well as 10 tons of medicine to Qamishli national
hospital. Winter supplies are being provided to the
most vulnerable.

Safe water, sanitation and hygiene efforts continue
and the polio campaign is ongoing, with the support of
the United Nations Children's Fund. The United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, together with the
International Organization for Migration, is supporting
people arriving in Iraq with shelter, core relief items
and protection services. There have also been efforts
to ensure that stocks are in place to scale up as needed.
The World Food Programme is ensuring that there is
food on hand for approximately 500,000 people for one
month. In Qamishli, the World Health Organization is
pre-positioned 314,000 medical treatments, including
trauma kits that will be distributed to medical facilities
in the area.

Following the United Nations engagement with the
Government of Turkey, a technical team comprising
Syrian Arab Red Crescent and local water and
electricity department technicians was able to access
the Allouk water station, which provides water to over
400,000 people across Hasakah, and to temporarily
restore the water flow after it was put out of service
in the hostilities. They also restored electricity in Ras
Al-Ayn. These are significant achievements but no
substitute for sustained services, which can be ensured
only if the parties take all feasible precautions to avoid
civilian harm and ultimately put an end to the hostilities.
Continued access to the facilities will be necessary to
keep them functioning in the coming days and weeks.
Hundreds of thousands of civilians depend on them.

As the situation evolves, a critical challenge facing
humanitarian actors is the need to scale operations from
within Syria. To achieve this, we will need all parties
to facilitate safe, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian
access via land and air routes to transport humanitarian
supplies along with an expansion of humanitarian
capacity in the north-east. United Nations leadership
on the ground is working with all relevant parties to
achieve this. The Syria Humanitarian Fund, supported
by 16 donors, is planning a $15-million allocation for
the north-east. Replenishing the Fund will be critical.

Keeping our focus on north-eastern Syria, I should
like to say a few words about Al-Hol camp. We have
provided regular updates on the situation in the camp,
where approximately 68,600 people reside, 94 per cent
of them women and children, and 55 per cent of the
children are under 12 years of age. Their situation
is desperate. As the Secretary-General has noted,
Member States bear primary responsibility for their
own nationals, and policies and actions that lead to
statelessness should be avoided.

Humanitarian organizations are monitoring how
the evolving situation throughout the north-east might
impact the civilian population in the camp. Despite a
reduced presence, humanitarian actors continue to
provide critical humanitarian services. However, more
support is needed to ensure that adequate protection
and humanitarian assistance can be provided over the
coming weeks and months.

I should now like to turn to the situation in the
north-west. Approximately 3 million people live in
extremely difficult conditions in the Idlib de-escalation
area in north-western Syria. We must also ensure that
the situation there receives the attention and priority it
deserves. Approximately 2.1 million people depend on
humanitarian aid and 1.6 million are displaced, many
having been forced to move multiple times in search
of safety.

The hostilities in the north-west have subsided
following the announcement ofa ceasefire on 30 August,
but worrying signs of insecurity remain. There have,
however, been recent reports of an uptick in hostilities.
Between 18 and 20 October, the highest number of
attacks since the start of the ceasefire agreement was
reported, mostly affecting the southern parts of Idlib.
We remain extremely concerned about the impact a
further escalation of fighting might have on civilians,
including further mass displacement for those forced to
flee and the communities receiving them.

More than 400,000 people were already displaced
between May and September and are now sheltering
in camps and informal sites in Idlib and Aleppo
governorates. Most are in densely populated areas in
the north, close to the Turkish border. Some people
are still in the open air, without adequate shelter, and
many will struggle to survive in colder temperatures.
Although the academic year began in September, many
school-age children are deprived of education because
of overcrowded learning facilities in the receiving
communities, the heavy damage sustained by schools,
the use of schools to house displaced people, and the
lack of learning supplies and materials.

Humanitarian organizations have scaled up cross-
border operations from Turkey to meet rising needs in
Idlib. Recent months have seen the highest number of
trucks passing through the United Nations Monitoring
Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic cross-border
operations in Bab Al-Hawa and Bab Al-Salam since
their inception in 2014. Food aid has nearly doubled in
2019, from reaching 560,000 civilians in the month of
January to reaching 1.1 million in September through
this cross-border operation. Tens of thousands more
have received other services and support, such as
winter clothing, household items, clean water, shelter,
emergency nutrition and protection services.

The Under-Secretary-General and Emergency
Relief Coordinator visited the border region between
Turkey and Syria earlier this month to assess the relief
operation. He noted that the human cost of failing to
renew the Security Council's decision to authorize
United Nations and partner cross-border operations
would be immense. If United Nations cross-border
deliveries were to be halted, civilian suffering would
increase, potentially leading to greater displacement,
including to neighbouring countries. The United
Nations does not have an alternative method of delivery
that could match the timeliness or reach, and it therefore
remains critical that resolution 2165 (2014) be extended
for another year.

I would now like to speak about Rukban. The
situation for people in this camp on the Syrian-Jordanian
border remains critical. Following the mission that
delivered aid to 15,000 people in early September,
a second joint mission by the United Nations and the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent in late September provided
additional aid and supported the voluntary departure
of 329 people to collective shelters in Homs. Another
mission to provide transport to those who want to
leave is planned to depart shortly, pending security
guarantees by all parties.

Meanwhile, the United Nations and the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent strive to continue assisting those most
in need inside the camp. One woman and her 7-year-
old child who required urgent surgery were evacuated
to Horns on 22 October to ensure that they received
care. As the cold months approach, many in Rukban
continue to request support to leave. Since late March,
some 18,300 people have left Rukban, but thousands
remain in the area and need support until alternatives
are found.

In the face ofthese difficult operational challenges,
the United Nations and its partners continue to deliver
aid to millions across Syria. Through the first half of
this year, the United Nations and other humanitarian
organizations reached about 6.3 million people in
need on average each month. In the past two months,
humanitarian agencies have provided assistance,
including food, to more than 4 million people in need.
More than 1.3 million health and medical treatments
were provided to people throughout the country during
the same period.

Despite these efforts and after months of
intensified needs, stocks are running low and gaps
have emerged and remain to be addressed. People in
north-western and north-eastern Syria are dependent
on aid organizations to meet their basic needs. Without
further funding, the availability of aid will be reduced.
The 2019 humanitarian response plan for Syria is
funded at 45 per cent, or $1.48 billion, 10 months into
the year. Donors have been generous, but more support
is urgently needed; without it, partners will not be able
to scale up their operations and respond to new and
existing needs.

While millions ofpeople in Syria need humanitarian
assistance, their primary need is to be spared hostilities
and to have political solutions that end the violence,
allowing people to begin to rebuild their lives in safety
and in dignity.

I will conclude this briefing by reiterating our three
key points: protect civilians and civilian infrastructure;
ensure safe, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access
to all civilians in need, including across borders; and
cease hostilities and de-escalate the situation in north-
eastern and north-western Syria.

