Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): We commend the United
States for convening this meeting to consider the
interlinkages between human rights and the prevention
of armed conflicts.

More than 70 years ago, the Charter of the United
Nations established the founding pillars of the United
Nations system. Those are peace and security, human
rights and free development. In today's globalized
world, they are more topical than ever. Sustainable
peace and security cannot be achieved in isolation from
human rights. Human rights violations are not only a
grave consequence of conflicts, but they are frequently
the very reason that conflicts begin in the first place.
In the past, we have seen rare instances in which
the Security Council was able to establish that link
between the danger of conflicts' eruption and human
rights violations.

On 4 November 1956, the Security Council
adopted resolution 120 (1956) on Hungary and the
grave situation generated by the use of Soviet military
forces to suppress the efforts of the Hungarian
people to reassert their rights. The Council called an
emergency special session ofthe General Assembly (see A/PV.564 to A/PV.573) so as to make the appropriate
recommendations concerning the situation in Hungary.
Remarkably, the Council's resolution could not be
vetoed by the Soviet Union, which had voted against
it. At that time, the Council succeeded in achieving
a desired result by adopting the resolution through a
procedural vote.

In contrast, the outbreak of the genocide in Rwanda
in 1994 was utterly overlooked, and the Council did
not heed the early signs of the impending tragedy.
Almost a year before the genocide during the summer
of 1993, the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on
Human Rights on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions depicted in great detail an alarming situation
with genocide looming and stressed that "human rights
must be the prime concern of any system for monitoring
or implementing agreements" (E/CN. 4/1994/7/Ade, para. 61). However, the Council subsequently failed to
respond to that warning until several months after the
tragedy had already taken place.

Today, the whole world is observing the severe
consequences of the crisis in Syria and the gross
human rights violations committed by various parties,
particularly the Syrian regime and its allies. Early
warning signs of an imminent conflict were already
very clear in 2011. However, the first draft resolution on
the issue (S/2011/612) introduced by France, Germany,
Portugal and the United Kingdom, with a prominent
human rights component, was vetoed on 4 October
2011. Fast forward six years - there is immense human
suffering with hundreds of thousands dead, millions
displaced and not even a hint of a light at the end of
the tunnel.

Here is a final stroke to complete this grim
picture. Action by the Security Council on the matter
is immobilized by what now has amounted to eight
uses of the veto. We can no longer apply a piecemeal
approach to the issue of such fundamental importance
for maintaining peace and security. It is time to look
anew at the role and place of human rights in the work
of the Council and take action.

Ukraine has consistently promoted the Human
Rights Council resolution 24/16 on the role of
prevention in ensuring and protecting human rights.
Although the Human Rights Council is a designated
United Nations venue for discussions on human rights
issues, its ability to take practical and action-oriented
decisions on matters relating to peace and security is
obviously constrained. We must therefore recognize the
crucial implications that human rights violations have
for peace and security, and it will be only natural for
the Security Council to take the lead on this matter.

In 1992, following the end of the Cold War, the
Council held its first summit meeting to discuss
the responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security in all
its aspects. At that time, the innate connection between
the protection of human rights and the maintenance
of peace and security appeared to be unquestionably
understood and defended. Every Head of State or
Government participating in the debate raised the issue
of the Council's share of responsibility for, and role in
the protection of, human rights.

At the summit, one world leader said:

"I believe that these questions are not an
internal matter of States, but rather their obligations
under the United Nations Charter, international
covenants and conventions. We want to see this
approach become a universal norm. The Security
Council is called upon to underscore the civilized
world's collective responsibility for the protection
of human rights and freedoms". (S/PV3046, p. 46)

This would be a relatively banal quotation if not
for the fact that those words, pronounced in this very
Chamber, were those of the President of the Russian
Federation. The speaker was President Yeltsin himself,
and the meeting took place 25 years ago, on the last day
of January 1992, the very first month of the Russian
membership in the United Nations and in the Council.
These words resonate to this day in their continued
global relevance, just as they do in their irrelevance to
the current political reality of the country in question.

In New York City, a street sign at the south-
west corner of Third Avenue and 67th Street reads
Sakharov-Bonner Corner, in honour of Mr. Sakharov
and his wife, Yelena Bonner. The corner is down the
block from the Russian - formerly Soviet - Mission
to the United Nations. Already in 1995 it was Yelena
Bonner, testifying before the United States Congress,
who said that all democratic ideals proclaimed in this
very Chamber by President Yeltsin had been betrayed
by the military assault on Chechnya.

Ever since, Russia has been striking a different
chord, to the effect that the Security Council, the
highest world authority to address conflicts and other
threats to peace and security, should not consider
human rights issues. What is more, human rights
phobia has been spreading like a metastatic cancer
beyond the Council to other parts of the United Nations
body in New York. In November and then in December
last year, consideration of human rights resolutions
was challenged by a group of countries in the Third
Committee, which, by its mandate, is obliged to address
such issues.

Disrespect for human rights, democracy and the
rule of law by authoritarian regimes with regard to
their own citizens is aimed, inter alia, at ensuring
impunity for themselves for internal civil wars, as is
the case in Syria, or unaccountability for attempts to
illegally annex foreign territories, as is the case with
Russia's actions in Crimea and its military aggression
in Donbas.

Three years have passed since Russia illegally
occupied Crimea. The occupying authorities are
committing massive, systematic violations of human
rights and seeking to destroy the identity of Ukrainians
and of the indigenous people of the peninsula, the
Crimean Tatars, as well as that of other ethnic and
religious groups. In its resolution 71/205, adopted in
December 2016, the General Assembly reaffirmed
that Crimean residents should enjoy protection under
the Geneva Conventions and applicable human
rights instruments.

One can find ample testimony to the crimes
committed during the Russian aggression against
Ukraine in the reports of the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission in Ukraine, which has been
operating in my country for three years now, at the
invitation of the Ukrainian Government. The request
for the deployment of the mission was an immediate
response by my Government to Russian aggression as
an effort to prevent massive human rights violations.
Since March 2014, the mission has issued 17 reports on
the human rights situation and two thematic reports,
including one on sexual violence in conflict in Ukraine.

Proper consideration of human rights violations in
the context of the maintenance of peace and security
may contribute to preventing the outbreak of armed
conflict. If a conflict is already under way, addressing
its human rights dimension may prevent the further
escalation of violence and serve as a deterrent to
conflict-related atrocities.

In the 19905, the Security Council received
23 periodic reports on human rights violations in the
former Yugoslavia. The first peacekeeping operation in
United Nations history with a mandate of protection of
civilians was deployed to contribute to the resolution
of the Balkan conflict. Therefore, we do not suggest
anything new.

The human rights component should be an
integral part of the Council's consideration of conflict
resolution and management. When the Council looks
into the issues of the occupation of Crimea and Russian
military aggression in Ukrainian Donbas, the same
approach should apply.

On the other side of the world, though still on
the Russian border, there is another Vivid case in
point: the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
The recent report of the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, presented in Geneva to the Human
Rights Council, pointed to deficiencies in the public
food-distribution system, restrictions on access to
information, and violations of international labour
standards concerning overseas workers. The report also
expresses continuing concern over the grave situation
in political prison camps and the unresolved cases of
enforced disappearances, including the abduction of
citizens of Japan and the Republic of Korea.

In the 1970s, human rights issues were removed
from the agenda of New York and transferred to nice,
cosy, sleepy Geneva. It was not only a physical move
but, it appears, an ideological divorce ofUnited Nations
Headquarters from something that was then perceived
as irreconcilably different from the security agenda
of New York. It is time to reconcile these differences
and to restore the integrity of the entire United Nations
system as designed by its founders.

The Council has no right to repeat its failures
in Rwanda, to continue to fail in Syria, or to remain
paralysed by the Russian position in the case of Crimea
and Donbas.

Of course, many things depend on the dedicated
leadership of the United Nations - a leadership that
would leave behind the years of apathy and neglect
vis-a-vis the human rights dimension of security, and
one that is fit to lead the Organization into a future
in which human rights and human security are integral
parts of the national security of each and every
Member State.

To conclude, I would like to stress how much we
are inspired by Secretary-General Guterres's vision and
the approaches he has outlined to the issues suggested
for discussion. We sincerely believe that the Secretary-
General can skilfully manage all of the tools given
him by the United Nations Charter and that he will not
hesitate to use them whenever necessary to achieve the
implementation of the Charter's goals and objectives.

