Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): The joint warning
issued by the Secretary-General and the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross on
31 October 2015 leaves no doubt that disrespect for the
well-being of civilians in armed conflict has reached
unprecedented levels, reminiscent of the Dark Ages.
Families are starving in besieged towns, patients are
being killed by bombs in their hospital beds, and there
have been unprecedented levels of sexual violence and
attacks on humanitarian workers - these are not just
clear violations of international humanitarian law, but
are, simply, barbarities.

Shockingly, not all of such acts and strategies can be
ascribed to extremists, rebels and non- State actors; some
of them fall squarely within the responsibility of States.
How can we expect non-State actors to comply with at
least the basic tenets of international humanitarian law
when even States parties to the Geneva Conventions fail
to do so? The discrepancy between the success of the
Geneva Conventions on paper and the dramatic erosion
of their respect in practice has become intolerable.

Discussions about international humanitarian law
sometimes get stuck in arguments about its relevance
in the light of the technological advances of the arms
industry, yet much of the suffering of innocent civilians
today arises from rather old-fashioned forms of military
action. In all too many cases, there is no need to resort to
sophisticated legal arguments to conclude that a certain
act amounted to a serious violation of international
humanitarian law. Clearly, lack of compliance with the
most basic rules of international humanitarian law is
its greatest problem today. We therefore regret that the
recent International Conference of the Red Cross and
Red Crescent was not able to agree on more concrete
measures to improve compliance.

The proposals on the table were already extremely
modest and designed to accommodate the concerns
of some opposing States. We therefore encourage
Switzerland and the International Committee of the
Red Cross, as facilitators of the process, to remain
steadfast. However, we cannot wait another four years
in the current situation of crisis. Complementary
steps for enhancing compliance have to be considered
urgently, both in the Council and outside. We also hope
that the World Humanitarian Summit will give a boost
to these efforts.

In any armed conflict, the protection of civilians is
first and foremost the responsibility and legal obligation
of parties to a conflict, and thus primarily of the States
and non-State actors involved. At the same time,
the Council, and in particular United Nations peace
operations on the ground also have an important role
to play. We generally support the recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,
but we were surprised that the report stayed clear of one

important dimension - accountability.

Bringing perpetrators of war crimes and other
serious violations of international humanitarian law to
justice is crucial to help deter future crimes, end cycles
of impunity and address the rights of victims. United
Nations peace operations can do much in the fight
against impunity, including by supporting domestic,
hybrid or international accountability and truth-finding
mechanisms. In particular, United Nations peace
operations could do much more to support the work of
the International Criminal Court. That will also require
greater commitment on the part of the Council itself
to the fight against impunity, and more principled,
concrete action, for example by referring situations
such as those in Syria and the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to the to the ICC, and by ensuring
the necessary follow-up.

Finally, I would like to take the opportunity to
remind Council members, as well as non-members, that
they are invited to join the code of conduct regarding
Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes. One hundred and
nine States, including eight current members of the
Council have already done so. The code is a strong
expression of the commitment of the supporting States
to actively contributing to timely and decisive Security
Council action to prevent or end mass atrocities. We
are strongly encouraged by the positive response of the
membership to the initiative and are confident that the
list will continue to grow. The code also reflects the
conviction that the protection of civilians is not just
another thematic issue for the Council to deal with, but
a core responsibility of the Council. We therefore call
on all Council members to deploy much greater efforts,
to engage with a greater spirit of cooperation, and to live
up to that responsibility for the sake of innocent men,
women and children trapped in conflict everywhere.

