Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank Assistant
Secretaries-General Titov and Nakamitsu, as well
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bangura, for their very thoughtful briefings, as well as
for the number of recommendations they made to the us,
which I found very creative and which we really need to
take seriously as the Council. I also pay tribute to your
leadership, Madam President, for having brought this
important issue back to the Council once again.

It is 18 months since we last discussed security
sector reform (SSR), and in that time more than
780,000 people have been killed by armed Violence.
That is almost one person every minute. Only a tenth
of those deaths occurred at the hands of terrorists or
in full conflict situations. Too many of them occurred
in countries that were emerging from conflict, where
stability, security and justice have yet to be embedded.
We all have a role to play to stop these deaths. Ensuring
an effective and accountable security sector in these
countries is a vital way of doing so.

So what can we do, as a Council and as
Governments, to achieve this? I think that there are
three things. First of all, we need to engage honestly
and sensitively with Governments and their institutions.
Security and justice are critical to stability, but if not
handled properly, these issues can fuel instability. Ill-
disciplined, unaccountable security forces operating
in fragile political climates can just as easily create
grievances as address them. We need to judge our
support according to the right political preconditions.
We cannot allow our enthusiasm for getting things done
to undermine the help that we are trying to give.

Honest engagement can bring risk, and it often
requires working with institutions that do not
necessarily meet international standards for human
rights transparency. But not engaging is not an option.
It is precisely these institutional security and justice
failures that allow crime and violence to flourish. They
are among the key drivers of conflict and extremism.
The Council is then left to tackle the violence and
dysfunctionality that they bring.

The second point that I want to make is that we
need to integrate our work on SSR into our longer-
term work on conflict prevention, peacebuilding and
development. We have made a good start. The fact that
Assistant Secretary-General Nakamitsu is here from
the United Nations Development Programme today
briefing the Council is progress in itself.

In addition, for the first time, our global goals on
development (SDGs) contain a goal on peace, justice
and security. This goal cannot be achieved without
effective, efficient security forces that can respond to
citizens" needs.

But we want to see more. A fully functional and
professional security sector is essential to sustainable
peace and also for the timely exit of United Nations
peace operations. We need better sequenced and better
prioritized mandates for peacekeeping operations to
achieve this, and we need effective systems to ensure
that the progress made on security forces does not fall
away once peacekeeping operations leave. If we get
these things right, not only will we decrease the average
15-year lifespan of a peace operation, but we can avoid
the tragic relapse into conflict that we see so often.

This all requires a strong requirement on the part
of the international community to support countries
through the whole of the conflict cycle. But it also
requires national political leaders to show courage
and drive reforms themselves. That is the only way to
ensure that the local security sector is able to deliver for
its population when a mission ends.

It is this concept of local ownership that informs
my third point. Locally owned political processes are
Vital to the success of security-sector reform, much
more so than externally imposed solutions. That is easy
to say but hard to deliver. In practice, this means that
efforts to build security capability in the short term
must be embedded in longer-term efforts to strengthen
accountability and the oversight mechanisms in
ministries of defence, the interior and justice. As both
Dmitry Titov and Izumi Nakamitsu have said, it means
that we have to use all of the tools available to the United
Nations, not just the military, to deliver security-sector
reform. It means coordinated responses, and, as we
heard in this Chamber earlier this week, working with
regional and subregional organizations. This is the best
way to ingrain coherent security-sector reform plans
within peacebuilding strategies.

To succeed, we also require reform processes that
are fully gender-sensitive and that incorporate the
perspectives and concerns of women. As we heard
today from Special Representative Bangura, gender-
sensitive SSR programmes are an important tool in the
fight against sexual violence. We know how much there
still is to do on this.

Madam President, let me conclude by thanking you
again for having brought this important issue back to the
Council. It is an issue that my Government cares about
deeply. This year, we will spend more than $250 million
on security-sector reform. That money is making a
difference. To cite just once example, in Sierra Leone
it has helped the local Government improve access to
security andjustice for nearly 300,000 women and girls
in remote districts. We support these programmes and
more because we believe that security and access to
justice is a basic service, on a par with health care and
education. It is a fundamental right, as recognized in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. We owe
it to the hundreds of thousands killed since we last
discussed this issue to ensure that this right is upheld.

