Mrs. Smith (Norway): First, I should like to
thank Mr. Mulet for his comprehensive briefing today.

As a sign of Norway's commitment, we are
nominating a team of five police officers with expertise
in sexual and gender-based violence to serve in the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). This is our first specialized team to a
United Nations mission, reflecting the great importance
that Norway places on contributing to the concrete
work of United Nations missions against sexual
violence. We commend MINUSTAH's support to the
Haitian authorities in setting up community police
substations that can assist victims of sexual and
gender-based violence in camps for internally
displaced persons and in crime-prone areas.

The potential for social unrest prevails. One must
look for solutions that permit the United Nations to
engage in areas of Port-au-Prince that are rated as not
secure. Norway commends the work done by the
community violence reduction programme and
recommends the extension of the programme.

Norway clearly supports MINUSTAH's measures
to address sexual and gender-based violence, including
training and the establishment of a referral system and
mechanisms for reporting and data collection. The Inter-
Agency Standing Committee's Guidelines for Gender-
based Violence Interventions in Humanitarian Settings
should inform the implementation of these measures.

Norway encourages MINUSTAH and other
relevant international bodies, including the Interim
Haiti Recovery Commission, to take fully into account
the recommendations issued by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights in her statement to
the Human Rights Council on 11 June 2010. We join
the High Commissioner in calling for all reconstruction
programmes and projects to adopt a human-rights-
based approach, including during tender processes. A
gender-based approach must be applied to all relief and
reconstruction efforts.

Norway has channelled a substantial part of our
support through the Multi-donor Trust Fund, including
as budgetary support. The Norwegian contribution to
the Fund of $33 million has been disbursed. We
endorse the Secretary-General's call for more of the
international support and for budgetary support to be
channelled through the Fund, thus supporting the
Government's own reconstruction efforts.

While there are positive developments in relation
to the preparations for presidential and legislative
elections, we are concerned about shortcomings in the
voter registration process. This may have a negative
impact on the elections and their legitimacy.

The challenge is now to achieve a gradual
transition from relief to recovery mode, keeping in
mind that the humanitarian situation is volatile. We
expect the United Nations to play a leading role in the
longer-term recovery process, including by supporting
capacity-building, enhancing the legitimacy of the
Haitian institutions and engaging civil society.

