Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on having
assumed the presidency of the Council for this month,
and I thank you for having taken the initiative to put
this item on our agenda, given its importance at the
Arab and Islamic levels. My delegation would like
also to associate itself with the statement made by the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and to make the
following comments in our national capacity.

We are meeting today at a very sensitive time and
at a turning point for the Middle East and the world as a
whole. We have witnessed unprecedented developments
with negative consequences for international peace
and security and the economic and social fabric. The
persistence of the Israeli occupation of the Arab and
Palestinian territories and the spread of extremism
and terrorism has sounded the alarm today, and it is
necessary to intervene before it is too late.

The unjustified and unacceptable Israeli aggression
against Gaza has had and will have dire consequences
that have jeopardized all the efforts deployed so far in
order to push forward the peace process. It has pushed
the region as a whole into the unknown and has ignited
hatred.

His Majesty the King has strongly condemned this
aggression since it began. It was also condemned by the
various social groups, parties and unions in Morocco.
Upon the directives of His Majesty, Morocco, since
the onset of the aggression in Gaza, has provided
humanitarian and financial assistance to our Palestinian
brothers in a show of solidarity.

Morocco and other supporters of peace were
relieved that on 26 August the ceasefire was signed
thanks to the Egyptian mediation. We welcome once
again this ceasefire and hope that it will be a lasting
one and pave the way to putting an end to the Israeli
occupation of the Palestinian territories.
The Kingdom of Morocco took part in the donors
conference organized by Egypt in collaboration with the
Norwegian Government and held on 12 October, and we
will contribute to the plan for rebuilding Gaza through
several projects that will be defined and implemented in
coordination with the Palestinian Authority and in the
framework of the relevant United Nations mechanism.
This will be in addition to the technical support that we
will be providing through the training of the Palestinian
personnel undertaking the reconstruction.

The plan to rebuild Gaza prepared by the Palestinian
Authority reflects the seriousness of our Palestinian
brothers, their love for peace and their aspiration to live
in peace and security as part of a two-State solution. It
is indeed an opportunity to encourage the Palestinian
private sector by building new partnerships between
with other stakeholders and countries. To that end,
the first step will be to lift the blockade and allow
access for the provision of assistance in all its forms, in
collaboration with the Palestinian National Authority
and in the framework of the relevant United Nations
mechanisms.

His Majesty the King, as Chair of the Jerusalem
Committee, has condemned all the provocative
measures in Jerusalem and the Judaization efforts
and has been calling for respect for the demographic
and legal specificities of Jerusalem, as a land for the
coexistence of all religions. We would like to remind
the Council of the outcome of the twentieth session
of the Jerusalem Committee, hosted by Morocco in
January under the chairmanship of His Majesty the
King, which emphasized that Jerusalem was at the core
of any political settlement for the Islamic nation.

The sufferings of the Palestinian people since 1948
will end only through a just and permanent settlement
that includes the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State with Jerusalem as its capital, based
on the June 1967 borders and in accordance with the
relevant international resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Madrid principles, with both States
living side by side in peace, security, coexistence and
collaboration. That is the only legitimate formula that
is accepted by the international community and can put
an end to the conflict. The international community
must therefore give that issue the utmost priority in
order to find a speedy settlement to the conflict, so that
the region can enjoy peace, security, prosperity and
coexistence.

The Syrian crisis, which has been growing daily at
all levels, must also be brought to an end. The Syrian
people have paid a high price as a result of the killing
and displacement of millions of Syrians, famine and
the degradation of their living conditions. In that
connection, we welcome the appointment of Mr. Steffan
de Mistura as the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Syria. We support his efforts at finding a
political solution and initiating a democratic transition
based on the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex)
of 2012, with a view to avoiding further destruction and
human suffering. We also call for the provision of more
medical and humanitarian assistance to the victims of
the bombing and the blockade. Morocco is ready to
provide more humanitarian assistance to the Syrian
people and to alleviate the burdens of displaced persons
and refugees. My delegation would like to reiterate the
need to safeguard Syria's sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity.

I reiterate once again my delegation's commitment
to Lebanon's independence and territorial integrity. I
commend the national spirit and great responsibility
shown by the various segments of the Lebanese
population in safeguarding the country's security,
stability and sovereignty.

The deterioration of the situation in Yemen is also
a source of concern for us. After the important strides
that were made in the peace process the consensus
reached under the auspices of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, the situation has deteriorated once
again and could jeopardize what has been achieved
so far. We therefore call upon all the stakeholders
in Yemen to show wisdom and give priority to the
common interests of Yemen, including its sovereignty
and territorial integrity.

I began by saying that we should sound the alarm.
We should indeed, because the scourge of terrorism has
taken a very worrisome turn and is today threatening
not only the Middle East, but the entire world. It is
jeopardizing our safety and security. The best proof
of that is the expansion of the so-called Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and the killing and degrading
treatment in which that group is engaged. The use of
religion by terrorist groups to justify their ideological,
political, expansionist and destructive goals has
nothing to do with Islam and harms the teachings
of Islam, which calls for coexistence, tolerance and
peace. In that context, we reiterate our condemnation
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. We
must not link terrorism to any religion, race, nation
or civilization. Terrorism must be fought relentlessly,
and the phenomenon of the foreign terrorist fighters
must also be fought and eliminated. In that regard,
the Kingdom of Morocco commends resolution 2178
(2014), adopted in September, to address that scourge.

