Mr. Feltman: I thank you, Sir, for inviting me to
represent the Secretary-General today in addressing
the Council on the item "War, its lessons and the search
for a permanent peace". The relevance and timeliness
of this debate are all too clear when we look to Syria,
South Sudan or the Central African Republic at the
moment.

The founders of the United Nations, in seeking to
end the scourge of war, had in the forefront of their
minds the searing experience of a global conflagration
that pitted States against States. In more recent years,
the United Nations has often been called upon to
contribute to ending conflicts inside States rather
than between States. Moreover, in a point relevant for
today's debate, even as conflicts between States lessen
in number, conflicts inside States too often reoccur.

In both types of conflicts, distortions ofhistory and
identity can be contributing factors. Wartime rhetoric
cultivates division. Helping groups inside States move
beyond such zero-sum thinking to accepting a shared
national narrative is especially hard. The United
Nations has a long history of helping to establish the
means to resolve territorial disputes, but reconciling
competing visions of history and identity is far less of
a developed science.

While we hope to contribute to permanent peace
when we act - be it as members of the Security Council
or the Secretariat - past crises have shown that the
immediate imperatives tend to be so overpowering
that what appear to be longer-term aspects often
receive less attention, even though peacebuilding is
now an indispensable part of our conflict management
and prevention work. In other words, while we have
time-tested formulas for separating armies, for
tending to the needy, for enacting political road maps
and rebuilding actual roads and ministries, we have
reflected less on our ability to repair trust in societies
and foster genuine reconciliation. How can we mend
shattered social fabrics so that people look in their
adversary's eyes once again and see the human being
rather than the enemy?

In the time I have to explore this topic today, I will
address two main questions. What are the essential
elements of reconciliation? And how should the United
Nations approach to crisis management be combined
with the imperative of enabling societies to heal?

So, what are the essential elements ofreconciliation?
When I refer to reconciliation, I have the following in
mind - accounting for and sharing views about the past,
including prior to conflict, in order to restore mutual
respect and trust between groups and individuals. To
make this a reality, I see a double responsibility. First
is the responsibility of the international community
to assist in creating conditions that, secondly, enable
national actors to live up to their responsibility for
rebuilding trust and respect, including reckoning with
their own behaviour and actions

Rebuilding trust and respect requires engaging
with one another at all levels of society, not just at the
level of political and economic elites. Leaders need to
set the example, not just by ceasing wartime rhetoric
and ending the intentional promotion of grievances,
but also by undertaking deeds of genuine cooperation
and honest examinations of their own roles in conflict.
Leaders also need to demonstrate that power-sharing
and other forms of post-conflict governance signify not
that the winner takes all, but that room is available for
engagement for all parts of society.

It is often being said that youth is the hope for
overcoming past hatred. However, reality shows that
young people brought up just after war tend to be more
extreme than their parents. By often being deprived of
the chance to meet "the other", they are also deprived
of the chance to experience what they have in common.
So, we need to find ways in our work in the aftermath
of conflict to break the vicious cycle of divided
communities when the hatred and sense of Victimhood
are most pronounced and palpable. Working with
teachers and parents is as important as working with
the young people themselves.

More broadly, education and curriculums tend
to be disseminators of contentious narratives. As
difficult as it is, it appears critical to start early with
the development of history curricula that, at the very
least, share the different interpretations of recent
events. This could form the beginning of developing a
shared narrative and establishing points of convergence
in people's experiences and thinking.

Let me now turn to my second question. How can
the United Nations approach to crisis management be
combined with the imperative of enabling societies to
heal?

Over the past few months, the Council has,
along with other business, expressed alarm about the
catastrophic situation in the Central African Republic,
the ongoing slaughter in Syria and the outbreak of
brutal hostilities in South Sudan. While outside forces
play roles in each of these conflicts, the root causes,
initial sparks and momentum of these conflicts are
essentially internal. In all three cases, the physical end
to war, while urgently needed, will not produce lasting
peace and security. In all three countries, an end to
the fighting will not permanently end the conflict. As
we have seen repeatedly, fighting that ends without
reconciliation - especially fighting inside States - is
fighting that can and often does resume.

In the Central African Republic, religious
communities that peacefully coexisted for generations
now view each other not as neighbours but as enemies.
As difficult as ending the fighting is, rebuilding a
shared sense of community and forging a common
narrative about recent events will be even harder, but
it is essential if the citizens of the Central African
Republic are ever to enjoy lasting peace and stability.

In South Sudan, a beautiful story of a country
gaining hard-won independence has now turned into an
ethnically charged conflict with deaths, displacement
and calls for revenge. What united different groups
during the fight for independence has evaporated. With
a ceasefire signed, there is a glimmer of hope, but if it
is to take root and hold we will need to help the parties
to trust one another again.

In Syria, the shared memory and pride in a secular,
multiconfessional and multi-ethnic State have been
shattered by nearly three years of unspeakable brutality
and human rights atrocities. We have reported to the
Council repeatedly that we do not believe that there is
a military solution to this conflict, and that the costs
of trying to impose a military solution are obscenely
high. Collectively, we must help the Syrians stop the
killing. But then what? Clearing the physical rubble
and physical reconstruction are not sufficient to erase
the grievances, hatreds and instincts for vengeance that
are undoubtedly multiplying in Syria with each passing
day.

In all three cases, any cessation of hostilities will
remain fragile and at risk of collapse without strenuous
efforts exerted on behalf of reconciliation and without
the honest examination by each community of its own
role in the conflict. There are many examples we could
cite, but please allow me to use Iraq as a case in point.

In recent years, Iraq has registered many successes,
including holding a series of national elections under
extremely difficult circumstances and re-establishing
positive relations with Kuwait. We all applaud the
Security Council's recognition of Iraq's progress, as
noted by the Council's resolutions. Yet, at the same
time, we have seen that Iraq's communities have
sharply differing historical and political narratives that
inhibit the country's ability to achieve common goals,
including the urgent fight against terrorism. Getting
more Iraqis to move past zero-sum thinking to forge
a common Iraqi narrative is hard, but it is essential for
Iraq's long-term peace and stability.

The open wound of the Syria conflict makes
Iraqi reconciliation even more complicated, given the
deepening regional crisis between Sunnis and Shia.
Healing the Sunni-Shia rift will become easier when
the fighting in Syria ends, as the horrors in Syria
exacerbate that divide. But we should not neglect lending
support to genuine reconciliation efforts, lest fighting
resume from unaddressed grievances, overlapping
claims of Victimhood and zero-sum narratives that are
undoubtedly already taking root and, in some cases,
being intentionally promoted.

The role of the United Nations in monitoring
ceasefires or separating warring parties is well
known, represented by almost 120,000 peacekeepers
in 15 places around the world. Those peacekeeping
operations, typically with robust protection-of-civilian
mandates given by the Council, serve in some places to
prevent State-to-State conflicts - the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, in the south of the country, is
one example - and in other places serve inside a State,
such as the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
United Nations has also played a significant role in
reconstruction efforts in previously war-torn countries,
such as Sierra Leone or Mozambique.

Those are important, physical manifestations
of the United Nations work to help end conflict. But
beyond the physical manifestations - peacekeepers,
monitors, reconstruction and development - the
United Nations has also become increasingly involved
in the non-physical aspects of peacebuilding. The goal
is to promote long-term peace and security, and not
stop with helping achieve cessations of violence that
too often may prove fleeting.

What we currently witness in Yemen is particularly
noteworthy. The agreement for the political transition
specifies that the provisions for transitional justice and
national reconciliation would be addressed through
a broadly inclusive national dialogue process. As the
Council knows, that dialogue concluded a few days
ago with positive results that need to be nurtured and
supported to complete the transition and promote peace
in Yemen.
Let me be clear: we are fully aware that reconciliation
cannot substitute for justice, an essential element of
ending conflict. However, the reverse also holds true.
For example, the International Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda cannot substitute for national
reconciliation. to put it another way, seeking truth and
accountability for the past is essential. But they are not
by themselves a plan to heal a broken State. That work
has to keep happening in the present and in the future.

The United Nations does not have a monopoly
on reconciliation efforts. For very good reason, one
often cites South Africa as an example of an extremely
effective national reconciliation that can serve as a
model for others. There are a number of organizations,
including the United Nations, that are increasingly
taking a more systematic approach to reconciliation
issues, in recognition that the physical end of fighting,
welcome as that is, does not end the conflict.

While the United Nations approach to enabling
permanent peace is under constant review, I will share
with the Council four areas that I believe deserve
special attention.

First, peace agreements themselves should,
where possible and appropriate, provide agreed
overall principles and mechanisms through which
reconciliation can be pursued, tailored to the specific
situation of each conflict.

Secondly, the timing of elections and constitutional
review processes need to be considered carefully. Ifthey
come too early, they can legitimize war profiteers and
thus entrench wartime narratives and fiefdoms. With
premature elections, opportunistic populist leaders can
cultivate grievances to win office, with risks to long-
term peace and stability.

Thirdly, reconciliation has to come from
inside and cannot be externally imposed. However,
outsiders - Member States, the United Nations and
regional organizations - can encourage and enable
such national processes to take place sooner rather than
later. At the same time, the international community
and the societies concerned need to give reconciliation
the necessary time. The trust that has been shattered
overnight tends to take years to rebuild.

Fourthly, bearing in mind that national processes
differ significantly, there nevertheless appears to be a
benefit in considering common strands and establishing
a repository of comparative knowledge and expertise on
reconciliation that can be put at the disposal of Member
States, United Nations Special Envoys and others.

I would like to conclude by raising some questions.
Can the international community, more specifically
the members of the Security Council and the United
Nations, provide incentives for a reconciliation that is
nationally owned and led? When is the right moment
for the process to start, and how do we get right
the timing right of elections and, more broadly, of
transitional processes? When prevention has failed and
ethnic cleansing has taken place, how do we reconcile
our aspirations for rebuilding shared societies with the
realities of division in the country or region concerned?

Some may ask whether the United Nations in
general or the Security Council more specifically
should help promote national reconciliation. I would
hope that the example of the Syrian catastrophe
demonstrates how unresolved internal conflicts can
pose grave risks to international peace and security.
Moreover, as a Member State-based Organization, the
United Nations itself is stronger when Member States
are at peace internally as well as with each other.

I thank Jordan for having made us consider some
of the most critical aspects that tend to undermine
permanent peace. I hope that today's debate will trigger
more in-depth thinking on how to ensure more traction
to our approaches to peace and security, especially
when addressing internal conflicts.

