Mr. Mangoaela (Lesotho): I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February. We are confident that
the Council's business will profit from your wisdom and
experience. I also wish to extend Lesotho's warmest
congratulations to your predecessor, Ambassador Hisashi
Owada of Japan, for a job well done last month. Allow me
also to express my gratitude to the Secretary- General, Mr.
Kofi Annan, for his most insightful report on the situation
in Angola and to his Special Representative, Maitre Alioune
Blondin Beye, for his tireless efforts and unwavering
commitment to the search for peace in Angola. The troika
of the observers of the peace process and the countries
contributing troops to the Angolan operations also deserve
our commendation.

When the Security Council reviewed the mandate of
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) in December 1996, we were keenly aware of the slow
pace in the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, as a
result of which the peace process continued to run behind
schedule. Our hopes were rekindled, however, by some of
the steps, limited as they were, that both the Government of
Angola and UNITA were taking towards implementing the
Lusaka Protocol. We were particularly pleased that the
quartering of troops was proceeding relatively smoothly.
Having thoroughly considered the report of the Secretary-
General, and conscious of the need to keep the momentum
of the peace process going, we reminded the signatories of
the Lusaka Protocol of their obligations towards the
Angolan people and the international community and
supported the extension of the mandate of UNAVEM. III,
with the firm expectation that further progress would be
made within a reasonable time frame in order to give new
impetus to the peace process.

The establishment of a Government of National Unity
and Reconciliation, which is the next crucial step towards
an Angola free of the deep divisions that have characterized
that country over the last three decades, remains elusive.
We have been encouraging all parties to work together in
good faith to complete the remaining tasks and form a
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation without
further delay.

Despite a few signs of hope in the implementation of
several tasks which were assigned to the parties, the
Angolan peace process has again been characterized by
difficulties and has been painfully slow and disappointing.
It is regrettable that, as we meet today, the return to
Luanda of UNITA deputies and the formation of the
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation have
once again been delayed, and the obligations of the
Protocol have not been fulfilled. Besides threatening to
unravel the gains made so far, these delays undermine the
fragile peace process.

It is therefore a matter of great disappointment to us
that we once again request this Council to ensure that
UNITA fully complies with its obligations in a timely
fashion and without any conditions or linkages, so as to
bring about the long-awaited peace and stability in
Angola and southern Africa. We believe that peace in
Angola should be given a chance and it is for this reason
that we support the extension of UNAVEM. III to 31
March 1997, on the understanding that the situation will
be reviewed on 20 March. If there is further
procrastination, the Council should be at liberty to
consider applying some of the measures within the
framework of Security Council resolution 864 (1993),
which shall oblige UNITA to respect fully and urgently
the deadlines established by the Council.

The completion of the 15 quartering areas, followed
by the quartering of over 70,000 UNITA troops, was a
welcome development which demonstrated the political
will of the Angolan leaders. In his report contained in
document S/1997/115 of 7 February 1997, the Secretary-
General informs us that the pace of the implementation of
the remaining military and political tasks has also been
very slow. It is regrettable that a large number of the
quartered troops continue to leave the quartering areas,
thus posing problems and further delays in the
incorporation of UNITA troops into the Angolan Armed
Forces. We again urge the parties to show real political
will and complete the outstanding military tasks in order
to put the process on the right path towards fulfilling the
Lusaka Protocol commitments to the formation of a
national army.

The support of the international community for the
Angolan peace process remains unshaken. This support
has to be matched by commensurate political will
measured through concrete and plausible actions on the
part of the parties. It is therefore urgent and imperative
for both parties, and in particular UNITA, to take decisive
steps towards fulfilling their obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol. This requires the parties to demonstrate the
necessary flexibility and statesmanship in order for a

 

Government of National Unity and Reconciliation to be
established without further delay.

The crisis in Angola has a negative impact on security
and stability and on the economies within the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) region. It is for
this reason that the SADC countries require the parties to
demonstrate the necessary flexibility to establish a new era
of peace and cooperation in southern Africa.

Finally, we reiterate our call for the international
community to continue to provide material support to the
peace process at this crucial stage in order to facilitate the
establishment of the Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation.

