Ms. Sison (United States ofAmerica): We welcome
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Daeie and
Ambassador Citaku back to the Security Council for
this quarterly briefing.

First of all, I would like to start by taking a moment
to congratulate the athletes from both of their countries
for the excellent display of sportsmanship in Rio de
Janeiro. We would like to welcome Kosovo to the
international athletic community, it having participated
in the Olympic Games for the first time under its own
flag and bringing home, as we have heard, a gold
medal in judo. We are sure that years of training and
practice went into that winning moment. We also salute
Majlinda for making her country proud.

As the Council, we have also put years of effort
into examining the situation in Kosovo. Over the years,
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) has assisted Kosovo in the
development of multi-ethnic democratic institutions
that uphold the rule of law and respect human rights. It
is clear that UNMIK has largely fulfilled its mandate
and should be further consolidated. We all receive
weekly briefing notes from the field, and I draw the
Council's attention to UNMIK's submissions as well.
There is some excellent political reporting, it is true,
but what does the Mission do? What are its remaining
tasks? Do those tasks require 125 United Nations staff
and other resources to fulfil them? As for the quarterly
briefings, the Secretariat and the Security Council both
have far more pressing business at hand. We urge fellow
Council members to prudently adjust the reporting
briefing period for UNMIK from three to six months.

None of that should be construed as a lack of
support for Kosovo, however. Indeed, the opposite
is true. The United States affirms its support for
Kosovo on its journey to becoming a prosperous and
peaceful multi-ethnic democracy, fully integrated
into the international community. We believe that,
when Kosovo succeeds, the entire region succeeds. A
democratic, stable and independent Kosovo is a force
for regional stability.

In that vein, we welcome Kosovo's and Serbia's
efforts to pursue the normalization of relations through
the European Union-facilitated dialogue talks. We
continue to welcome European Union (EU) High
Representative Mogherini's facilitation of the dialogue
and commend leaders in both Belgrade and Pristina
for taking the difficult decisions necessary to make
progress in the talks.

Thankfully, work has finally started to revitalize
the Austerlitz Bridge in Mitrovica, which will
remove barriers that, for too long, have perpetuated
and reinforced divisions rather than bringing people
together. We would like to thank NATO and the NATO
mission in Kosovo for their support for security during
the revitalization of the bridge and for continued
essential work to ensure a secure and safe environment
in Kosovo.

We note with some disappointment that the pace
of progress on normalization slowed over the past year.
We call on the leaderships in Belgrade and Pristina to
reinvigorate the dialogue process, including by rapidly
reaching compromises and fully implementing the
agreements Prime Minister Vucie and Prime Minister
Mustafa reached in August 2015. The implementation
of those agreements has lagged for too long. We call
on leadership of both sides to uphold their political
commitments and advance the dialogue without delay.
Vice-President Biden recently visited Serbia and
Kosovo, where he noted the important progress that
both countries had made on the road to comprehensive
normalization. In Belgrade, Vice-President Biden
welcomed the progress Serbia had made towards its
goal of EU accession and the difficult reforms it is
making to get there. We encourage Prime Minister
Vueic' and President Nikolie to stay the course and carry
on with the significant work that remains. Serbia's
future prosperity lies with Europe and is dependent on
a transparent and just society.

In Pristina, the Biden family was honoured by
the Government of Kosovo, which named a road after
the late Beau Biden, who served in Kosovo with the
Department of Justice in 2001, helping to establish
judicial solutions and the rule oflaw. As Vice-President
Biden noted, Kosovo has made tremendous progress
since his previous visit in 2009. But as the Vice-President
said, there is more work to be done. Kosovo's leaders
have had to make very tough decisions for the future
of their country. Kosovo's leaders need to continue to
work with their neighbours. With regard to Serbia, I
have already spoken about the need to fully implement
dialogue agreements, and, with regard to Montenegro,
Kosovo needs to ratify its agreement to demarcate their
shared border so that Kosovo can continue advancing
along its European path.

At the same time, Kosovo continues to face serious
economic challenges that demand greater action by its
Government. While the Government has taken some
steps to introduce policies to foster economic growth,
we encourage more progress to improve governance,
combat corruption, increase transparency and bolster
the rule of law. We welcome the extension of the
mandate of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo, which will help strengthenjustice and fight
corruption there. Progress in those areas will help
attract foreign investment, thereby contributing to
Kosovo's development.

As the United States and Kosovo's international
partners work with the Government to advance
democratic and economic development, it is of serious
concern that there are those in Kosovo who would
seek to use violence and misinformation to derail the
country's progress. The recent resumption, by some
political parties, of the use of tear gas in the Assembly
and the heinous attack against the public broadcaster
have no place in a democracy. Such actions are counter
to democratic values and threaten the welfare of the
country and all of its people. We commend Kosovo
President Thaci for his personal efforts to advance
reconciliation. Laying a wreath in Staro Gracko
to commemorate the children killed by ethnically
motivated criminals in 2003 was a courageous step to
benefit the country.

We also welcome and encourage the important
work that Kosovo is undertaking to address the serious
problem of foreign fighters, which is a threat to us all
and must be addressed collectively. That underscores
the need for a responsible, inclusive approach to
security challenges that fully integrates the entire
region, including Kosovo, into the vital international
institutions that are working to increase the security
of our peoples. That must include INTERPOL, where
we can cooperate and coordinate on issues vital to the
national security of all United Nations States Members
and where shared values bring us together. It serves
no one's interests, except those of criminals and
extremists, to prevent Kosovo from making the fullest
possible contribution to ensuring its security and that
of its neighbours.

In conclusion, as we gear up for the annual high-level
meeting of the General Assembly, we note the progress
that Kosovo is making in its bid for recognition and,
one day, membership in the United Nations. We applaud
Suriname's recent recognition ofKosovo. We call on all
Member States to recognize Kosovo and welcome the
country's people into the international community as
they strive to take their rightful place as a full-fledged
Member of the United Nations. It is good for Kosovo,
good for the international Organization and good for
the international community. And it is inevitable.

