Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends Peru for having taken the initiative to
convene this meeting and welcomes the presence of His

Excellency Mr. Ne'stor Popolizio Bardales, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Peru, as he presides
over this meeting in New York.

We wish to thank Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres for his briefing. We welcome His Excellency
Foreign Minister Trujillo Garcia of Colombia and thank
him for the briefing he made in his capacity as Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission. We also welcome
Mr. Bousquet of the World Bank and Mr. Baldeh of the
African Development Bank and thank them for their
briefings.

A number ofpost-conflict countries and regions are
currently undergoing national reconstruction as part of
the transition phase towards peacebuilding and long-
term development. In the face of new developments and
requirements, the United Nations and the international
community should strengthen partnerships and mount a
collective and active response by providing constructive
support and assistance.

In that regard, China would like to elaborate on
the following points. First, with regard to upholding
the principle of national ownership, achieving lasting
peace and sustainable development in a post-conflict
country ultimately depends on the country itself.
Given the differences in national realities and stages
of development, countries differ from one another in
terms of their priorities and approaches undertaken
in such transitions. The United Nations and other
partners should abide by the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and respect the
sovereignty and ownership of the countries concerned,
provide constructive assistance based on the country's
specific requirements and requests, and focus on
fostering their capacity-building with a view to
achieving self-driven development.

Secondly, in ensuring a smooth transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding, the Council is
responsible for defining the mandates of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions. When drawing
up a peacekeeping operation mandate, the Council
should plan early to ensure that once the operation
has achieved its desired objectives, it is followed up
by timely peacebuilding efforts. Some peacekeeping
operation mandates already include peacebuilding
components. When a peacekeeping operation has come
to an end, various functions should be handed over
as efficiently as possible to a United Nations country
team or special political mission. Throughout this
process, it is important to ensure that peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are coherently linked so that the tasks
in the subsequent phase can be implemented smoothly.

Thirdly, with regard to strengthening partnerships
with regional and subregional organizations, these
organizations are uniquely positioned to tackle
issues specific to their region. In order to assist post-
conflict countries in their transition phases, the
United Nations and the wider international community
should strengthen communication and coordination
with regional and subregional organizations and fully
leverage the role of the African Union, the League of
Arab States and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, inter alia, in addressing regional affairs. The
United Nations and the international community should
engage in partnerships and cooperation with relevant
organizations and States from the region in a joint
effort to assist local socioeconomic development and
address the root causes of conflict.
Fourthly, with regard to creating synergies between
the United Nations system and the international
community, the Council, the Peacebuilding Commission,
relevant funds, programmes and international financial
institutions, inter alia, should carry out their mandated
activities and create complementarity by pooling their
strengths. United Nations missions and country teams
should enhance their collaboration by contributing
their respective expertise. International development
agencies must fulfil their aid commitments and assist
post-conflict countries in implementing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development with a view to
achieving sustainable development in these countries
and ensuring that the people there can truly benefit
from the peace dividend.

China supports post-conflict countries in their
reconstruction efforts and has been striving to assist
developing countries in post-conflict settings by
actively supporting their economic, education, health-
care, infrastructure and other endeavours. The China-
United Nations Peace and Development Trust Fund
has been actively supporting cooperation projects in a
number of countries in such areas as counter-terrorism,
peacekeeping, good offices and mediation, refugees
and migrants and sustainable development.

China believes in the philosophy of mutually
beneficial cooperation in international relations and
has been seeking to build inclusive and constructive
partnerships and to foster friendly cooperation between
countries in the political, economic, security and
cultural fields, allowing people from all countries to
collectively enjoy dignity, the fruits of development,
safety and security.

