The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Securitiy Council for the month of November 2012, I
should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Ambassador
Gert Rosenthal, Permanent Representative of
Guatemala, for his service as President of the Council
for the month of October. I am sure that I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing deep appreciation
to Ambassador Rosenthal and his delegation for the
great diplomatic skill with which they conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Somalia

Letter dated 12 October 2012 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2012/764)

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Somalia to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members have before them document 8/2012/812,
which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted
by France and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/764, which contains a letter dated
12 October 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Azerbaijan, China, Colombia, France, Germany,
Guatemala, India, Morocco, Pakistan, Portugal,
Russian Federation, South Africa, Togo, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America

The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2073 (2012).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


