Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's open debate.

Trafficking in persons is the commodification of
human bodies. It is probably one of the most degrading
experiences that human beings can be subjected to.
Simply put, it is a modern version of slavery. I would
like to make five proposals, based on a simple premise.
Human trafficking typically occurs, or occurs more
easily, in conflict situations. In such situations, the rule
of law is very clearly broken, the judiciary is inadequate

and States are unable to address those challenges.
That is why the Security Council has to take action,
as was outlined in resolution 2331 (2016), which was
adopted under Spain's presidency of the Council, and
which today has been superbly complemented with
the Council's adoption of resolution 2388 (2017) under
Italy's leadership. These are my five proposals.

First, we must combat fragmentation. I think it
is clear that we are working to combat trafficking in
persons from various areas within the United Nations,
such as the Security Council and General Assembly.
However, what we are lacking is a comprehensive vision
and strategy. I propose that we ask the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime to prepare a report on the
basic guidelines for such a comprehensive strategy.

Secondly, there is a very close link between
children and armed conflict and trafficking in persons.
Unfortunately, they go hand-in-hand. In that regard, I
would like to commend the sterling work undertaken by
the delegation of Sweden, and I urge Sweden to monitor
situations where there is a connection between children
and trafficking in persons.

Thirdly, I believe we should enhance and leverage
our peacekeeping operations and special political
missions as much as possible. Listening to some
statements today, we have all understood that there have
been tragic events in a certain Mediterranean country,
and everyone has emphasized that. What I want to say
is that we should make the best possible use of our
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
with a view to detecting such incidents of human
trafficking and reporting them to the Security Council.
My fourth proposal is about the victims of
trafficking, whom we have sometimes compared to the
victims of terrorism. We must not forget them, for they
need all the attention we can give them. I would like to
underscore the importance of resolution 2379 (2017),
which established an accountability mechanism for the
fight against Da'esh in Iraq. I believe that it is a model
that we can follow. Lastly, there is the role of States.
I believe we cannot always blame multilateralism.
Nation States are also responsible and I urge them to
take measures to combat trafficking in persons.

In conclusion, I would like to bring up a proposal
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Spain, which I
believe is of great interest, for establishing a worldwide
network of anti-trafficking coordinators that could
effectively address this issue, which is one of the worst
scourges of the twenty-first century. It costs almost
nothing and a form of it already exists within the
European Union. I call on all other nations to take the
same steps.

