Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): It is with great regret that I assess what has
just happened in the Council - the direct application
ofthe policy of certain countries to exclude the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia from participation not only in
today's meeting, but generally, in the settlement
process for the Balkans. This goes against the letter and
the spirit of the United Nations Charter and its
purposes and principles, and hinders the Security
Council and the international community in the
performance of their tasks.

It is awkward for me even to recall in this
Chamber that, according to Article 31 of the United
Nations Charter, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
has the right to participate in this discussion on an
equal footing with other United Nations Member States
that have made such requests. It is embarrassing for me
to have to note that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
is a country whose interests are directly affected by the
item under discussion in today's meeting. If this is not
sufficient reason for anyone here, members can recall
that, according to Article 32 of the Charter, even a
State that is not a Member of the United Nations has
the right to participate in the discussion by the Security
Council of a situation in which that country is involved
as a party.

To discuss the Balkan problem without the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is nonsense. We are
concerned with the fact that the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia continues to be used as a
political instrument, which was recently demonstrated
once again when the Prosecutor of the Tribunal, Ms.
Carla Del Ponte, refused to consider the flagrant use of
force and violations of international humanitarian law
by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. Russia
cannot support this destructive attempt to isolate the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, both from the
standpoint of a political settlement in the Balkans and
of the damage such attempts do to the United Nations
as a universal Organization.

A very dangerous precedent is thus being created
when States that are unpalatable for political reasons
are excluded from participation in the work of the
United Nations. Gagging people's mouths is not the
best way to discuss acute international problems. Even
a defendant has the right to defend his or her position.

The Security Council meeting on the Balkans,
without the full participation ofthe Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, loses its practical meaning, since one of
the key parties is being eliminated from the discussion
of the problem of a settlement, which could have a real
impact on the development of events in that region.

