I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by His Excellency the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, and His Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union Commission, as well as the statements delivered by Their Excellencies Mr. Matamela Cyril Ramaphosa, President of South Africa; Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou, President of the Niger; Mr. Kais Saied, President of Tunisia; Mr. Ralph E. Gonsalves, Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, National Security, Legal Affairs and Information of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines; Mr. Wang Yi, Special Representative of President Xi Jinping, State Councillor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of China; Ms. Sophie Wilmes, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, European Affairs and Foreign Trade of Belgium; Mr. Pham Binh Minh, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam; Mr. Urmas Reinsalu, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia; Mr. Heiko Maas, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany; Mr. James Duddridge, Minister for Africa of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland; Mr. Febrian A. Ruddyard, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs for Multilateral Affairs of Indonesia; and by the representatives of the Dominican Republic, France, the Russian Federation and the United States of America, in connection with the video-teleconference on "Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations: African Union" convened on Friday, 4 December 2020. A statement was also delivered by His Excellency Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo, President of Somalia. In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter from the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
