Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): I
am pleased to join you, Mr. President, and other
delegations in welcoming Ambassador Brahimi back
among us in the Council. I would like to express my
personal respect and admiration for what he has
accomplished since he was last here. I think the work
he has done is truly remarkable, and I think that the
progress that has been achieved in Afghanistan is due
in large measure to his efforts and his excellent
judgement.

Having said that, and despite how far we have
come, I think we all agree that there is still much
before us to be accomplished. The United States focus
in Afghanistan has continued to be centred on the
conduct of the war on terrorism. The roughly 8,000
coalition troops in Afghanistan are focused on the
destruction of the remnants of Al Qaeda. We, together
with our coalition partners, succeeded in defeating the
vicious regime that harboured the Al Qaeda network,
and we have succeeded in killing or capturing
somewhat less than half of the top 30 or so leaders of
the Al Qaeda organization. Many others are on the run.
Military successes in Afghanistan have contributed to a
larger success in finding terrorists elsewhere in the
world. However, while these developments are
encouraging, we must recall that Al Qaeda is still
dangerous and active, and still poses a threat.
Afghanistan's long-term stability is the best guarantee
that that country will not once again become an outlaw
country that provides sanctuary for terrorists.

To make concrete the vision of a stable
Afghanistan, the United States has also focused on the
challenges of building an accountable and effective
security apparatus in that country, of fostering
Afghanistan's internal governance and of providing
humanitarian and development assistance. The
backbone of Afghanistan's security apparatus must
ultimately be the Afghan national army. We have more
than 250 United States and French military trainers
working closely with the Afghans to train the army.
The first and second battalions are progressing through
their basic training. The first battalion is about to
graduate, next week, and the third battalion will begin
training before the end of July.

In that context, I would like to express our thanks
to those States that have committed donations for the
Afghan national army trust fund. We very much
appreciate the significant contribution made by
Luxembourg, as well as Finland's pledge to that fund.
In addition, the United Kingdom, Turkey, Bulgaria,
Poland, the Republic of Korea, India and Romania are
assisting the training effort with personnel, funding or
equipment. But the efforts of the international
community to train and equip a new army cannot stand
alone. As the Security Council has said many times, the
core solution to the Afghan security problem lies with
the Afghans themselves. To that end, certain reforms
are critical.

The Transitional Authority must create a
representative, multi-ethnic and apolitical Ministry of
Defence and national army that work on behalf of all
Afghans. The Afghans must work together to prevent a
recurrence of the recent violence in the north, and to
end the tolerance for violence reflected in the shocking
assassination of Vice-President Haji Abdul Qadir. The
United States strongly support President Karzai's
efforts to develop a national defence council
encompassing all key ministries that will provide
integrated national security leadership. The
development of a comprehensive plan for the
demobilization of regional militias and the absorption
of some of those soldiers into a national army is a
critical step. We applaud Japan's very positive
contributions to establish a register for peace and a
demobilization programme aimed at reducing regional
militias.

We continue to strongly support the efforts of
United Nations agencies to provide humanitarian and
reconstruction assistance. The reconstruction effort
needs to strengthen and legitimize the Transitional
Authority. Concurrently, we need to strengthen the
Transitional Authority's capacity to absorb and
administer assistance in a transparent manner. As we
move from acute humanitarian crisis into the long-term
project of reconstruction, the Transitional Authority,
the United States and the international community are
exploring ways to better prioritize and coordinate
assistance. Last week, at meetings in Paris and Geneva,
we discussed how better to coordinate international
programmes. I might take this opportunity to note that
the total amount of United States humanitarian
assistance in the years 2001 and 2002 is more than
$633 million.

Finally, I would again like to commend Special
Representative Brahimi and his colleagues in the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for
their dedication and their successes. They have helped
to launch an extraordinary process in Afghanistan, and
they deserve great credit for the good work that they
have done.

