Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We are grateful to Mr. Annabi for his statement. Although
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina gives no grounds
for any particularly optimistic forecasts, nor should it
produce a pessimistic mood. Forward movement, while
slow, continues. The main thing is to make the process of
a Bosnian settlement irreversible and sustainable; to seek
the consolidation of multi-ethnic statehood for Bosnia and
Herzegovina through the building of democratic foundations
and the observance of the rights of all the peoples of that
country; and to encourage the Bosnians themselves to
shoulder primary responsibility for the future of their State.

In our View, it is extremely important that all the
parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina recognize the need for
scrupulous adherence to the Dayton Agreement as the basis
for building a stable democratic society. Clear evidence of
such recognition was the signing of the New York
Declaration last November by the members of the Joint
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina; the thrust of the
Declaration is consistent implementation of the basic
Dayton document without arbitrary adjustments.

The implementation of the Dayton approach is the
key condition for realizing efforts to find a long-term
effective settlement in Bosnia. We are therefore
concerned that of late we have increasingly been hearing
statements by some Bosnian politicians who represent
various communities of that country, offering proposals
for "correcting" or "polishing" the Dayton peace plan. We
View that approach as counter-productive.
Mr. Annabi's statement and the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2000/215) rightly took note of some
fundamental aspects of the process of developing Bosnian
statehood: strengthening democratic institutions and law
and order; the creation of a functioning independent
judicial system; the reorganization of the Bosnian police
on a genuinely multi-ethnic basis; the establishment of a
unified Border Service; the speedy adoption of an election
law; the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons; guarantees of the rights of all communities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina; market reforms; and fighting
corruption and crime.

We think that pending problems need to be resolved
as soon as possible, regarding achieving a proper level of
cooperation between the two entities - not just in the
Bosnian State organs, but also in terms of relations
between the entities and leading international structures in
Bosnia, particularly the Office of the High Representative,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) as a whole.

Here we cannot fail to note our concern at the
situation in Breko and Mostar. It is important to deal with
the resurgence of political extremism in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We stress anew that the activities of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
should be depoliticized and that detention of those
indicted on the basis of Tribunal warrants should not take
place without the consent of the States in whose territory
they are located. We are categorically against the use of
force to hunt down indictees.

We cannot fail to be concerned at demonstrations of
Bosniac extremism, in particular recent statements by
Mr. Izetbegovie describing representatives of the Serb and
Croatian peoples in Bosnia and Herzegovina not merely
as political opponents but as outright enemies of the

 

Bosniacs. Such statements only confirm our fears; they
whip up inter-ethnic hatreds and undermine the basis of the
Peace Agreement for Bosnia and Herzegovina. Unless we
control such forces decisively, these attacks on Dayton will
lead to further exacerbation of the situation: tension will
inevitably spill over the borders and will result in a
deteriorating situation in Kosovo, Albania and Macedonia.

Any attempt to impose solutions that are not
acceptable to the representatives of even one of the three
peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina could lead to an
outburst of discontent at the centrifugal tendencies that are
on the increase in Bosnia and to greater tension throughout
the country's territory. We are convinced that Dayton's
potential is far from exhausted, and that a review of Dayton
now would cause more problems than it would resolve.
Thus, we do not consider it to be a good idea even to talk
about the possibility of revising the Peace Agreement.

For its part, Russia, as one of the leading participants
in the Bosnian settlement, will continue to make an active,
practical contribution to the peace process on the basis of
complete, scrupulous implementation of the Dayton and
Paris agreements. Moreover, that should be the clear focus
of the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo as well.

It is my understanding that before this meeting was
called to order there was discussion of the President making
a statement to the press following the adjournment of the
meeting. Frankly, my delegation is not clear about the
outcome of that discussion. We consider this to be too
important a topic; I think that any statement must be agreed
upon by all members of the Security Council.

