The President: After consultations among the
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council.

"The Security Council reaffirms its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations.

"The Security Council recognizes the
important role of regional organizations in the
prevention, management and resolution of
conflicts in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as its
relevant resolutions and presidential statements,
in particular resolutions 1625 (2005) and 1631
(2005) and presidential statement
S/PRST/2006/39. In this respect, the Security
Council recalls that cooperation between the
United Nations and the regional arrangements in
matters relating to the maintenance of peace and
security, as are appropriate for regional action, is
an integral part of collective security as provided
for in the Charter of the United Nations.

"The Security Council recalls the relevant
paragraphs of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
Document (General Assembly resolution 60/ 1), in
particular the support expressed for the
development and implementation of a 10-year
capacity plan to enhance Africa's peacekeeping
capacity, and welcomes the signing, in November
2006, of the Declaration on Enhancing UN-AU
Cooperation between the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the Commission of the African
Union in the field of peace and security
(A/6l/630).

"The Security Council also recalls its
presidential statements made in Nairobi in 2004
(S/PRST/2004/44) and in New York on 20
September 2006 (S/PRST/2006/39), where it
expressed its intention to consider further steps to
promote closer and more operational cooperation
between the United Nations and regional,
subregional and other intergovernmental
organizations in the field of conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and peacekeeping, and
acknowledges the important role played by them
in the brokering of peace agreements in conflict
situations. The Security Council also welcomes

recent developments with regard to

cooperation between the United Nations, the
African Union and the European Union.

"The Security Council welcomes the
growing contribution being made by the African
Union and the resolve of its leaders to address
and solve the conflicts on the African continent.
The Security Council stresses, in accordance with
Article 54 of the Charter of the United Nations,
the need for the African Union at all times to
keep the Security Council fully informed of these
efforts in a comprehensive and coordinated
manner.

"The Security Council recognizes that
regional organizations are well positioned to
understand the root causes of many conflicts
closer to home and to influence the prevention or
resolution, owing to their knowledge of the
region.

"The Security Council urges the Secretary-
General, in consultation and in cooperation with
the relevant regional and subregional bodies, to
resolve regional conflicts in Africa by using
existing United Nations capacities as effectively
as possible; to support regional early warning and
mediation, in particular in Africa; assess the risk
of conflict at regional level and prioritize those
areas of highest risk; and highlight possible
methods at a regional level in combating illegal
exploitation and trafficking of natural resources.

"The Security Council stresses that common
and co-coordinated efforts undertaken by the
United Nations and regional organizations in
matters of peace and security should be based on
their complementary capacities and comparative
advantages, making full use of their experience,
in accordance with the United Nations Charter
and the relevant statutes of the regional
organizations. In this regard, the Council
recognizes the need to build capacities with
regional organizations so as to improve our
collective effectiveness in the maintenance of
international peace and security. The Security
Council recognizes the Peacebuilding
Commission as a forum for coordination between

the
the United Nations system and regional and
subregional organizations.

"The Security Council invites further

collaboration with the Peace and Security Council

of the African Union in order to help build the
latter's capacity to undertake, inter alia, rapid and
appropriate responses to emerging situations and
to develop effective strategies for conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The
Security Council recognizes that in some cases,
the African Union may be authorized by the
Security Council to deal with collective security
challenges on the African continent. In this
connection, the Security Council encourages
increased exchange of information and sharing of
experience, best practices and lessons learned
between the Security Council and the African
Union as well as other relevant regional
organizations.

"Emphasizing the primacy of the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace
and security, the Security Council stresses the
importance of supporting and improving in a
sustained way the resource base and capacity of
the African Union. The Security Council requests
07-28766

the Secretary-General to provide a report, in
consultation with the relevant regional
organizations, in particular the African Union, on
specific proposals on how the United Nations can
better support arrangements for further
cooperation and coordination with regional
organizations on Chapter VIII arrangements in
order to contribute significantly to the common
security challenges in the areas of concern and to
promote the deepening and broadening of
dialogue and cooperation between the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2007/7.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.
23
