Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on behalf of the Algerian delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July and to express to you our
appreciation for the effective manner in which you
have been guiding our work. I would also like to
commend you for having selected the theme
"Optimizing the use of preventive diplomacy tools:
Prospects and challenges in Africa" and to thank you
for developing the terms of reference for this debate. I
would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate
Ambassador Claude Heller, Permanent Representative
of Mexico, and his delegation for their presidency in
the month of June.

As we have heard in today's debate on the
subject, preventive diplomacy is not only accepted in
its general terms but is also recognized as a potentially
effective instrument for action, one requiring patience,
discretion and coordination. One of the essential and
accepted tenets of preventive diplomacy is respect for
the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and
the political independence of States. Given its nature
and its purpose, preventive diplomacy is thus founded
neither on interference nor on coercion. It is also
acknowledged that preventive measures can enable the
international community to save precious resources
that could then be invested in development.

Algeria notes with satisfaction that in the overall
resources used by the United Nations to handle
existing conflicts, the portion devoted to preventive
diplomacy has increased considerably, even though it is
peacekeeping operations that remain the most visible
aspect of the activities of the Organization.

Given that the success of this undertaking hinges
on a dynamic synthesis of efforts at the global, regional
and subregional levels, we have witnessed the gradual
development of multidimensional partnerships based
on a perspective of consolidating gains and creating
synergies. The United Nations and regional
organizations serve as our points of reference in this
context, to the extent that their actions are
complementary and mutually reinforcing.

In the African context, preventive actions have
been intensified and expanded, first because of Africa's
collective commitment to peace - which has resulted
in the multiplication of mediation efforts led by
eminent African leaders - as well as through the
implementation of a peace and security architecture, at
the heart of which lies the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union.

This recasting of the African collective security
system responds to awareness that peace and security
govern the progress of our societies. It is based on an
approach that includes addressing the root causes of
conflict in order to ensure that conditions are in place
for lasting peace and security. The Panel of the Wise,
the Early Warning System and the African Standby
Force are further innovations that allow the Peace and
Security Council to fully carry out its responsibilities.
By creating these new instruments and the means for
their functioning, Africa has thus clearly shown its
resolve to fully play its role in maintaining,
consolidating and strengthening peace and security on
the continent.

To achieve that goal, Africa counts on the
constant and resolute support of the United Nations
and the international community. The interest and the
attention that the main organs of the Organization pay
to affairs on the African continent are, in this respect, a
source of decided encouragement for the efforts of the
African leaders.

Despite the significant headway achieved, Algeria
is of the view that this preventive diplomacy
arrangement has not yet reached its full potential. First,
the risk of crises will remain significant in countries
experiencing all types of insecurity. To remedy that
situation, we must not only more effectively tackle the
structural causes of conflict, but also implement a
comprehensive and integrated approach while ensuring
sufficient coordination of actions. Moreover, the
actions of preventive diplomacy will remain ineffective
as long as the parties themselves refuse to resort to
dialogue and negotiation, or to enter into mediation and
contribute to appeasing tensions. There will be no true
progress in this field without the will of its main actors.

With regard to preventive diplomacy instruments
and their use, I wish to make the following comments.
I will begin with the Early Warning System,
which is a tool crucial to the success of preventive
action, to the extent that it helps to detect the warning

signs of dangerous situations. For its optimal use, we
believe that internal links should be established
between the political and economic sectors of the
United Nations Secretariat. On the external level,
channels should be created for the exchange of
information and communication with regional
mechanisms. We must also move from the phase of
observing situations that may be precursors to crises to
the progressive-response phase; otherwise the Early
Warning System will lose its relevance.

A further observation concerns the pre-conflict
peacebuilding dimension and the support measures that
should be taken to help countries that are in difficulty
before conflicts break out. In this regard, preventive
development is considered a necessary complement to
preventive diplomacy. It consists in focusing efforts on
building States' capacities to resolve their problems
themselves by targeting specific sectors.

The implementation of preventive development,
however, raises the issue of financing, which is quite
clearly the most critical element and the main
constraint. One of the clear challenges lies in
persuading the international community that the cost of
pre-conflict peacebuilding represents only a small
fraction of the expenses that could be committed to
peacekeeping operations and, at the end of the day, for
peacebuilding operations following conflicts.

Finally, it is essential to optimize the
coordination of efforts by the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations. To that end,
Algeria believes that efforts must be made to derive
greater benefit from the complementarity and
reinforcing roles of the entire array of actors, taking
into account their various constraints, in particular
their lack of resources and expertise.

In recent years, the African Union and some
subregional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States and the Southern
African Development Community, have made a
commitment to do more to resolve conflicts and have
established new institutional mechanisms to encourage
conciliation and negotiation. Those initiatives
supplement efforts made at the global level in the field
of prevention and auger well for future cooperation
between those organizations and the rest of the
international community. As a result, they have the
right to expect increased support from the United
Nations and the international community, all the more
so because their actions to support peace on the
continent are part of greater worldwide efforts to
maintain and strengthen peace.

