Mr. Kuindwa (Kenya): It is so good to see an old
friend and, indeed, a son of Africa chairing this important
meeting on Africa. Your association with our continent,
Sir - including my own country, Kenya, where you were
born - gives me great hope that your important mission
for Africa on the eve of the millennium will be successful.

Allow me to commend your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Slovenia, Ambassador Danilo
Turk, who presided over the Council during the month of
November, for an excellent job well done. We also thank
the Secretary-General for his focused presentation this
morning and we associate ourselves with the Views
presented by the representative of Algeria on behalf of the
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
by the representative of Cameroon, the Chairman of the
African Group for this month.

Allow me to make two observations and some specific
other points on some issues. First, in accordance with the
United Nations Charter, the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security rests with
the Security Council. Regional, subregional and other
efforts to address peace and security can only be
complementary, but the United Nations system needs to
encourage those efforts.

Secondly, after our recent tenure in the Security
Council, we see not only that African issues dominate the
agenda of the Council, but that most have stalled because
of inadequate attention. We had hoped that, by the time our
tenure ended, there would be definite movement towards
resolution of some of these conflicts. Instead, and sadly,
most continue at the same level of intensity, while others
have mutated into even more complex crises. My delegation
and I therefore welcome the statements made by the
representatives of the Netherlands and China regarding this
situation.

As concerns the issue of improving coordination and
cooperation between the Security Council and the OAU,
as well as key subregional organizations, including
coordination of joint activities on specific issues, please
allow me to make four points.

First, in our statement of 24 April 1998, before this
Council, my delegation welcomed the Secretary-General' s
establishment of an Executive Committee on Peace and
Security. We support its establishment and look forward
to reports on its activities. We would also like to find out
how the United Nations liaison office at OAU
headquarters in Addis Ababa is doing, since it was
mandated to consolidate cooperation between the two
organizations and facilitate the coordinated deployment of
political efforts to prevent, contain and resolve conflicts
in Africa.

Secondly, the annual meeting of the
Secretaries-General of the OAU and the United Nations
is a good mechanism that could be re-energized. It would
greatly assist the Member States to know how well this
structure is working.

Thirdly, we wish to propose the establishment of a
mechanism that would allow for quarterly meetings in
which the secretaries-general, executive secretaries and
facilitators of regional organizations and initiatives, such
as the Inter-Governmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), the East African Community, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
Southern African Development Community (SADC) and
the Burundi initiative, among others, would meet to
exchange ideas and consolidate conflict resolution
proposals. We agree with the Secretary-General that such
meetings should take place in Africa, and we commend
these views for consideration by the Council.

Fourthly, it would be important to improve liaison
with the African representatives at the United Nations in
New York by, inter alia, holding periodic meetings
between the Secretary-General and African ambassadors
and strengthening the office of the Adviser for Special
Assignments Africa. We are grateful that you yourself,
Mr. President, alluded to this idea in your remarks this
morning, and we invite the Council to consider your
proposals.

With regard to additional instruments which the
Council can bring to bear to help prevent, manage and
resolve conflicts in Africa, I would like to suggest that
the instruments currently at our disposal, if effectively

 

implemented, would adequately address the problems we
are faced with today. In our View, the primary problem has
been lack of political will and the reluctance to commit
resources that are commensurate with the tasks at hand.
Indeed, the Secretary-General speaks on this point in his
report of April 1998. In this context, I have the following
few points to make.
First, the number of resolutions adopted by the
Council in the last two years on Africa is very, very
impressive. However, all that effort has hardly left any
imprints on the ground in Africa. The Council should
therefore consolidate existing follow-up mechanisms and
proposals and implement the resolutions on Africa already
adopted, especially those aimed at the prevention and
resolution of conflicts. Enforcement action, such as
sanctions, works both ways. As already pointed out, those
companies purchasing diamonds in conflict areas in
Violation of existing sanctions must stop. In addition, the
sale of illegal small arms exacerbates ongoing conflicts. We
commend the ongoing activities to address this problem,
and we support the position that has been already stated by
several delegations regarding the sharing of intelligence
information on those who are busting sanctions.

Secondly, to underline the international community's
concern with the potential threat to international peace and
security, we invite the Council to hold one of its meetings
in Africa. This will no doubt raise the symbolic political
importance the world attaches to solving peace and security
problems on the continent. In African situations where
people are born outside hospitals, the umbilical cord is
normally buried in the ground after one is born, and we
know that you, Mr. President, as one who was born in that
continent, will support the initiative to have the Council
consider Nairobi as a venue for such a meeting.

Thirdly, there is a need for us to intensify coordination
between the General Assembly, the United Nations
Development Programme and the Bretton Woods
institutions to address key economic issues which constitute
the core of African problems, such as the issue of poverty
eradication. We should also consider the issue of the debt
burden, the financing of development and the impact
HIV/AIDS has had on development. Although there are
many causes of conflict in Africa, the underlying and core
issue that of poverty.

Fourthly, the Council should consider diversifying
sources of information to facilitate timely decision-making.
A more intensive use of the existing Arria formula should
include inviting all parties to conflicts and affected third
countries. Summaries of meetings should be made
available to all United Nations Member States in order to
enable them to contribute directly to decision-making in
the Council.

Fifthly and finally, regional cooperation and
integration mechanisms must be strengthened and
supported. The examples of IGAD and ECOWAS show
that there is some capacity to cope with some of these
peace and security issues. In this regard, on 30 November
1999, Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania signed the Treaty for
the Establishment of the East African Community. In the
coming months, we shall no doubt have the opportunity
to suggest ways in which the Community can strengthen
its relations not only with this Organization, but also will
other regional and subregional organizations.

