Mr. Nour: I am pleased to be taking the floor on
behalf of the International Organization for Migration
(IOM). I would first like to thank Italy and the Security
Council for convening today's important open debate.

The IOM. welcomes the increased attention that
the international community is according to human
trafficking, and particularly the recent focus on the
phenomenon of human trafficking in conflict situations.
The IOM. believes that the crime of human trafficking
has been largely overlooked in emergency situations,
despite growing evidence of the connections between
human trafficking and armed conflict.

We are mindful that this open debate is happening
at a time of unprecedented global human mobility,
record high numbers of displaced populations and
multiple simultaneous, complex and protracted crises
in different parts of the world that are putting more and
more vulnerable people at risk of human trafficking.
We are concerned about the fact that the rights of many
migrants continue to be violated during potentially
fatal journeys. We have seen and learned from first-
hand experience that situations of armed conflict,
natural disasters and protracted humanitarian crises
can create conditions conducive to human trafficking.
With that in mind, I would like to highlight three areas
where, from the IOM's perspective, a more concerted
effort and coordinated action are required.

First, while legal frameworks for victims of
trafficking have been strengthened in recent years,
less progress has been made in preventing human
trafficking from occurring in the first place. The
demand for cheap goods and sexual services is what
drives human trafficking. Recent studies by the IOM
and the International Labour Organization have shown
that the impact of armed conflict on trafficking, child
recruitment and forced labour is on the rise. Efforts
should therefore be made to reduce the demands for
goods and services that are met by trafficked persons
and exploited migrants. That requires concrete
measures that will encourage, help or oblige companies
to establish decent working conditions for all employees
in their supply chains.

Secondly, despite the progress that has been
made in protecting people identified as victims of
human trafficking, the numbers of those who benefit
from protection schemes remain small. In order to
address this problem, we must increase the ability of
Governments and civil society to identify and assist
migrants in vulnerable situations, including victims
of trafficking, by targeting high-risk locations such as
border crossing points, as well as sectors in industries
where the risk oftrafficking is high and where effective
responses are urgently required.

Thirdly, our experience from working in many
parts of the world has shown us that responding to
human trafficking requires appropriate and timely
data. We therefore emphasize the importance of
increasing efforts to provide good data, improve the
analysis of the information available and share that
information as widely as possible. We should find
ways to overcome obstacles to sharing trafficking
data, within a framework of strict confidentiality and
data privacy protection. That can be achieved through
multi-stakeholder open-data publishing platforms, such
as the IOM's Counter-Trafficking Data Collaborative.

Finally, the IOM. welcomed the statement that the
Secretary-General made on Monday about Libya. In a
press release today, the Director General of the IOM
called for a number of possible concrete actions to be
considered. The smugglers' business model is at the
core of this human episode, and the IOM. is working
with local authorities to disrupt smuggling networks
and provide assistance to victims. The IOM. has been
voluntarily providing assistance with returns since
2015 to some 13,000 migrants who have left Libya to
return to more than 30 countries around the world.

In conclusion, the IOM. strongly supports the
Council's efforts to eliminate human trafficking in
conflict situations, and we call on the Council to take
into account the humanitarian aspects of crisis-induced
human trafficking.

