Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
welcome you, Mr. President, in presiding over this
meeting, and we thank our briefers Mr. Mamabolo and
Ms. Mueller for their updates.

I would like to focus my remarks on three
fundamental points: the situation in Darfur, the
withdrawal of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the future
of Darfur.

On the situation in Darfur, the Secretary-General's
recent report (S/2019/305) has confirmed the continued
decrease in all kinds of violations in Darfur over the
past four years. In addition, the region is enjoying
relative security and stability, while displaced persons
continue to return. We reiterate that their dignified,
safe and voluntary return is necessary and that the
international community should continue supporting
their return amid the difficult circumstances. We
welcome the allocation of $26 million from the Central
Emergency Response Fund as humanitarian assistance
for those in need.

Accordingly, we emphasize the need for the work
to continue as proposed by the Secretary-General
and set out in resolution 2429 (2018) and in the
Security Council's presidential statement of last year
(S/PRST/2018/l9).

On the withdrawal of UNAMID, the Council
affirmed in the presidential statement that the progress
made on achieving the benchmarks and indicators for
the withdrawal will contribute to the transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding. As per the Secretary-
General's report, there has been sustained progress in
a number of areas, and there is an ongoing need for
additional efforts in other areas. There is therefore
a need, now more than before, for our Council to
move forward the agreed issues in order to continue
the implementation of UNAMID's exit strategy, in
accordance with resolution 2429 (2018).

On the future ofDarfur, as members ofthe Security
Council we must take into consideration the impact of
stability in Darfur on the Sudan and its region. We
must not forget the great human, political and material
investments made first by the people of the Sudan, and
then by the African Union and the United Nations over a
decade and a half. We would be committing an injustice
against Darfur and its people if we allowed their hopes
for a life of dignity and a better future to be dashed. We
therefore call on the members of the Council to unite at
this critical juncture and resist divergence because of
our positions or slogans.

We have closely followed developments in the
Sudan and call on all parties to be calm, practice
maximum restraint, denounce violence and pursue
dialogue in order for the transitional political process
to be successful. We express our hope that the measures
taken to address the recent developments will achieve
security and stability in the brotherly Sudan and that
they will respond to the aspirations of its people. We
call on the Sudanese people to prioritize their national
interest over everything else with a view to achieving
unity, sovereignty, stability and territorial integrity in
the Sudan.

In conclusion, we reaffirm that what is happening
in the Sudan is a domestic affair that should not be
interfered with, in line with the Charter of the United
Nations. We call once again for all concerned to abide
by the Security Council resolutions on the Sudan.
We further call for our discussions to be limited
to our subject matter and not to allow the current
circumstances to divert us from what the Council has
agreed upon in its resolutions.

