Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): First, I would like
to thank our briefers for their updates on the situation
in Yemen. I also want to warmly thank Mr. Ismael Ould
Cheikh Ahmed for his tireless efforts over the past
three years to find a peaceful solution to the conflict.
We recognize that it has been an incredibly challenging
task and we appreciate everything he has done to bring
the parties back the table and to create the conditions
for sustainable peace, often at great personal risk to
himself. I thank him on behalf of the United Kingdom.
I would also like to welcome the appointment of
Mr. Martin Griffiths as the new United Nations Special
Envoy. I pledge the United Kingdom's full support for
his future efforts.

As we have just heard from the United Nations,
the conflict in Yemen has caused the world's most
devastating humanitarian crisis. More than 22 million
people, more than three-quarters of the population,
are now in need of humanitarian assistance. Of those
22 million people more than half require immediate
help to save or sustain life. They will not survive
unless they receive assistance. The United Kingdom
is committed to providing that assistance to the people
of Yemen. We are the second-largest donor the United
Nations Yemen appeal, and the third-largest donor to
the United Nations overall. We provided $286 million
to the appeal in the financial year 2017-2018. We also
continue to work hard in order to reach consensus on a
draft presidential statement from the Security Council
aimed at responding to the recent developments on
the ground.

Despite the devastating humanitarian situation, last
year's appeal was only 70 per cent funded. This year, as
the situation deteriorates further, we have just heard that
the United Nations is requesting a record $2.96 billion.
The recent pledge made by Saudi Arabia and United
Arab Emirates to contribute $930 million to the 2018
appeal is very welcome, as is their commitment to
disburse it by the end of March. The upcoming pledging
conference, to be hosted by Sweden and Switzerland, is
also an opportunity to respond to the United Nations
appeal to help the starving people of Yemen. We call
upon all donors to answer this call and ensure that all
pledges are disbursed in a timely manner.

However, aid alone will not address the needs of
the Yemeni people. Imports of food, fuel and medicine
continue to remain well below levels ofneed. All parties
to the conflict must allow unhindered commercial
and humanitarian access throughout Yemen, which is
essential to avert the risk of mass starvation. All plans
and efforts to improve access are welcome. However,
that can be no substitute for full and unhindered
commercial and humanitarian access to the Red Sea
ports of Hudaydah and Saleef. Eighty per cent of
Yemen's imports enter the country through those ports.
Other ports lack the necessary berthing, storage and
milling capacities, and it takes days to transport goods
by road across multiple conflict front lines to reach
those in need.

The ongoing conflict in Yemen has not only given
rise to the world's largest humanitarian crisis, it has
also created ungoverned spaces in which terrorist can
operate, posed security threats to regional countries
and international shipping and fuelled regional
tensions. That is demonstrated by the ballistic missile
launches by the Houthis against civilian targets in
Saudi Arabia and their stated intention to launch
attacks against the United Arab Emirates and to block
the Red Sea international shipping lane. We agree with
the Panel of Experts' conclusion that missiles fired by
the Houthis ~ of Iranian origin and provided after the
imposition of the arms embargo - mean that Iran is in
non-compliance with paragraph 14 of resolution 2216
(2015). We call upon Iran to cease all and any activity
that fuels the conflict in Yemen. Until an enduring
political settlement is reached, the sanctions regime is
a critical tool to deter those who would otherwise use
violence to achieve their political aims.
Humanitarian aid and access will provide only
temporary relief for the people of Yemen. Ultimately,
a political settlement is by far the best way to address
the humanitarian crisis and security threats emanating
from Yemen. We call upon all parties to engage
constructively with the incoming Special Envoy and to
abandon preconditions in order to restart the political
process. All members of the Council should employ
all of their influence over the parties to resolve their
differences through dialogue and consultation.

