Mr. Sorcar (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for the timely convening
of this meeting against the backdrop of the recent
developments in the Middle East. We fully align
ourselves with the statements made by the Chairs of
the Non-Aligned Movement, the Arab Group and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.

We would like to reaffirm that the question of
Palestine lies at the heart of the Middle East crisis and
that the occupation must be recognized as central to the
issue of Palestine. Lasting peace cannot be achieved
unless the root causes are addressed. We reiterate our
full support for the legitimate cause of the Palestinian
people and for its inalienable right to a sovereign and
independent State, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
existing alongside Israel in peace and security.

We maintain that for a just and sustainable peace
to take root, Israel must meet all its obligations under
the Fourth Geneva Convention, relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions and other
peace initiatives, including the Road Map.

We are pleased to note the recent conclusion in
Mecca of the agreement between Hamas and Fatah. We
hope that this will resolve the difficulty within the
Palestinian administration, create an enabling
environment for peace through the formation of a
national unity government and lead to the lifting of the
siege currently imposed on the Palestinian
Government. We also look forward to the upcoming
tripartite meeting to be held on 19 February, between
the United States Secretary of State, the Israeli Prime
Minister and the Palestinian President and to a positive
outcome, and we hope that this will revive the stalled
peace process.

The Al-Aqsa mosque in Jerusalem is one of the
holiest places for Muslims. It is the mosque towards
which all Muslims turned for daily prayer before they
turned to Mecca. Due to the extreme political
sensitivity of this area, very little archaeological
excavation has been done until now. We do not see any
reason why this should suddenly change. When there
are major political issues pending, it would be
imprudent to continue with this plan, as it is in no way
helpful to the peace process. Digging under the holy
site gives the feeling that the shrine above is under
threat. This is neither the time nor the place to look for
ancient artefacts.

The building of the bridge that is planned here is
widely suspected to have strategic intent. The
controversial construction and the excavation work
should immediately stop. The Security Council has a
responsibility to halt the ongoing work as it could
affect and further destabilize the already imperilled
peace effort.

