Mr. Jim Yong Kim: It is a pleasure and a privilege
to take part in this briefing, and I thank you, Sir, for the
invitation.

As the Secretary-General noted, thejoint trip to the
Sahel was a historic opportunity to bring international
attention to an often neglected region. We are all so
grateful to the Secretary-General for his leadership
in bringing together the United Nations, the African
Union, the African Development Bank, the European
Union and the World Bank Group on this trip, showing
a unified front of support for the Sahel.

All of us should also express our deep gratitude to
the Government of France and President Hollande for
their courageous decision to send French troops to help
stabilize much of the Sahel. Without those troops, our
joint mission, led by the Secretary-General, likely never
could have happened. We are also very grateful for the
good work of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, which we
witnessed directly on the trip.

Our message today should be unequivocal. The
world will support the Sahel. Our joint visit last month
gave us all a better idea of the challenges facing the
people and the leaders of the Sahel. It made me even
more convinced that if we work together, we can offer
sustainable and potentially transformative solutions to
the problems of the region. I left the Sahel full of hope
and optimism. One of the conclusions we drew from
our visit is that there is a need for a coordinated and
regional approach to tackling the major development
challenges of the region. The recent formation of the
coordination platform is exactly what that region needs.
Foreign ministers from the Sahel countries will meet
every six months to decide common priorities, and we

welcome Mali's leadership in chairing the coordination
platform for its first two years.

During the trip, the World Bank Group committed
$1.5 billion to new regional investments over the next
two years. That is in addition to significant existing
country programmes. Those new funds will support
major regional development priorities, such as social
safety nets to help families withstand the worst
effects of economic adversity and disasters. They
will also support the private sector by encouraging
entrepreneurship and an improved investment climate.
I am very happy to say that exactly one week ago, our
Board approved the first part of the package - the
$228-million Senegal River Basin Multi-purpose Water
Resources Development Project. The Project will
benefit such countries as Senegal, Mauritania and Mali
by improving water availability for agriculture and
food production.

It is critically important that our work support
the social and economic empowerment of women. We
need to harness the energies of all citizens, especially
women, to build a secure and prosperous future for the
region. During the trip, together with the President of
Niger, we issued a collective call to action on women's
empowerment and demographics in the Sahel. As part of
our new investments, we have committed $200 million
to address those issues. The World Bank Group can
provide that new level of support to the Sahel because
of the commitment of our donors that support our
fund for the poorest - the International Development
Association (IDA). We very much appreciate donors'
contributions to IDA because that funding translates
into programmes that create jobs that empower and
that build infrastructure, such as roads and irrigation
systems, especially for fragile countries and regions.

The people of the Sahel have struggled for far
too long with too little economic growth. They have
endured a harsh climate in a period of famine. They have
suffered the intricately linked curses of high fertility
rates and the world's highest number of maternal and
child deaths. There is nothing natural or preordained
about this unfortunate state of affairs. For too long, we
have failed the Sahel. Our low aspirations reflect our
inability to see past what are very real challenges. But
let me be clear. The people of the Sahel do not have
low aspirations for themselves. They have very high
aspirations, and we must respond appropriately.

When I was in Timbuktu, a diverse group of people
all had the same message. They wantjust what all of us
want: a good job, a good education, access to quality
health care, and hope for a better life for their children.
In Burkina Faso, business leaders told us that they are
ready to invest more but that they need better access to
affordable energy. Today, people in Burkina Faso pay
74 cents per kilowatt-hour for their electricity, which is
almost seven times more than we pay in Washington,
DC. Still, Burkina Faso is expected to grow at 6 per
cent this year and next. We can only imagine what
Burkina Faso's growth rate would be if it had affordable
energy.

All of us must raise our aspirations for the Sahel so
they are as high and as ambitious as those of its people.
We must demonstrate our solidarity with them through
effective, pragmatic support. The lives of the people
of the Sahel can be transformed. All they need is our
sustained commitment to their vision for a better life.
I look forward to working with all Council members to
make it happen.

