Mr. Adom: I have the honour to make this
statement in my capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2127 (2013), concerning the Central African Republic.
In my presentation I intend to provide an overview of
the Committee's work since my predecessor last briefed
the Council (see S/PV.8187) on 22 February 2018, and,
in doing so, highlight the activities of the Committee
and the Panel of Experts, particularly my recent visit to
the Central African Republic.

The security situation in the Central African
Republic has remained volatile throughout the country
over the course of 2018, with marked deterioration in
the humanitarian situation and continued attacks on
civilians and humanitarian personnel by predatory armed
groups. Despite that downturn, the Government of the
Central African Republic has made tangible progress
in terms of security sector reform, with the valuable
assistance of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), the European Union Training
Mission, the Russian Federation, the United States and
France, as well as bilateral, regional and international
partners. We can now see that progress on the ground
as the Central African Republic armed forces and
internal security forces are gradually deploying across
the country, together with MINUSCA personnel.

Since my predecessor's previous briefing to the
Council, the Committee has held a total of six meetings:
on 23 February, 16 March, 25 May, 22 June, 20 July
and 7 September. The press releases summarizing
those meetings are available on the Committee's web
page. Nonetheless, I would like to highlight several of
the Committee's activities, which are focused on the
monitoring of the sanctions measures.

The Committee has advanced its close cooperation
with the Central African Republic authorities and
regional and neighbouring States in order to strengthen
the implementation of the sanctions measures and
to improve regional cooperation in that regard. On
7 September, the Committee convened a briefing for all
Member States, including the Central African Republic
and its neighbouring and regional States, to discuss
the midterm report of the Panel of Experts and the
recommendations contained therein (see S/2018/729).
The deliberations proved to be of great value and
provided an opportunity to exchange ideas on how
to enhance regional cooperation in countering arms
embargo violations and addressing cross-border arms
trafficking and the exploitation of natural resources by
armed groups. The root causes of the conflict in the
Central African Republic cannot be addressed without
the close involvement of the region and neighbouring
States. I see the sanctions regime as a valuable
vehicle to help bring the countries of the region closer
together to address the management of small arms and
light weapons.

Following a recommendation ofthe Panel's midterm
report, the Committee has encouraged the authorities of
the Central African Republic and neighbouring States
to establish, activate or reactivate commissions to
address transborder issues, including matters that are

relevant to the United Nations sanctions regime or that
affect insecurity in the Central African Republic, such
as the implementation of the travel ban on sanctioned
individuals, transhumance or trafficking in arms and
natural resources.

In addition, I would like to commend the work of
the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS),
which provided training to the Forces armees
centrafricaines and internal security forces on the safe
and effective management of weapons and ammunition
in the country. UNMAS will continue to improve
weapons and ammunitions storage facilities and
construct permanent armouries outside Bangui, such
as in Bouar, in the months to come. Together with the
United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research,
on 22 June UNMAS briefed the Committee on its
assistance to the authorities of the Central African
Republic, which, unfortunately, has been placed at risk
due to a scarcity of funding. In that regard, I would
like to call on Member States to provide additional
funding to UNMAS and earmark it for weapons and
ammunitions projects in the Central African Republic. It
is important that the international community continue
to assist the authorities of the Central African Republic
in ensuring the effective management of weapons and
ammunitions, which is a prerequisite in countering the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons in the
Central African Republic and the wider region.

Concerning the travel ban, the Committee and the
Panel of Experts have actively engaged with relevant
actors and Member States and provided information
on the appropriate travel ban exemption procedure to
advance mediation activities, pursuant to resolution
2399 (2018) and Committee guidelines. In that regard,
once again I would like to encourage the authorities
of the Central African Republic and relevant Member
States to use that tool to fully comply with the sanctions
regime. It is unfortunate that no Member State, since
the establishment of the sanctions regime in 2013, has
requested an exemption to the travel ban, although the
Committee is well aware that sanctioned individuals
are travelling.

With regard to the assets freeze, in its midterm
report the Panel of Experts reiterated that the authorities
of the Central African Republic had yet to freeze the
accounts and assets and halt the payment of salaries
to sanctioned individuals Alfred Ye'katom, Eugene
Nga'i'kosset and Habib Soussou. I stressed the same
during my recent visit to the Central African Republic
and hope that appropriate measures will be taken as
soon as possible.

Along those lines, I would like to express my sincere
words of gratitude to the authorities of the Central
African Republic for their hospitality and engagement
during my visit to Bangui and Kaga Bandoro from 2 to
5 October, together with Committee representatives
of France, Kuwait, the Netherlands, Peru, Poland, the
United States, the Embassy representatives of China and
the Russian Federation in Bangui, and several members
of the Panel of Experts. I would also like to convey my
words of gratitude to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
and Head of MINUSCA, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
and his colleagues at the Mission for their outstanding
support to my delegation.

My visit to the Central African Republic was
the third by the Chair since the establishment of the
Committee in 2013, but the first since May 2016. During
the visit, the authorities of the Central African Republic
unanimously called for the lifting of the arms embargo
as it relates to the Government so that the armed forces
can deploy throughout the national territory and protect
the population from the predations of armed groups.
They also expressed the view that the embargo is
affecting only the Government and not preventing the
armed groups from receiving weapons and ammunition
via the country's porous borders.

For my part, I underlined that it is the prerogative of
the Security Council, and not the Sanctions Committee,
to ease, strengthen or lift the arms embargo. I also
echoed the conclusions ofthe Secretary-General's letter
of 31 July to the President of the Security Council on
benchmarks to assess the arms embargo - namely, that
the "embargo has not prevented the Government from
receiving weapons through the prevailing exemption
provisions" (S/2018/752, p. 7). As the Secretary-General
noted in his letter, it would be important to assess the
embargo according to the three key benchmarks: first,
progress on security sector reform, including the armed
forces and the internal security forces and their needs;
secondly, progress on national weapons management
and ammunition capacity; and, thirdly, progress on
the effective monitoring and management of borders
to address the illicit proliferation of small arms and
light weapons.

