Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam President, for choosing to address the
issue of intercommunal violence and violent extremism
in West Africa. I also thank our two briefers for
their statements.

The situation in the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin
is extremely alarming. Grave intercommunal violence
is reported almost every day and the threat of terrorism
continues to spread. In that regard, I extend France's
condolences following the 11 December attack on
the Nigerien army. Civilians are the first to suffer in
such situations, especially women and children. The
humanitarian situation is deteriorating, particularly in
Burkina Faso, with the threat extending to the States of
the Gulf of Guinea.

We are all aware of the root causes of the
instability. Economic fragility, weak States, the growth
of trafficking and even the effects of climate change
exacerbate antagonisms between sometimes ancient
communities. But criminal and terrorist groups are
also weaponizing and profiting from the tensions, in
a context of mass distribution of light weapons. The
situation continues to deteriorate, despite the support
that has been extended. There is therefore an urgent
need to act. France calls for collective activation
and mobilization.

Within the Security Council and the United Nations
as a whole, we must continue to encourage the States
concerned to improve their governance and promote
social cohesion. It is imperative that the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali be implemented.
There has been too much delay and now serious progress
needs to be made. Resolution 2480 (2019) identifies
clear objectives and we reiterate that all those who may
stymie the implementation of the peace agreement will
be at risk of sanctions.

The solution lies first and foremost with the States
concerned. It is up to them to develop political strategies
that combine security measures, a humanitarian
response and development initiatives. No one else
can do it in their place. However, their resources are
limited. We must therefore continue to help them.

It is imperative that we step up our efforts to
counter terrorism. France remains committed to those
efforts through Operation Barkhane. Following the
summit of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
held yesterday in Niamey, President Macron will meet
with the Presidents of the five countries of the region
in early 2020 to redefine the political and operational
framework of our joint action. The Partnership for
Security and Stability in the Sahel, a Franco-German
initiative, should help to strengthen the capacities of the
countries in the region. It will be officially launched by
the end of the first quarter of 2020.

We must support regional initiatives, particularly
the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel, which has recently
seen the pace and effectiveness of its operations
increase, but which cannot sustain its action over time
without adequate international support, especially in
terms of logistics and finance. The United Nations
must contribute to that support. France encourages
donors that have not yet met their commitments to
that Force to do so as soon as possible. Those efforts
are essential, but military struggle is only part of the
answer. If it is carried out in isolation of prevention,
reconciliation, justice and development measures, it is
doomed to failure.

In the face of intercommunity violence, it
is important to prevent antagonisms and violent
radicalization and to deal with such feelings as soon as
they take root. Certain traditional conflict resolution
mechanisms have proven to be effective, and it is
important to support them. There is a need to deal with
the problems of transhumance and conflicts between
herders and farmers. Communication is vital. To this
end, France has for several years been supporting
community radio stations in Mali and has funded
training programmes for journalists.

It is also critical to give new legitimacy to the
presence of the State. The population is often angry with
the central authorities, whose actions do not benefit
them. It would therefore be appropriate for States to
assist in the provision of public services in remote
areas and conduct sustainable development projects
there. There also exists under-exploited agricultural
potential in the Sahel and around the Lake Chad basin.
In Burkina Faso, the French Development Agency
has been providing support to the rural sector and the
education system for several years. There has been
tangible progress there - primary school enrolment
rates have risen from 46 per cent in 2001 to 86 per cent
in 2016. We must therefore take this opportunity for
success and tackle root causes.

It is also necessary that we undertake a massive
financial effort in line with the objectives of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change. France is actively
contributing in this regard, with a donation of
€1.6 billion to the Sahel Alliance projects portfolio. We
have witnessed laudable efforts on the part of the United
Nations and other partners, in particular the European
Union, which I commend for being the leading donor in
the Sahel. Nevertheless, we must do more, and we must
act more effectively and efficiently.

I wish to conclude by underscoring, once again, the
urgent need to assist the Sahel and West Africa as a
whole. The situation is deteriorating unrelentingly and
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
We can no longer afford to allow such developments
to continue.

