Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I would like to thank High
Representative Valentin Inzko for his comprehensive
briefing and for his latest report to the Council
(S/2016/395, annex).

Malaysia takes note of the positive developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina during the reporting period,
as outlined by the High Representative. We welcome
the country's submission of a formal application for
membership in the European Union (EU) in February.
That latest milestone reflects the continuing aspiration
of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina and its
leaders to European integration. We believe that the
accompanying political and socioeconomic reforms
required for EU membership would pave the way for
stability and prosperity for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We therefore urge the leaders to remain steadfast
in their commitment to implementing the country's
reform agenda.

Malaysia also welcomes the positive developments
in relations between Bosnia and Herzegovina and
its neighbours. That includes the ratification of the
State Border Treaty with Montenegro, the visit by
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina to Croatia,
and the first-ever joint Cabinet meeting with Serbia
in Sarajevo.

Despite the positive developments during the
reporting period, the commitment of all parties to
the Dayton Peace Agreement and to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina
unfortunately remains in doubt. Malaysia is alarmed
by the continuing challenges, through words and
actions, posed by the leaders of the Republika Srpska
to the Dayton Peace Agreement, the Office of the High
Representative, and the State-level judicial institutions
and authorities. Such challenges are clearly against the
Peace Agreement, the rule of law and the Constitution
of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Malaysia takes note of the High Representative's
briefing on the cancellation of the planned referendum
by the Republika Srpska, which would have challenged
the authority of the High Representative, as well
as the country's rule of law and judiciary. While we
welcome this latest development, we regret the fact that
the referendum, together with other, similar threats,
were called for in the first place. We strongly urge the
Republika Srpska authorities to respect the country's
Constitution, the various Security Council resolutions
and the Dayton Peace Agreement.

Two decades after a devastating war, there is
simply no place in the country or the region for
divisive, provocative or secessionist rhetoric, which
can serve only to perpetuate narrow political agendas
at the expense of peace and stability in the region.
We also condemn the intimidation, harassment and
even death threats that have been directed at the High

Representative and the country's international judges.
Such acts are unacceptable and must cease immediately.
The divergent reactions among the ethnic communities
to the recent decisions of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia relating to Radovan
Karadzie and Vojislav Seselj prove that reconciliation is
still a distant vision. We call on all parties to respect the
rule of law and use this opportunity to make progress
on national reconciliation.

In conclusion, Malaysia reiterates the importance of
intensifying efforts to fully implement the 5+2 agenda
as prerequisites for the closure of the Office of the
High Representative. Until then, Malaysia reaffirms its
strong support to the Office of the High Representative,
as laid down in the Dayton Peace Accords and upheld
in various Council resolutions. We also recognize
the important role played by the European Union
Multinational Stabilization Force in ensuring security
and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

