The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Cuba, India, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Morocco, Norway, Pakistan,
Philippines, Spain, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab
Republic and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, Without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, in which he requests to
be invited, in his capacity as Acting Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. IfI hear no objection, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
His Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, we will hear briefings by His
Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
2

resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities; His
Excellency Mr. Ertugrul Apakan, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism;
and His Excellency Mr. Claude Heller, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).

Before giving the three Chairmen the floor, I
would like to make some introductory remarks.

This briefing will be the last by all three Chairmen
in their current capacities. It is also the last briefing
before the expiry of the mandates of both the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
and the 1540 Committee. I have therefore agreed with
the Chairmen that they will, in addition to their
statements on behalf of their Committees, offer their
views on the future of those Committees in a national
capacity. Therefore, each will deliver an abbreviated
version of their Committee's statement. More detailed
versions of their reports will be distributed today, and
will be made available on the respective websites of the
three Committees in due course.

At the outset, Mr. Mayr-Harting will make a joint
statement on behalf of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004). Following that joint statement, the
Council will hear briefings by the three Chairs of those
Committees. I now give the floor to Mr. Mayr-Harting.


