Mr. Takasu (Japan): I too would like to thank
Special Representative Victor Da Silva Angelo for his
informative briefing.

On this occasion, I would like to pay tribute to
the late President Omar Bongo of the Gabonese
Republic, who contributed so much to promoting peace
and stability in the region that we are discussing today.

The volatile security situation in Chad and the
Central African Republic is cause for serious concern
to all of us. Attacks by rebel forces continued in
eastern Chad. Violence and banditry by armed groups
increased in the north-eastern part of the Central
African Republic and light weapons continued to
proliferate. The political process to seek stability is
essential to ensure security. Both Governments -
Chad and the Central African Republic - are to be
commended for their efforts at political dialogue with
the rebel groups. For its part, the Government of Chad
signed a peace agreement with three rebel groups in
Tripoli, on 26 July - just two days ago. The valuable
support of Libya is very important.

We are also encouraged by the progress in the
election process since the Government of Chad
launched a general population census in May. It is our
hope that the parliamentary election to be held next
year and the presidential election the year after will be
organized as planned in a free and fair manner.

The Government of the Central African Republic
is also in the process of establishing legal and
institutional frameworks for parliamentary and
presidential elections next year. We welcome those
positive steps. I trust that the political dialogue among
the Government, opposition and rebel groups will be
further promoted and intensified.

Such volatile security affects the humanitarian
situation in Chad and the Central African Republic. A
growing number of refugees and internally displaced
persons are experiencing difficulty in gaining access to
necessary humanitarian support. The international
community must be more active and more generous in
delivering humanitarian assistance to the region.
On our part, Japan in recent months has disbursed
approximately $10 million through United Nations
programmes for humanitarian assistance in Chad and
an additional $4.5 million for humanitarian assistance
in the Central African Republic.

Tension between the Sudan and Chad is another
source of concern for the stability of the region. We
urge both countries to respect the Doha agreement for
improved relations and to resolve differences through
dialogue. To that end, I would like to underline the
importance of immediately halting all hostilities and
resuming the Dakar peace process. We support and
encourage continuous active mediation and confidence-
building efforts by countries in the region.

The United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) has an
essential stabilizing role in the region through taking
over the activities of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force. Japan is concerned about the delay
in deployment, which still stands below 50 per cent of
the mandated troop strength. There may be a danger of
gaps, if rotation of troops is not met by reliable new
forces. We appreciate the contributions of all troop-
contributing countries, but we need more support. I
urge all concerned to make their best efforts to
expedite seamless transitions in troop deployment.

It is also important to support capacity-building
for Chadian police and judicial institutions. I call for
the pledges to support the Detachement inte'gre' de
securite to be implemented without delay, in order to
reinforce security in collaboration with MINURCAT.
We welcome the ongoing efforts to strengthen Chadian
judicial institutions and the rule of law. Such efforts are
essential in order to defend human rights and to protect
women and children.

I would like to conclude by expressing our
gratitude to the members of the MINURCAT for their
dedicated work and for the strong leadership of
Mr. Angelo. MINURCAT needs all possible support to
fulfil its responsibilities based on a strategic workplan
with the benchmarks that have been defined.

