Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2004/348), and we thank the Head of the Mission,
Mr. Harri Holkeri, for his comprehensive briefing on
the situation in the province. We welcome the
participation in today's Security Council meeting of
Mr. Vuk Draskovic, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia and Montenegro, and of the Secretary-General.

The appraisals provided in the report and the
position of the Special Representative coincide to a
great extent with our View of the alarming situation in
Kosovo, Serbia and Montenegro. The wide-scale
outbreak of ethnic violence in March, provoked by
extremists, has seriously damaged the efforts to
establish a democratic, multi-ethnic and stable society
in the province. That planned and targeted attempt to
force members of the non-Albanian communities -
primarily Kosovo Serbs - out of the province and to
undermine the social foundations of their lives,
including by destroying historical and cultural Serbian
Orthodox monuments, can be seen as nothing other
than a conscious policy of ethnic cleansing of
Kosovo's non-Albanian population.

Russia has repeatedly warned of the danger of
such developments. Unfortunately, however, the
alarming trends that have emerged in recent years have
not been met with an adequate response. The Security
Council, in its presidential statement of 30 April 2004
(S/PRST/2004/ 13), sternly condemned the events of
March and clearly stated that no party can be allowed
to profit or to advance a political agenda through
violent measures.

It is important that, in the same presidential
statement, the Security Council reaffirmed its full and
consistent support for the "standards before status"
policy as part of the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999). Only the true attainment in Kosovo of the
democratic standards established for it by the
international community can serve as a basis for the
Council's consideration of the possibility of beginning
a discussion of the province's future status.

With regard to the complex and tense situation
still prevailing in Kosovo, we believe that a series of
steps must urgently be undertaken, aimed at
normalizing the situation and at returning the process
of reaching a Kosovo settlement to the track of
restoring a multi-ethnic society. In conformity with the
demands of the Security Council, we must carefully
study the circumstances surrounding the events of 17
to 20 March and punish those responsible, including
those who directly or indirectly incited those events,
those who engaged in hate propaganda or nationalism
and those who promoted the events by doing nothing.
We must identify and dissolve the paramilitary groups
left over from the organizational structure of the
former Kosovo Liberation Army and take stringent
measures against organizations and political figures
who, during those events, revealed their outright
nationalist or extremist nature. We must take urgent
steps to effectively restore law and order and to seize
illegal weapons. We must intensify our fight against
organized crime and all manifestations of extremism.

We support the Secretary-General's demand that
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
immediately put into effect their verbal promise to
restore a multi-ethnic society and ensure reconciliation
in Kosovo.

It is clear today that the process of normalization
has been seriously damaged. This threatens to
destabilize the situation in the region and calls into
question the timetable for the gradual implementation
of the standards set out for Kosovo by the international
community.

In that connection, we are convinced that the
strategy for attaining democratic standards in the
province needs to be modified. It is important, as noted
in the April statement of the President of the Security
Council, that we review and adapt the plan for the
implementation of Kosovo standards. Bearing in mind
the ethnic cleansing that took place in March, we need
to enhance its key provisions regarding safeguards for
equal security for the population, freedom of
movement, the return of refugees and displaced
persons, and the protection of the rights of minorities
and their full integration into Government institutions
at all levels.

Serious attention needs to be devoted to the task
of decentralizing executive powers in Kosovo, so as to
ensure, through the necessary institutional machinery,
conditions conducive to the coexistence of all
communities in Kosovo in a unified multi-ethnic
democratic society. In that connection, we await from
the Secretary-General recommendations with regard to
a balanced model for the transfer of executive powers
at the provincial level to local bodies and communities
in Kosovo, bearing in mind the relevant studies carried
out and proposals made by interested parties and
international organizations.

It would be appropriate to consider also the Serb
plan for a political settlement of the current situation in
Kosovo. This is important in the context of both
establishing constructive cooperation between the
United Nations Mission and the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo on the one
hand and the Kosovo Serbs and Belgrade on the other,
and finding appropriate ways and means to solve the
Kosovo problem and maintain the multi-ethnic nature
of the province.

Advancing in the "Standards for Kosovo" process
without taking into account the events of 17 to 20
March is inadmissible. We continue to believe that, at
the current stage, it would be premature to set a
deadline for a comprehensive review of the
implementation of the plan for Kosovo standards by
the middle of 2005. Arguments to the effect that this
would provoke additional tension in the province do
not convince us - quite the contrary. Such a hasty
setting of deadlines would incite extremists and would
be taken as an attempt to relieve the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo of their
responsibility for developments in the province.

We need to review, also in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), the current
practice of involving the Provisional Institutions in
activities related to the reserved areas. The provincial
structures should be deserving of trust and should
beforehand show themselves to be effective in
administering various aspects of life in Kosovo.

The Russian delegation shares the concern of the
Secretary-General at the continuing threat of new
outbreaks of violence in Kosovo. We note the decisive
action taken by the international presence in Kosovo to
restore law and order and to protect minorities in the
province as well as their religious, historical and
cultural sites. However, we believe that, along with
strengthening KFOR, we could also strengthen its anti-
terrorist component and give it additional means of
combating massive outbreaks of violence. We cannot
allow, and we should condemn most sternly, attacks on
the United Nations Mission and on KFOR.

We welcome the constructive role that the
leadership of Serbia and Montenegro played in March
in the context of their collective efforts to combat
extremist violence, and we note the effective measures
taken to punish those individuals who took part in, or
who did not prevent, the burning of mosques in
Belgrade and Nis, and we note also the steps taken to
restore them.

We welcome the intention of the Belgrade
authorities to undertake active work in Kosovo,
including their stated readiness for the earliest possible
resumption of dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.

Russia is prepared to cooperate fully and closely
in order to put an end, as soon as possible, to the
tragedy in the Balkans and to put the situation back on
the track set out in Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), which remains the sole legal basis for a
Kosovo settlement. We firmly believe that we must
draw the most serious conclusions from what has
happened, which will enable the international
community, through its joint efforts, to provide a just
solution to the problem of Kosovo and to ensure lasting
stability and security in the province.

