Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): First of all, I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency. You can be sure of our full
support during this month. I also offer many thanks and
congratulations to Ambassador Rice and the United
States delegation on their successful presidency in April.

In recent weeks, the Council has expressed its
deep and growing alarm at the escalating conflict
between the Sudan and South Sudan, including troop
movements, seizure of territory, support to proxy
forces and aerial bombardments - a situation that the
Council has rightly characterized as a threat to
international peace and security.

With the adoption of resolution 2046 (2012), the
Council has demonstrated its determination that the
conflict must end. It has given its full support to the
African Union road map of 24 April. With the full
weight of its authority under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations, it has created binding
obligations on both the Sudan and South Sudan to
cease fire and follow the path laid down by the African
Union towards the restoration of a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace between their two countries.

The adoption of resolution 2046 (2012) also
means that both the Government of the Sudan and the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North (SPLM-N)
have binding obligations to resolve the conflict in the
Sudan's Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan states,
which has cost its people so highly in suffering and
displacement.

As resolution 2046 (2012) makes very clear, the
Sudan, South Sudan and the SPLM-N must meet in full
their obligations set out in the resolution or face the
consequences of non-compliance. The United Kingdom
hopes that, with the adoption of resolution 2046
(2012), the Sudan and South Sudan will choose the
peace, stability and prosperity that their people so
desperately need and deserve.

The African Union High-level Implementation
Panel, supported by the Security Council, has made
clear that it stands ready to help them make that choice
and to make it binding for generations to come. The
United Kingdom expresses its deep gratitude to the
Panel for its work and looks forward to a better future
for all the people of the Sudan and South Sudan.
