Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): I thank Ms. Reena Ghelani for
her comprehensive briefing on the humanitarian
situation in Syria. I would also like to once again
thank the thousands of humanitarian workers in the
camps providing assistance and protection in order
to save lives in Syria. We recognize that ensuring the
necessary conditions for safe, sustained, effective and
quick humanitarian work remains a great challenge.

The Dominican Republic is particularly concerned

about the ongoing violent incidents and military
operations that endanger the lives of civilians and
forcibly displace them in difficult circumstances, often
with deplorable consequences, as was the case with the
recent displacement of thousands of people from Hajin
to Al-Hol camp that injust a few weeks claimed the lives
0f6l children. Moreover, it is estimated that 10.2 million
Syrians are living in hostile zones. We therefore call on
all parties involved in military activities to strictly abide
by international humanitarian law and safeguard the
lives, freedom of movement and integrity of civilians
and civilian infrastructure. While we realize that Syria
is continuing to experience one of the most acute and
urgent humanitarian crises of our times, second only to
that in Yemen, my delegation believes it is important
to consider the real conditions on the ground in order
to enable steps to be taken, even small ones, towards
lasting peace for the Syrian people. We believe that in
order to do so, we must begin by ensuring basic health,
education and security conditions.

The figures are not encouraging. One of three
schools in Syria has been damaged or destroyed. Forty
per cent of health centres are not operating at capacity.
I have already mentioned the high level of insecurity
affecting a large number of people, whose very future
is frankly uncertain. Six and a half million people
are suffering from food insecurity, and 2.1 million
children are not attending school, with a high rate of
child employment.

Those are just some of the poignant statistics coming
out of United Nations reports, which do not enable
envisaging even a budding progress in the years to
come. We therefore believe that the 2019 humanitarian
response plan must include a comprehensive approach
towards laying a firm foundation for ensuring a better
future for the Syrians, including lasting solutions to
the situation facing the millions of displaced persons.
It is very complex situation. We look forward to the
successful outcome of the donors conference to be held
in Brussels in March.

I would like to join the other delegations that
expressed their views earlier on the situation concerning
the makeshift camp in Rukban and the extensive and
effective joint operation carried out by United Nations
agencies and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent - the
largest-scale humanitarian operation that has been
carried out in the country. Concerning the conditions
described by Ms. Ghelani earlier, we would be remiss if
we failed to stress the need for assistance in facilitating
the return to Rukban in a regular and sustained manner.
We urge the Syrian authorities to authorize access to
a fresh convoy as soon as possible. In particular, we
support seeking lasting solutions for the Syrian children
of Rukban and any other affected location, including
local integration and resettlement, and ensuring that
any return of refugees and displaced children is safe,
voluntary, dignified and informed, while at the same
time decisions are made in the light of the best interests
of the children concerned, within the framework of the
family and their overall well-being.

Lastly, we echo the many calls to the parties to fully
implement the Russian-Turkish brokered agreement
on a demilitarized zone in Idlib under international
humanitarian law. As the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and other actors have stated,
an escalation of hostilities would have catastrophic
humanitarian consequences. Equally catastrophic is
the insecurity that the trapped civilians are facing.
According to reports, last week 16 civilians, including
women and children, were reportedly killed and more
than 70 injured in the Al-Qusour neighbourhood of
Idlib by two explosive devices, the second of which
appears to have been designed to kill and maim people,
including medical workers attempting to help the
victims of the first bomb.

Diplomatic efforts must be ramped up to find a
political solution to the crisis in Syria in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015), while avoiding new
military offensives, which inevitably end up harming
civilians, mainly children, women, the elderly and
people living with disabilities.

