Mr. Soemirat (Indonesia): On behalf of my
delegation, I would like to begin by congratulating you
and your team, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency ofthe Council for this month. I also want
to assure you of our full support and readiness to work
with you throughout your presidency. We would also
like to thank all the members of the Council for their
support to our delegation during Indonesia's presidency
last month. And we wish you and all the Members of
the United Nations Eid Mubarak - a happy holiday.

We thank Special Representative Fall for his
briefing and for the work of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) in supporting the
countries of the region.

We have noted from his briefing and from the
Secretary-General's latest report (S/2019/430) that the
situation in Central Africa remained volatile and highly
charged by political and security challenges. However,
we cannot overlook the positive progress that has taken
place in the region since the beginning of the year. The
peaceful general elections and transfer of Power in the
Democratic Republic of Congo and the signing of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic arejust a few ofthe highlights.
There is no doubt that the region is currently in the
international spotlight. We have heard over and over
again that multilateral and bilateral efforts to support
the region are being prepared and delivered. We must
collectively seize this momentum in order to assist the
countries of the region in their efforts to address their
various challenges and achieve a better future for their
region. I would like to focus my comments on a number
of points.

First, the root causes of conflict should be
comprehensively addressed. We share the Secretary-
General's view that inclusive, genuine and credible
electoral processes remain a key factor for the region.
The Governments of the region must regain the trust
of their peoples, especially after years of conflict and
political distrust. Not only that, they must also gain
one another's trust. Good neighbours create a good
community. And the international community should
work together to provide capacity that will enable the
creation of that trust. In short, trust is important and
partnership is key. Peace and stability remain fragile.
The region is prey to threats from armed groups, the
illicit exploitation and trafficking of natural resources,
and communicable diseases. The violence committed
by the Lord's Resistance Army and Boko Haram has
significantly affected the region's stability. That must
also stop.

Secondly, partnerships between regional and
subregional organizations, in collaboration with the
United Nations, are urgently needed. Indonesia believes
in the principle that neighbours know best. As natural
first responders, regional and subregional organizations
play a very important role in enabling the region to
resolve this crisis. We recognize the important efforts
undertaken for the region by the African Union, the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community,
the Lake Chad Basin Commission, the Gulf of Guinea
Commission and other regional and subregional
organizations, and we encourage them to continue their
collaboration with the United Nations.

Indonesia also notes the significant importance of
the region for the United Nations, which is apparent from
the number of dedicated United Nations special envoys
and representatives to the region and its countries.
We welcome the efforts to enhance coherence and
coordination between them, including the coordination
and cooperation between UNOCA and the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel, as the
Special Representative mentioned. This is in line with
the current spirit of reform of the United Nations,
including by breaking the silos between the branches
of the United Nations system. We also urge them to
include United Nations peacekeeping missions on the
ground in their coordination efforts, as well as United
Nations experts mandated by the Security Council.

In conclusion, it is clear that the challenges in the
region persist, and as members of the Security Council,
we are obliged to continue to provide support to the
countries of the region in accordance with our mandate.

