Mr. Marzooq (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.

My country fully supports United Nations efforts
to achieve peace, and condemns in the strongest terms
all terrorist attacks, including recent attacks in New
Zealand, Sri Lanka, Burkina Faso and the United States
of America. In that regard, we extend our deepest
condolences to the families of the victims.

We salute the Palestinian people for their
steadfastness and determination to endure the
severe economic, humanitarian and political crises
they are facing. We fully support the policy of the
Palestinian Authority and congratulate it on forming a
new Government.

Since the announcement of the creation of a plan
for peace in the Middle East, or so-called deal of the
century, the occupying Power has committed a long list
of blatant violations with a view to changing the legal
and demographic status of the occupied territories. It
continues to build illegal settlements and has ended
the temporary international presence in Hebron, while
freezing part of the Palestinian tax revenues and taking
other illegal decisions that are null and void in violation
of the international resolutions and that could have
serious repercussions in the region.

As peace-loving States that are keen to expedite
the deal of the century, we must work together to
strengthen the international front against all unilateral
decisions that perpetuate the occupation and to block
the immunity granted to Israel, forcing it to respect and
implement international resolutions and agreements.

Iraq recognizes no solution that clearly and explicitly
violates the resolutions of international legitimacy and
international law, nor do we acknowledge it as part of the
peace process. We renew our rejection of all violations
by Israel, the occupying Power, against Muslim and
Christian holy sites, especially attempts to change the
historical and legal status of the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque
with temporal and spatial divides. Iraq commends
the Al-Quds appeal, launched by King Mohammed
VI of Morocco and Pope Francis, which stresses that
Al-Quds Al-Sharif is a symbol of coexistence and
mutual respect for human heritage. Jerusalem unites
and does not divide. We must therefore work to ensure
that Al-Quds remains a symbol of peace.
Iraq deplores the United States declaration of Israeli
sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan. We stress
that Syria has the right to fully recover the occupied
Syrian Golan, in accordance with the resolutions of
international legitimacy. We reject any decision that
entrenches Israel's occupation of the Syrian Arab Golan
or any other occupied Arab territory.

In conclusion, we reiterate our call on the
international community to fulfil its commitments
and take the steps necessary to revive the peace talks
in order to achieve a just and comprehensive solution
based on relevant United Nations resolutions. We also
call on all countries that have not yet recognized the
Palestinian State to do so expeditiously, as that will
provide the Palestinians with the support needed to
seek a political, not a military, solution, rather than
wait for the occupying Power to annex other parts of
the West Bank.

