Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We thank the
United Kingdom for convening this debate and you,
Madam Secretary, for presiding over this meeting.

We want also to express our condolences to the
Government and people of France over the horrific
attacks that took place in Paris on Friday, and to the
Governments of Lebanon and Iraq over the attacks in
Beirut and Baghdad. As others have said, terrorism is a
scourge that affects all of us.

I want also to thank the Secretary-General
and Ambassador Skoog, as well as Nobel laureate
Ms. Bouchamaoui, for their briefings. I pay particular
tribute to Ms. Bouchamaoui for the inspiration that
Tunisia and her colleagues have given the rest of us.

We share the assessment of most speakers today
that this debate marks an important recognition by the
Council that security and development are intrinsically
linked and must be considered in their interconnections.
The Council does not and cannot operate in a theoreticl
vacuum. New Zealand has made no secret of its belief
that the Security Council should do more to prevent
conflict. Since joining the Council in January, we have

pushed for a greater focus on the part of the Council and
the wider United Nations system on emerging crises
and preventing countries from sliding into conflict.

This has led us to call for attention to developments
in Burundi and, earlier this year, in Guinea Bissau, and
for a credible response to the situation in Israel and
the occupied territories, which we regard as dangerous
and unsustainable. It has led us to support discrete,
informal options for Council engagement on emerging
crises that are sensitive to concerns regarding national
sovereignty. We have encouraged informal briefings by
the Secretariat where appropriate, and see potential in
making greater use of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa. We have
also made efforts to explore targeted interventions,
such as statements and Council missions, and to call
for more meaningful coordination with regional actors,
who are often at the forefront of prevention efforts.
Conflict prevention will remain a primary focus for
New Zealand for the remainder of its term.

Today's debate offers the opportunity to consider one
specific aspect ofprevention. To sustain peace, we need
to get better at addressing the root causes and drivers of
conflict. There is a growing recognition - led by the
pioneering work of post-conflict countries themselves
through the g7+ initiative, under the leadership of
Timor-Leste - that security and development needs
are closely interlinked, particularly in fragile and post-
conflict States.

For most societies, inclusive growth and
development are critical elements in preventing the
emergence or reoccurrence of conflict. But prospects
for development are in turn contingent on maintaining
a stable environment, underpinned by institutions that
provide security, effective governance, and the rule of
law. As others have noted, this has been acknowledged in
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), notably through Goal 16.
This relationship between a stable, secure environment
and sustainable development was also acknowledged in
the Small Island Developing States (SIDS) Accelerated
Modalities of Action Pathway, agreed at the 2014
International Conference on SIDS, and was also a strong
theme of the open debate convened by the Council in
July on the peace and security challenges facing small
island developing States (see S/PV.7499).

As we all know and acknowledge, the Security
Council is not the primary actor in addressing many of
these challenges, but it can and must play an important
role in addressing them and in ensuring that its work
in addressing threats to peace and security is linked
up with and complements the work of the wider United
Nations system and with relevant regional actors.
The Council needs to ensure that it reflects these
understandings in its mandates. Its interventions need
to be tailored to the specific drivers of conflict in each
setting, and to be based on a clear assessment ofthe roles
that Council-mandated missions can most effectively
play, based on the Council's comparative advantage.
The Council must also be proactive in seeking more
effective coordination with other international actors.
Where it mandates development-related activities,
whether they be quick impact projects or targeted
support to core institutions, the Council is invariably
reliant on other international development actors with
more specialized expertise and longer time horizons.
This means bridging the silos between different
pillars of the United Nations, including development,
security and human rights. It also means reaching out
to enhance cooperation with others beyond the United
Nations system, including the international financial
institutions, regional organizations, non-governmental
organizations and bilateral donors.

We have yet to fully realize the potential of the
Peacebuilding Commission to coordinate peacebuilding
actors or to achieve the kind of partnership with the
Council that was originally envisaged. We firmly
believe that there must be closer engagement with and
more systematic involvement of country configuration
Chairs in Council discussions, given the valuable
knowledge and insights they can provide. We also need
to ensure that United Nations missions are equipped
with the resources and expertise they need to identify
and address the drivers of conflict and to manage
emerging threats.

We therefore strongly support the recommendation
of the High-level Independent Panel on United Nations
Peace Operations for much greater investment in the
political component ofpeace operations, and in conflict-
prevention efforts more generally. It is for these reasons
that New Zealand has recently significantly increased
its funding to the Department of Political Affairs.
We also acknowledge the good work being done by
United Nations Development Programme on conflict
prevention.

Our understanding of the requirements of conflict
prevention and the relationship between peace and
development has advanced significantly in the past
decade. It is incumbent on the international community,
and the United Nations in particular, to translate these
understandings into action. New Zealand will continue
to champion greater up-front attention, investment,
practical innovation and courage in exercising the
Security Council's responsibilities under the Charter of
the United Nations for preventing conflict.
