We, too, thank Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for her informative briefing and her leadership under these extraordinarily difficult circumstances. I wish also to recognize my friend and colleague Ambassador Mohammed Hussein Bahr Aluloom, the Permanent Representative of Iraq. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes the political progress made in Iraq, including progress towards the formation of the new Government. Iraq is now grappling with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, and we recognize and commend the Government's early engagement to contain its spread. We also acknowledge the coordination between the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the World Health Organization to support the Government's measures in this regard. We reiterate that the fight against COVID-19 is a shared one requiring close cooperation. We encourage the Government to keep human dignity at the centre of its efforts to combat COVID-19, to protect the most vulnerable people, including displaced persons, and to ensure that appropriate mechanisms and laws are in place for the protection of victims of domestic violence. We also emphasize the need for the unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance to persons in need. Most persons targeted for humanitarian assistance under the humanitarian response plan are displaced persons, and we take this opportunity to underscore the need for the relevant authorities to facilitate the voluntary, safe and dignified return and reintegration of displaced persons in accordance with international law. In addition to fighting the pandemic, Iraq is still recovering from the war on terror, and we remain concerned that remnants of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant continue to launch frequent attacks against the Iraqi people. We commend UNAMI for its constructive engagement in Iraq, including its commitment to resolve the issue of missing Kuwaiti persons and property, and recognize the commitment of Iraq's Ministry of Defence and the support of the International Committee of the Red Cross in that regard. Regarding Iraq's path to reconciliation and reconstruction, we stress that the exclusion of any group within Iraqi society can have a crippling effect. Impunity can also adversely impact the reconciliation process. To that end, we encourage the Government to pursue accountability for violations of international law and encourage UNAMI to support the Government in that endeavour, in accordance with the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity. In conclusion, we reiterate our support for UNAMI and encourage the countries of the region and the international community to help strengthen Iraq's domestic capacities in order to promote its path to reconstruction. Last but by no means least, I wish to extend our condolences to the families of the Blue Helmets recently killed in Mali. May they rest in peace and may their good work always be remembered.
