Ms. Ndhlovu (South Africa): My delegation is
pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over this emergency
meeting of the Security Council, which has been called
in response to Israel's ongoing refusal to implement
Security Council resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002)
and 1403 (2002). We note with great concern that the
Israeli Government is using the time period between
the adoption of resolution 1403 (2002) and Secretary of
State Powell's visit to the region to intensify its
military operations against the Palestinian Authority
and the people in the occupied territory, including
Jerusalem.

The Non-Aligned Movement firmly believes that
Israel's attempt to isolate and humiliate President
Arafat is a grave error. Whether Prime Minister Sharon
likes it or not, President Arafat was democratically
elected by the Palestinian people and remains their
leader. Furthermore, as the Secretary-General noted
during his statement to the Council on 4 April 2002,
the right to self-defence is not a blank cheque.

The unprecedented adoption of three Security
Council resolutions in three weeks demonstrates that
the international community will not condone the
continuation of massive Israeli military aggression
against Palestinian towns and cities.

Israel has no jurisdiction over diplomatic
representatives, humanitarian workers and journalists,
and no right to refuse them access to Palestinian towns
and cities. We cannot accept the Israeli Government's
dictating to those representatives of the international
community accredited to Palestine when they may or
may not function. South Africa's Charge d'affaires in
Palestine is among those barred from Ramallah by the
Israeli Defence Force, which has declared the city a
closed military zone.

Israel's military operations in Palestinian towns
and cities have generated a humanitarian and human
rights catastrophe throughout the occupied territory,
including Jerusalem. According to the Israeli
Government's own estimates, hundreds of Palestinian
civilians have been killed and many more wounded.
We note with deep concern that the Israeli Defence
Force continues to deny Red Cross, Red Crescent and
other medical and humanitarian workers access to
wounded or dead civilians.

We wish to remind the Security Council that three
suggested courses of action have been proposed to it by
the Non-Aligned Movement, and that it has yet to take
them up. The first is that the Council should consider
the immediate deployment of a credible, multinational
monitoring mechanism or peacekeeping force to ensure
that the parties observe a ceasefire and any other
agreements that may be reached between them. The
second is that the Council consider sending a mission
to Israel and Palestine immediately to obtain a first-
hand impression of events on the ground. The third is
that the Council consider the suggestion that it meet
with Prime Minister Sharon and President Arafat to
obtain a first-hand account of the situation on the
ground.

The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its
demand that Israel immediately implement Security
Council resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and 1403
(2002) and respect human rights and international
humanitarian law and allow medical and humanitarian
workers, journalists and international diplomatic
representatives free access to Palestinian towns and
cities. We call on Israel to immediately withdraw its
forces and to acknowledge that a political, rather than a
military, solution needs to be found to the crisis that
Israel's continued occupation of Palestinian land has
provoked in the Middle East.

