Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): It is
said that humans are the only animals that trip over the
same stone twice. In 2016, we had a situation in which
the mandate of the Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM) was about to expire. There were doubts about its
continuation. There was a brief rollover of its mandate
and finally, in November, it was adopted. What
happened in the meantime?

What happened is that the JIM. is not just an idea.
It is based on the work of human beings - men and
women who earn salaries, who have families and who
need to know what is going to happen to their lives. That
is what happened last year. In the face of uncertainty,
most of the staff of the JIM. sought contracts elsewhere.
They withdrew and looked for other means of earning
a living.

A small country like Uruguay makes great efforts
not to stumble over the same obstacle twice. That is
precisely where we are today. We are less than a month
away from the expiration of the mandate of the JIM.
The men and women who work for the JIM. have the
right to know what is going to happen to their lives,
what is going to happen to them, and whether they
will have to change jobs. We therefore believe that we
should be pragmatic and renew the JIM. mandate. Let
us not make the same mistake twice. Let us renew the
mandate as soon as possible and retain the Mechanism's
staff. Essentially, last year we had to wait six months
for the JIM. to be stood up anew. There was almost no
JIM. activity from November of last year until May of
this year. Is that what we are after? I think what is most
logical is to renew the mandate.

For us, renewing the mandate matters because
Uruguay alone does not have the means of investigating
what happened in Syria or what is happening in the 60
reported cases of potential chemical-weapon use. We
need an impartial body to do the work. The United
Nations, in cooperation with the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, and the Security
Council established the JIM. Let us once again give it
an opportunity to continue its work.

