Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
The text before us is the welcome outcome of long and
difficult negotiations. It is welcome because the text rules
out for good wording that could have proved dangerous.
The principles underlying the oil-for-food programme have
been respected. The Memorandum of Understanding of
May 1996, which serves as a basis for the agreements
between the Government of Iraq and the United Nations in
this area, has not been unilaterally amended. The new spirit
of cooperation between Iraq and the United Nations since
the Secretary-General's trip to Baghdad has been
strengthened. That is why we will vote in favour of the
draft resolution.

The provisions are, of course, temporary, as is the
distribution plan and the Memorandum of Understanding
itself, which is renewed every six months. The Council
recalls its desire for the humanitarian programme to
continue, with the agreement of Iraq, until the oil embargo
is lifted. That is how we understand the fourth preambular
paragraph, which uses the same wording as the
preambular parts of resolutions 986 (1995) and 1153
(1998). As for the distribution plan, the compromise
arrived at in paragraph 5 preserves the essential elements.
On the one hand, it avoids any danger of a gap in the
supply of humanitarian goods to Iraq. On the other, if
Baghdad so wishes the Iraqis may, next November, before
the expiration of resolution 1153 (1998), propose a new
distribution plan. If Iraq prefers, it may also simply
amend the current distribution plan.
The main objective of the draft resolution, however,
was supposed to be to allow Iraq to increase its oil
production. As early as February, France, together with
others, expressed the wish that the Council would
authorize Iraq to import the spare parts that it needed. At
the time, this desire was met with reluctance on the part
of some. We therefore lost four precious months. This
draft resolution will now provide the legal framework
deemed indispensable by some Member States. No delay
can any longer be justified. The draft resolution
unfortunately approves only a mechanism, and not the list
of spare parts - still less the contracts. We can only
regret that the very specific and precise recommendations
of the Secretary-General in this matter have not been
followed. The Secretary-General had proposed that the oil
overseers - the independent experts - rather than the
sanctions Committee, approve the contracts, so as to gain
time. However, they will henceforth be submitted to the
sanctions Committee. We hope that it will show the
necessary sense of responsibility and diligence. In this
respect we have every confidence in you, Mr. President,
as Chairman of that body.

Given some unfortunate past experiences, however,
we have every reason to be vigilant. Further delays of
several months after the very sharp drop in crude oil
prices would effectively and permanently jeopardize any
expansion of the oil-for-food provisions, which were
considered reasonable by all members of the Council.

Such an expansion of the programme is necessary.
It is necessary if we want to avoid any further
deterioration in the humanitarian situation of the Iraqi
people. I should like to recall one statistic. As the
Secretary-General said in his last report, the nutritional
situation of children under the age of five has not
improved at all, despite the implementation of the
humanitarian programme. One third of Iraqi children are
suffering from serious or acute malnutrition, according to

 

the United Nations Children's Fund and the World Food
Programme.

But we must also broaden this programme so as to
meet essential needs relating to water quality and to the
provision of energy to enable hospitals, bakeries and other
facilities to function and to meet the immediate and
essential humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people. That is
why we must hope that the sanctions Committee will ensure
that this increase that has finally been authorized will
actually take place. Of course, the humanitarian programme,
even when it is enlarged, is only a provisional and
temporary palliative measure. Today it is to be hoped that
the new relationship established between Iraq and the
United Nations, particularly after the mission by the
Secretary-General to Baghdad, will be reflected in the swift
lifting of the oil embargo once the Special Commission has
certified that Iraq has carried out, as it must, its
disarmament obligations.

