Mr. Ayebare (Uganda): Thank you, Madame
President, for organizing this important debate and for
presiding over the work of the Security Council this
month. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his briefing.

I wish to convey our deepest condolences and
sympathies to the Government and people of Turkey on
the loss of life and the destruction of property caused
by yesterday's earthquake in eastern Turkey. We also
convey our deepest condolences to the Government
and people of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on the
passing away of Crown Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz
Al-Saud.

When a peace process becomes as long-drawn-
out and protracted as has been the case with the Israeli-
Palestinian question, there are times when the parties
involved feel frustrated. It is essential for both parties
to recommit themselves to the noble objective of
reaching a durable solution.

In that regard, Uganda reiterates its call on the
Israeli and Palestinian parties to muster the necessary
courage to resume negotiations towards a peaceful
settlement based on a two-State solution - Israel and
Palestine living side by side peacefully and within
secure borders.

We welcome the Quartet statement issued in New
York on 23 September, in particular the six steps it
proposes and the call on the parties to resume
negotiations with a view to reaching a final agreement
by the end of 2012. Uganda encourages both Israel and
Palestine to resume negotiations without further delay.

We also welcome the agreement reached on the
exchange of prisoners, brokered by Egypt and
Germany, which was announced by Israeli and
Palestinian leaders on 11 October. We consider this as
an important gesture that can foster greater
cooperation.

The continuation of settlement activity, or any
other actions that can hamper progress, should be
avoided.

On the situation in Gaza, we remain concerned
about the dire humanitarian conditions and we reiterate
our call for a complete lifting of the blockade on Gaza.

Finally, at this critical juncture, it is important for
the Israeli and Palestinian parties, with the support of
the international community, to step up their efforts
towards the attainment of a two-State solution.

