The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank the
Security Council and the Egyptian presidency for
this timely reflection on the contribution of United
Nations peacekeeping operations to global efforts to
sustain peace.

The nature of today's challenges requires us to
connect all our efforts for peace and security, human
rights and sustainable development. Member States
have explicitly acknowledged this interlinkage, most
recently in the twin resolutions on the review of the
peacebuilding architecture (Security Council 2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262).

The universality of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and its pledge to leave no one behind
has put sustainable development at the core of the
sustaining peace agenda. Sustainable development
cannot be achieved in the absence of the conditions
for peace, and implementing all the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) will make an enormous
contribution to the sustaining peace agenda. The links
between both agendas are found not only in Goal 16, on
strong institutions and inclusive societies, but across all
17 Goals. Sustaining peace, understood as a process and
a goal to build a common vision of a society, underlines
the comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred
approach of the 2030 Agenda.

Implementing the sustaining peace agenda requires
an inclusive strategy that supports the diverse range
of our missions and takes account of the entire peace
continuum, from prevention, conflict resolution
and peacekeeping to peacebuilding and long-term
development. The resolutions on the review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture outline
the importance of strong coordination, coherence and
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission in the formation, review
and drawdown of peacekeeping operations. The Council
has a vital role to play.

Peacekeeping operations need clear, realistic and
up-to-date mandates with well-identified priorities,
adequate sequencing and the flexibility to evolve over
time. Coherence, complementarity and collaboration
between the United Nations peace and security efforts
and its development and humanitarian work are also
essential to preventing conflict and mitigating risks,
fostering more sustainable outcomes and ensuring that
no one is left behind.

Looking ahead, we must work together to ensure
that peacekeeping lives up to its full potential as an
essential tool for sustaining peace - not in isolation but
as part of our new, integrated approach. Peacekeeping
missions operate with strong links with the United
Nations development system and the humanitarian
community to facilitate a more integrated approach to
peacebuilding initiatives, exit strategies and transition
plans, as we have seen in the cases of Liberia and Haiti.

Sustaining peace is an inherently inclusive
political process that spans development activities,
preventive measures, mediation, conflict management
and conflict resolution. Implementing the sustaining
peace agenda means putting Member States and their
populations in the lead, prioritizing political solutions,
making prevention the priority, and leveraging the
United Nations three pillars - human rights, peace
and security, and development ~ in a mutually
reinforcing way.

The Secretary-General's vision of prevention goes
beyond averting crisis and violent conflict and takes
account of the changing nature of crises in today's
unpredictable world. It requires a broad, whole-of-
United Nations approach, as well as greater synergies
for more effective delivery and impact. We need
to enhance our support by drawing on the United
Nations early warning capacity, mediation, preventive
diplomacy and programmes and activities in the field.

In line with this vision, the Secretary-General
has committed to a surge in diplomacy for peace, in
partnership with a wide range of actors. Prevention
measures and peace processes must be driven by
national leadership and inclusive ownership that
recognize the needs and contributions of all segments
of society, especially women and young people as our
agents of development and peace.

With the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the international community
acknowledged the role of young men and women as
critical agents of change. They will find in the SDGs a
platform to channel their capacities for peace into the
creation of a better world. The future of humankind
lies in their hands, and they will pass the torch to
future generations. Empowering them and building a
sustainable future requires stronger institutions and
better governance. That is why we must invest more in
development and mobilize our efforts towards fostering
peaceful, just and inclusive societies that are free
from fear and violence. There can be no sustainable
development without peace and no peace without
sustainable development, and there can be neither
without human rights.

In order to achieve sustaining peace and sustainable
development we need to engage in strong collective
action and enhanced collaboration and partnerships,
including with the business community, financial
institutions, civil society, and regional and subregional
organizations. We need to deepen ties with regional
and subregional partners, the World Bank, which is
drastically increasing its involvement in conflict-
affected countries, and the International Monetary
Fund, which is seeking to reduce the destabilizing
influence of corruption so as to ensure better investment
in peace.

At the African Union summit in July, I committed
the Organization to strengthening our partnership on
political issues and peace operations, with stronger
mutual support and continued capacity-building
through the joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security. The Peacebuilding Commission occupies
a unique role in bringing all those partners together.
I invite the Security Council to engage more actively
with the Commission. Those partnerships must also be
based on solid and predictable funding, including for
prevention, in line with the sustaining peace agenda. I
hope a united Council will consider supporting missions
backed by a Council resolution and implemented by
our partners, either with assessed contributions or by
promoting other predictable financing mechanisms.

Let me now turn to the subject of reform. We need
to improve how we review peacekeeping operations, in
consultation with our development and humanitarian
partners, and to ensure a strong human rights and
gender focus. Women are the first to bear the brunt of
conflict and endure the post-conflict transition, they are
also expected to lay a foundation for peace. In all fields
of peacekeeping, women peacekeepers have proven that
they can perform the same roles to the same standards
and under the same difficult conditions as their male
counterparts. It is an operational imperative that we
recruit and retain female peacekeepers and police. Not
only because gender parity is essential for its own sake,
but because the involvement of women increases the
chances of sustained peace and reduces incidences of
sexual abuse and exploitation.

We must work together across our silos and address
the humanitarian/development/peace nexus, as well as
the root causes of violence and conflict. Sustaining
peace can be achieved only through a broader vision
of prevention. Humanitarian and development actors
need to work together to bridge the gap between relief
efforts and development aid, and enable Governments
and communities to build and strengthen their
capacities for resilience, disaster risk reduction and
mitigation, and conflict prevention, in particular in
developing countries.

It is our duty to support the people of the
world and provide them with effective and timely
humanitarian assistance and development programmes
simultaneously, through a coherent whole-of-system
approach. Guided by the Secretary-General's ambition
to overcome fragmentation and make prevention the
priority of the United Nations, we have taken important
steps to outline a comprehensive and bold agenda so as
to improve how the United Nations delivers to the people
it serves. It is crucial to recognize that development is
an end in itself and a central part of our work.

The Secretary-General's repositioning of the
United Nations development system and the reform of
the peacebuilding architecture reflect the instrumental
role ofthe 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as
a road map for sustainable development and sustaining
peace. The Sustainable Development Goals are key
tools for preventing crises and achieving sustained
peace. The reform of the United Nations system has
been designed to reinforce the interlinkages between
the 2030 Agenda and the sustaining peace agenda,
as outlined in the presentation on the Secretary-
General's report on the United Nations development
system (E/20183) to the Economic and Social Council
in July. Among other steps, the Secretary-General's
recommendation calls for strengthening the leadership
of Resident Coordinators and establishing a direct line
from them to the Secretary-General, thereby ensuring
more responsive accountability, coordination and
efficiency on issues that are related to prevention,
sustaining development and sustaining peace.

In order to effectively implement such reforms
and sustain peace we must build the resilience of the
poor and those in vulnerable situations and reduce their
exposure and vulnerability to climate-related extreme
events and other economic, social and environmental
shocks and disasters. Each mission and peacekeeping
operation must be considered in its unique political
and development context. In many ways, one of
peacekeeping's most important contributions to peace is
the preparation for a smooth and effective peacekeeping
mission drawdown and hand-over to the United Nations
Country Team.
We have recently seen successful examples of
that process in Cote d'Ivoire and soon in Liberia. In
Haiti and Darfur, community-violence reduction
programmes are impeding the recruitment of at-risk
youth by armed criminal groups, thereby contributing
to stability and social cohesion. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali mainstreams the prevention of and response
to conflict-related sexual violence in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and security-sector
reform processes. In order to deepen those successes
we must work together for gender parity, particularly
in missions that are moving from military to police
and civilian components. For example, we must use
the window of opportunity that is emerging from the
drawdown of the military component of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti to engage more
women in police and civilian operations.

Peace processes are rarely short or straightforward.
The complexity of current conflicts requires a
multidimensional approach that prioritizes a range of
initiatives. They include providing crucial protection for
civilians under threat and strengthening institutions, as
well as the rule oflaw, so as to bolster respect for human
rights at all levels. They require the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of armed groups, and
they entail a focus on justice and reconciliation, proven
credible elections and the extension of legitimate and
accountable State authority.

For many people suffering in conflict-affected
countries United Nations peacekeeping missions are a
rare source ofhope for the return ofpeace. Their success
is a source of great pride for us all. I would like to pay
tribute to the brave men and women of United Nations
peacekeeping missions, whether civilian, military or
police, and take the opportunity to encourage more
women to join our missions. I would particularly like to
honour the sacrifices of those who have lost their lives
while providing an indispensable service.

In order to ensure that we are on the right
peacebuilding track, we must get the politics right.
Peacekeeping operations are political instruments that
ideally accompany a locally-owned peace process. To
that end, missions provide good offices and work closely
with the various parties and communities to achieve
and implement peace agreements. In considering all
those areas, a broader and more sustained level of
engagement by members of a united and strong Security
Council, individually or collectively, is essential in
order to ensure that member States, the United Nations
system and all our partners are aligned behind a
common purpose and a common vision for action that
integrates all pillars of the United Nations and brings
all its activities together in a truly integrated fashion.

With the adoption of the 2030 Agenda and the
sustaining peace resolutions, we have mapped the
road to a safer, more resilient and sustainable world.
The challenge now is how to ensure that the journey
is successful and that its gains are truly irreversible.
I look forward to the support of the Security Council
in orienting efforts and resources towards our ultimate
goal of achieving sustainable development and
sustaining peace.

