Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): We, too, would like to
start by welcoming Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone, to the
Council and to thank her for her briefing. We also
thank the Executive Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL),
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg, for presenting the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/267) and the
Permanent Representative of Canada, Ambassador
John McNee, in his capacity as Chair of the Sierra
Leone country-specific configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for his briefing.

Uganda commends UNIPSIL, the United Nations
country team and the Peacebuilding Commission for
their efforts and support towards the implementation of
the mandate of the peacebuilding mission in Sierra
Leone in an integrated and coherent manner. We are
particularly pleased to note that the United Nations
peacebuilding strategy has been finalized and that all
20 projects financed by the Peacebuilding Fund to the
sum of $35 million are expected to be fully
implemented by the end of this year. The establishment
of two regional offices in Kono and Bombali districts
and the pending creation of six others will further
enhance effective coordination among United Nations
agencies, programmes, funds and development partners
operating from one location in each district.

We welcome the initiatives undertaken and
tremendous progress made by the Government of
Sierra Leone under the leadership of President Ernest
Bai Koroma in the political, economic and social
sectors during the period under review. In particular,
we note that the overall security situation in the
country has remained largely calm. We are encouraged
that, following the unfortunate incidents of political
violence in March this year, inter-party dialogue
between the ruling All People's Congress and the main
opposition party, the Sierra Leone People's Party,
culminated in the signing of a joint communique by
their leaders.

We call upon all political leaders to resolve any
misunderstandings through dialogue and to desist from
all acts of political intolerance and the incitement of
violence. We further call upon them to ensure widespread
publicity and the expeditious implementation of the joint
communique, which lays the foundation for reconciliation
and constructive bipartisan consensus on important
national policies and institutions.

We commend the Government for making
agriculture and national food production its top
priority, as well as for initiating innovative
programmes, including food- and cash-for-work
activities. This focus on the agricultural sector is
critical to the country's economic growth and food
security and to the provision of employment for a large
number of unemployed young people. In that regard,
we appreciate the support extended by the African
Development Bank, the European Commission, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the World Food Programme and non-governmental
organizations towards the implementation of these key
initiatives.

We call upon the Government, UNIPSIL, the
Peacebuilding Commission and international partners
to intensify their efforts in mobilizing the national and
international funding needed for the consolidation of
Sierra Leone's recovery, economic growth and
development. The implementation of priority
programmes, such as the Joint Vision, the peacebuilding
strategy for Sierra Leone, the President's Agenda for
Change and the private sector development strategy,
requires substantial funding. We welcome the
Government's ongoing plans to utilize and harness the
country's natural resources for strategic investments that
will spur economic growth and development.

My delegation supports the proposed launching
of the United Nations multi-donor trust fund at the
forthcoming special session of the Peacebuilding
Commission, slated for 10 June, and calls for the
further commitment of support at the subsequent
Consultative Group meeting scheduled for November
in London.

Sierra Leone still faces a number of challenges in
consolidating peace, stability, economic growth and
development. The capacities of national institutions,
including the civil service, the judiciary and police,
require substantial enhancement. We are therefore
encouraged by the commitment of UNIPSIL and the
development partners to support Government efforts in
strengthening their capacity. Massive youth
unemployment also remains a significant problem.

We are encouraged to learn from the Foreign
Minister that consideration of the constitutional review
report is now on course. It is imperative that the
Government ensure the expeditious resumption of the
process with wider public participation, as recommended
by the Lome' Peace Agreement and the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission.

Finally, we commend the recent steps taken by
the Government in fighting drug trafficking, which
should be sustained.

