Mr. Fowler (Canada): It is indeed a pleasure to see
you, Sir, presiding over the work of the Security Council
today. You clearly have many friends around this table and
within these walls. Twenty-two years ago, as a junior
member of the Canadian Security Council delegation, I had
the distinct pleasure of working with you and President
Nujoma, as the Gang of Five sought to negotiate Namibia's
freedom - a process that culminated in resolution 435
(1978), passed in September 1978, which, far too many
years later, led to the independence of your country. It is a
delight to now serve on the Security Council with a
vigorous and effective Namibian delegation and an honour
to meet today under your presidency.

(spoke in French)

Let me begin by congratulating you, Sir, for your
initiative in calling this open debate on children and armed
conflict. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict for providing the context for our debate, in
particular by presenting his assessment of the harsh realities
faced by children affected by war. I also wish to thank the
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) for circulating to Council members her excellent
overview of the important work that UNICEF is doing in
the field. My delegation considers it indeed unfortunate that
Ms. Bellamy could not be present to participate in this
important debate, where UNICEF's unique expertise would
have been most valuable.

The protection of civilians during armed conflicts is a
central aspect of human security. Children, as the most
vulnerable civilian group, deserve the Council's special
consideration. In the open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, held last February at Canada's
initiative, the Council devoted particular attention to child
victims of war, and we believe that this issue must remain
a priority on our agenda.
Children are the future of the global community and
of human security. Ensuring respect for their rights, their
protection and their welfare is a collective obligation, and
any failure on our part in these areas necessarily
undermines our efforts to promote the rule of law. As
States we must do our utmost to comply fully with our
obligations under the relevant international instruments,
including the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
the Geneva conventions and their protocols. Children are
increasingly the innocent victims of war crimes and
crimes against humanity. We must therefore put an end to
the culture of impunity through unflagging support for the
international tribunals and the timely establishment of the
International Criminal Court. In addition, if we are to
achieve effective reconciliation and ensure the full
participation of children in their societies, we must work
to ensure that war-affected children are rehabilitated and
reintegrated into their communities. By failing to address
the effects of armed conflict on children, we risk
jeopardizing the prospects for sustainable peace.

The Lome Peace Agreement for Sierra Leone
focuses appropriately on war-affected children. Its signing
is an important turning point for the international
community. The conflict in that country has been dubbed
the "children's war" because of how many of the victims
and perpetrators of violence have been children. This is
why the successful disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of child soldiers will be a decisive element
in rebuilding a climate of security and stability.

National efforts to address accountability and
reconciliation after the traumatic events which occurred in
Sierra Leone will also be crucial. Canada welcomes the
Security Council's expansion of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL) and
supports efforts for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, which must
specifically recognize the special needs of children.

(spoke in English)

Canada strongly supports the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu. As we are all too
aware, the legal norms and standards which exist to

 

protect the rights of children are most often honoured in the
breach. Mr. Otunnu has raised the profile of children's
rights in conflict-affected areas with particular leaders on
all sides of a withering array of devastating conflicts, with
non-governmental organizations, and with domestic
constituencies throughout the world. More substantively, his
numerous missions to conflict-affected countries, including
Sri Lanka, Sierra Leone and Colombia, have resulted in
commitments to stop recruiting and deploying children
under the age of 18.

We also strongly support the efforts of other key
bodies within the United Nations system as they seek to
protect children caught up in conflicts throughout the world.
Agencies such as the United Nations Children's Fund and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, as well as the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, all drawing on years of
experience with children, have critical roles to play on the
ground in implementing effective programmes to address
the needs of war-affected children. This makes it the more
important that those involved in addressing this problem
within the United Nations system coordinate and collaborate
carefully so that no effort is wasted. While we recognize
that some progress has been made in this area, more is
clearly required.

My delegation is deeply troubled by the growing
number of child soldiers, now numbering more than
300,000 - not only the children who use and carry
weapons, but also the many young girls and boys who
serve fighting factions as water carriers, messengers or sex
slaves. The practice of employing children as weapons of
war must be stopped. We must also be creative in finding
solutions which can integrate children who have been left
orphaned or abandoned by families, clans and communities.
Children should be offered real alternatives to joining
armies or rebel groups, or indeed to living alone on the
streets.

To this end, Canada has a three-track approach. First,
we support the development of a strong optional protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, aimed at
raising the age of recruitment in the armed forces and the
age at which people may legally participate in hostilities.
Canada is taking measures to be in a position to support the
strongest possible standard by the time the working group
next meets, in January 2000.

Secondly, civil society partnerships are central to the
way Canada approaches human security. Complex
problems, such as that of war-affected children, call for
multifaceted responses. Governments alone cannot prevent
abuses against children trapped in conflicts; nor can they
alone heal the impact of war-related trauma. Close
cooperation among international organizations, regional
bodies and civil society, such as the international non-
governmental organization Coalition to Stop the Use of
Child Soldiers, is crucial to devising coordinated
responses and imaginative solutions.
Thirdly, we recognize the importance of regional
initiatives. Canada congratulates the Organization of
African Unity and the Organization of American States on
their regional efforts to combat the use of child soldiers
and to assist the plight of war-affected children more
generally. The African Conference on the Use of Children
as Soldiers, held in Maputo last April 1999, and the Latin
American regional conference, held in July, have built
momentum at the regional and subregional levels. These
conferences have succeeded in bringing Governments
together with civil society to examine the problem in an
effective partnership. They tell us that solutions too will
require partnerships and, to be sustainable, must be built
on local and regional initiatives which recognize
traditional values.

Two weeks ago the Secretary-General called for
"days of tranquillity" in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to enable the country's more than 10 million
children to be immunized against polio, measles and
diphtheria. Canada believes that the Council should
support such humanitarian ceasefires as an important
element in long-term peace-building. My delegation
shared the Secretary-General' s dismay, however, when the
campaign was interrupted and valuable supplies wasted in
several parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo a
few days later. As a result, many children could not be
vaccinated. The situation of the Congolese children speaks
to the problem we debate today: children did not cause
the conflict in the Congo, yet they are so deeply, so
dramatically and so desperately affected by such struggles
in the most basic of ways.

In many war-torn societies, landmines constitute one
of the most significant threats to children. It is estimated
that approximately 25 per cent of the world's landmine
victims are children who come into direct contact with
mines as they play, go to school, tend livestock or gather
food and water. Moreover, given their relative size, child
victims of landmines are more likely to suffer more
seriously, or to die, as a result of their injuries. In
addition, children are particularly vulnerable to the threat

 

of landmines as a result of their natural curiosity about
strange objects as well as their relative inability to
recognize and respect warning signs of mined areas. While
it is difficult to fathom, some militaries have deliberately
targeted children with landmines by developing brightly
coloured mines that look like toys.

In her study on the impact of armed conflict on
children, Graga Machel called on the international
community to denounce this attack on children for what it
is: intolerable and unacceptable, as children have no part in
warfare. In the Security Council, we should accelerate our
efforts to address the problems of war-affected children
and, more generally, to promote the protection of all
civilians. Other forums - the General Assembly, regional
organizations and other key meetings such as the 27th
International Conference of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent - will also play vitally important roles.

My delegation looks forward to the Secretary-
General's forthcoming report on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict and to discussing the concrete
recommendations contained therein. We also look forward
to participating in the preparation of the report on children
and armed conflict envisaged in the draft resolution before
the Council today.

