Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Turkey and appreciate the briefing that
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco presented to us.

We are dismayed and surprised by the grave
events that took place along the coasts of the
Mediterranean off the Gaza Strip today. We condemn
in the strongest terms the armed attack carried out by
the armed forces of Israel in international waters
against the flotilla of civilian boats seeking to carry
humanitarian aid to the inhabitants of the Gaza Strip.
We also deplore the loss of human lives and the
persons wounded as a result of the attack. We extend
our condolences and solidarity to the relatives of the
Victims and the wounded in those tragic events.

Attacks in armed conflict situations directed
specifically against civilians and other persons or
goods subject to protection - in this case,
humanitarian assistance personnel - and the

restrictions on access to humanitarian assistance, are
serious violations of the norms and principles of
international humanitarian law, in accordance with the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Additional
Protocols of 1979. They also constitute international
crimes. We also believe that actions of that type, which
are contrary to international law, arbitrarily limit the
right to the freedom of legitimate navigation.

For all those reasons, the Government of Mexico
requests a broad investigation of those facts and that
measures to alleviate the regional situation be taken as
soon as possible so as to renew the peace process in the
Middle East.

Such regrettable facts confirm that the blockade
on Gaza not only deeply affects the civilian population
in Gaza but also is counterproductive for Israel,
causing grave incidents like that of today, which could
well have been avoided. Therefore we once again urge
the Government of Israel to lift the blockade against
the Gaza Strip so as to allow access of humanitarian
aid to the population, whose situation has been grounds
for great concern to the international community since
the end of the conflict in that territory in January 2009.

We also reiterate the importance of full
compliance with the provisions of resolution 1860
(2009) and underscore once more the significance of
establishing an international ceasefire monitoring
mechanism that allows the passage of humanitarian
supplies and materials necessary for the reconstruction
of the Gaza Strip and puts an end to illicit arms
trafficking to that region.

In the current difficult conditions, we call on the
parties involved to refrain from any action that could
provoke an escalation in violence. We also call for the
renewal of the dialogue between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority, which is the only way to attain
lasting peace in the region.

Such acts should not interrupt the process of
proximity talks under way, the urgency of which has
been shown today. The opposite would serve to inflame
to most extremist sectors, enemies of peace in the
region, which in the end would prevent the coexistence
of two States there - Israel and Palestine - within
secure and recognized borders.
