Mr. Schwaiger: We would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council at the beginning of
2010. We would also like to congratulate the five
newly elected members of the Security Council.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU) in accordance with the new
arrangements for external representation of the Union
under the Treaty of Lisbon. In this respect, it is a very
special and, as the French representative said, a very
moving moment for the European Union.

The candidate country Croatia; the countries of
the Stabilisation and Association process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; and the Republic of Moldova
and Georgia, align themselves with this declaration.

Allow me to begin by expressing our appreciation
for the opportunity to participate in today's debate.
Like other speakers before me, I would especially like
to thank Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing, his
excellent work in the past and his ongoing work in
leading the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). We also want to wish him all
the best in his future endeavours.

The European Union welcomes the conclusion of
the presidential electoral process and congratulates
President Hamid Karzai on assuming office for a
second consecutive term. The EU wishes to underline
its readiness to support President Karzai and the future

Afghan Government in the implementation of the
commitments made to the Afghan people in his
inaugural speech, namely, in the five key areas of
peace and reconciliation, security, good governance,
economic development and regional cooperation. This
will require close and strategic coordination of the
international efforts under the lead of UNAMA.

The European Union takes note of the
announcement by the Independent Electoral
Commission that the parliamentary elections will take
place in May 2010. It also underlines the need for
urgent reform of the electoral system, including a
review of the appointment mechanism of the
commissioners of the Independent Electoral
Commission to ensure its impartiality, as recommended
in the final reports and findings of the EU Election
Observation Mission and other observations groups on
the presidential and provincial council elections.

The security situation in Afghanistan remains
extremely challenging. As highlighted in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2009/674), the security situation
has worsened over the reporting period, with a 65 per
cent increase in the number of incidents from 2008,
including the tragic attack of 28 October 2009, which
highlighted the increased level of risk exposure for
United Nations personnel. In this context, the European
Union wishes to reiterate its condolences to the
families of the victims.

The European Union concurs with the Secretary-
General that, to reverse this downward trend, the new
Government will have to show resolve in implementing
political reform that addresses the root causes of the
insurgency, including through efforts aimed at
improving governance and an Afghan-led political
process to re-establish peace. Also, everything possible
must be done to avoid civilian casualties.

The European Union actively supports the
improvement of good governance, the rule of law, the
fight against corruption and impunity, and respect for
human rights in Afghanistan. Building Afghan capacity
and ownership in the police and civil sectors remains at
the core of the European Union's engagement in
Afghanistan, as reaffirmed in our recent plan of action.
The European Union Police Mission in Afghanistan is
clear proof of that active and continued engagement.
Equally, the European Union urges the new Afghan
Government to give the utmost priority to the
achievement of significant progress in those areas,
especially at the sub-national level.

Stability, security and development in
Afghanistan are closely linked to the overall situation
in the region. The European Union strongly supports
the development of a coordinated approach at the
regional level and enhanced cooperation between
Afghanistan and its neighbours, especially Pakistan.
The EU has initiated decisive steps to strengthen and
achieve a more coherent and concerted approach to EU
action in Afghanistan and Pakistan through its plan of
action for the region.

The European Union strongly supports UNAMA
in its important role as the coordinator of international
efforts, while recognizing Member States'
responsibility to provide UNAMA with the necessary
resources to perform this task. The European Union
concurs with the Secretary-General that a more focused
and better coordinated international civilian effort,
under a United Nations umbrella and within the
framework of a transition strategy, is urgently required.

In that regard, the European Union is ready to
further explore initiatives such as the establishment of
a reinforced and dedicated civilian coordination
structure that ensures strong Afghan ownership and the
involvement of all major stakeholders, and the
appointment of a senior civilian official within the
International Security Assistance Force. Those and
other initiatives, including the improvement of existing
coordination mechanisms, need careful analysis.
10-20219

The European Union also looks forward to the
upcoming London Conference, on 28 January, and the
subsequent Kabul conference, which will offer an
opportunity for the new Afghan Government to lay out
its priorities, plans and commitments. The United
Nations will have a prominent role in both conferences.
For the international community they will be occasions
to review and reaffirm its engagement in Afghanistan.
We should agree on new goals, benchmarks and
timelines in order to renew a common framework for
our work towards the shared goal of a peaceful and
secure Afghanistan. Those conferences also represent
an important step towards the formulation and
subsequent implementation of a transition strategy,
with the emphasis on building up the Afghan National
Security Forces and the gradual handover of
responsibility for security to Afghanistan's own
authorities.

The European Union reiterates its full recognition
that the primary responsibility for the development of
the country lies with the Afghan Government and
people themselves. But I would like to assure the
Council that the European Union will continue to play
an active role in assisting Afghanistan on its road to
security, stability and prosperity, in close cooperation
and coordination with UNAMA and other international
actors.

