Mr. Gaspard (Haiti) (spoke in French): Allow me
to begin by thanking the President of the Council for
having convened this debate. I welcome the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2013/l39), and I congratulate
his Acting Special Representative for his briefing. I
also thank the various speakers for their constructive
comments.

Today's debate in the Council, five months after
the adoption of resolution 2070 (2012), allows us
to take stock of the progress made in Haiti and the
main challenges that remain. Along those lines, it is
important to briefly recall the strategic guidelines and
core objectives of the Government's activities.

First, on the humanitarian front, for the Haitian
authorities it was a matter of facing emergency issues,
in particular the situation of those made homeless
by the earthquake, as well as to launch far-reaching
projects to rebuild the country based on six core
priorities, namely, education, employment, the rule
of law, the environment, energy and children. In that
respect, the objective is to place the country sustainably
and irreversibly on the path of development.

Today it is clear that Haiti has made significant
progress. On the humanitarian front, as noted in the
report, between 2010 and early 2013, thanks to the
Government's measures and the backing of the United
Nations and other humanitarian partners, 1,178,000
displaced people have been resettled. That represents a
basic reduction of 77 per cent ofthe homeless population
in terms of the initial figures.

In combating cholera, despite a reoccurrence in
some parts of the country, the results of cross-cutting
efforts are encouraging. Cholera-related mortality was
reduced from 5.3 per cent in 2010 to 1.2 per cent by
the end of 2012. The cholera prevalence of 43 cases per
1,000 in 2011 was reduced to 6 cases per 1,000 in 2012.
The initiative of the Secretary-General to create a fund
to combat cholera in Haiti and his appointment of Dr.
Paul Farmer are most welcome in that regard.

More generally, measures taken in various domains
are beginning to bear fruit. With respect to education,
the Government has enrolled more than 1 million
children through its universal education programme,
with the assistance of funds-transfer programmes, and
is guaranteeing that mothers receive cash stipends in
order to motivate them to keep their children in school
and out of the work place.

Economically speaking, measures undertaken
have led to stabilization of the macroeconomic
situation, attracting foreign investors and combating
unemployment. They have resulted in thousands of jobs
and increasingly promising economic prospects.

In that context, Caracol Industrial Park in the
north of the country - one of the largest of the
Caribbean - was inaugurated and could create 20,000
direct jobs and up to 60,000 indirect jobs. Moreover, it
should be noted that the Government has considerably
increased public spending to rebuild roads, airports,
public buildings and housing projects,, thereby creating
immediate employment.

In the area of the rule of law, mindful that the
independence of the judiciary is a sine qua non for
establishing a culture of the rule of law, the Martelly-
Lamothe Government has set up the Superior Council
of the Judiciary and filled vacancies in the Supreme
Court, which is the country's highest level court.
Additional measures were undertaken to train judicial
staff, increase the number ofprisons, combat prolonged
pretrial detention and increase the number of peace
tribunals. All of those initiatives aim to guarantee
respect for and the protection of human rights.

In the area of State reform, the Government is
reforming public administration through its State reform
framework, which was launched last October to cover
the five years from 2012 to 2017. The programme was
established following an observed lack of effectiveness
in the public administration's service to the public. It
must therefore be modernized to improve its public
service capacity.

With respect to corruption, the Government has
strengthened existing bodies by providing them with
the necessary funding. Therefore, due to the efforts of
the Anti-Corruption Unit, more than 200 State officials
implicated in an embezzlement affair involving funds
for universal education were arrested and prosecuted.

On the political front, my delegation notes the
concerns expressed with regard to delays in following
the electoral calendar for convening interim legislative
elections and municipal and local elections. We reaffirm
the firmly expressed will of the Government to work to
achieve those milestones as quickly as possibly based
on the utmost honesty and transparency and strict
adherence to democratic norms.

In that vein, the Government hails the recent
appointment of three parliamentary representatives to
the permanent electoral council, which will organize
the elections in order to fill the one third of vacancies
in the Senate and establish the local authorities. Those
are important elements of democratic governance that
the President and the Prime Minister are seeking to
advance.

On the security front, the situation has generally
improved greatly, thanks to the efforts of the Haitian
National Police, supported by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

According to some studies, Haiti had 8 homicides
per 100,000 inhabitants in 2012, which represents
a much lower rate as compared to other countries of
the region, which had 25 per 100,000 inhabitants. The
security situation is therefore satisfactory.

The striking success of the twenty-first summit of
the heads of State and Government of the Caribbean
Community, which took place in February in Port-
au-Prince, was highly important to the Haitian
Government.

All of those facts represent that wide differences
exist between perception and reality. The Government
will therefore continue its efforts to maximize security
throughout the country.

The Haitian National Police development plan
for 2012-2016 stipulates a progressive increase from
10,000 to 15,000 members in 2016, and will further
professionalize the institution and bolster its operational
capacities. In that regard, my delegation welcomes
MINUSTAH's work and supports its draft 2013-2016
consolidation plan. We also take the opportunity
to thank all of the countries contributing troops to
MINUSTAH.

On the social front, the Haitian Government, with
the help of many international organizations, including
the World Bank and UNICEF, has launched many social
programmes aimed at creating a social safety net in the
country. Those programmes have helped to alleviate
the situation of many families facing extreme poverty.

Despite those tangible steps forward, many
challenges remain. There are many humanitarian and
structural issues involving development in Haiti. Allow
me to highlight two of them.

The first concerns the funding of reconstruction
and development programmes and projects as
defined by the Government. That remains the core
issue in tackling emergency situations, such as the
displaced persons camps, food and security, as well
as more general matters of reconstruction. Resource
mobilization is therefore crucial. I would therefore
like to take this opportunity to thank the main donor
countries and to reiterate our call to them to continue
to demonstrate their generosity and understanding to
Haiti, in order to contribute over the long term to the
country's reconstruction.

The second challenge is the matter of the country's
vulnerability in terms of natural disasters. Without
improved consideration of that problem, reconstruction
tasks cannot be appropriately addressed.

Finally, the Haitian Government's core objective is
to sustainably and irreversibly set the country on the
path of development, as a precondition to the lasting
improvement of its people's living conditions. The
Government possesses the necessary political will and
is mindful that Haitian stakeholders must be the real
motors of those ambitious objectives. However, we
also understand that given the limited resources of our
country, we require the genuine and effective support
of our international partners to attain our goals. The
Government therefore renews its commitment to work
hand in hand with its partners and with the Council.

