Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank Police Commissioners Greg Hinds, Fred Yiga
and Luis Miguel Carrilho for their briefings. We also
thank the presidency for organizing today's first-ever
briefing from the heads of the police components.

Establishing the rule of law is a fundamental
pillar in consolidating post-conflict peace. Initial
peacekeeping operations would be fruitless unless they
are strategically supported by efforts to institutionalize
law-enforcement functions through reforms in the
security and justice sectors. Police components in
peacekeeping and special political missions are
increasingly called upon to play a more constructive
role in that process. Even though they make up merely
15 per cent of the total United Nations uniformed
personnel, their role is unique and irreplaceable. Their
professionalism and expertise can assist in closing the
loopholes in civilian protection activities and enable
tailored advice in the institution-building process.

Police tend to face less psychological resistance than
the military in host countries. Female police officers
are also better positioned to deal with gender- and
child-related crimes, which often occur with impunity
in conflict-ridden areas. That comparative advantage
should be fully utilized and appropriately systemized
in the composition of the police components.

Different perspectives on the rule oflaw deserve due
attention in assisting a host country's capacity-building.
However, we believe that post-conflict societies,
without exception, require an end to impunity, as well
as transitional justice and national reconciliation. The
political leadership should play a pivotal role in that
regard in a transparent, impartial and inclusive manner.
Otherwise, a mission's assistance and engagement will
have limited effect.

Having said that, I would like to ask the briefers
some questions.

United Nations missions are often exposed to
unexpected circumstances. Based on the United Nations
police policy and the Strategic Guidance Framework
for International Police Peacekeeping, scenario-based
training needs to be continuously elaborated.

In Liberia the outbreak of Ebola seriously threatens
the peacebuilding achievements made thus far. The
security situation may deteriorate unless it is addressed
appropriately and in a timely fashion. I would like
to ask Commissioner Hinds what specific efforts are
being made to coordinate with the host Government
and other key partners? What are the main obstacles
undermining the work of security institutions?

With regard to the protection of civilians,
inter-communal fighting widely displaces civilians,
as we have witnessed in South Sudan and the Central
African Republic. Displaced civilians can no longer
find safe haven. Even around the protection-of-civilian
camps of the United Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
compound, women and girls fall victim to sexual
violence. Last May, through resolution 2155 (2014), the
Security Council refocused the UNMISS mandate to
stress the protection of civilians, with enhanced police
personnel. 1 would like to hear from Commissioner Yiga
what specific actions have been taken on the ground to
protect civilians since last May. I also wonder whether
there are any negative repercussions from suspending
support for South Sudan's capacity-building?

In the Central African Republic the security
situation is much worse, with far weaker Government
functioning. The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) is being forced to assume more
responsibility for policing, as the national police service
is virtually non-existent. Impunity persists amid an
endless cycle of retaliation between communities.
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Gaye
once stressed the importance of establishing a criminal
justice system in cooperation with international
partners. In that regard, I would like to hear from
Commissioner Carrilho whether the MINUSCA police
component has helped that idea materialize with the
transitional Government.

Before concluding, we would like to pay special
tribute to all United Nations police component
personnel. We believe that resolution 2185 (2014),
adopted today, will be a good reference for the high-
level independent panel on peace operations in carrying
out their comprehensive review, due next year.

