Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Ever since the Security Council adopted its
resolution 1125 (1997) last August, the Bangui
Agreements have been implemented comprehensively and
effectively, thanks to the efforts and cooperation of the
Government of the Central African Republic and the
Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of
the Bangui Agreements (MISAB). The situation in the
country has been reasonably stable, and there have been
tangible results in the process of national reconciliation.
China is pleased by this.

At the invitation of the Government of the Central
African Republic, MISAB carried out peacekeeping
activities under a Security Council mandate to monitor
and assist that country in implementing the Bangui
Agreements. The officers and men of MISAB have done
their duty in most difficult circumstances: recovering
weapons, promoting dialogue, maintaining security and
providing humanitarian services. Their excellent
performance has created conditions in which the country
can stabilize the situation and achieve national
reconciliation. China highly appreciates the work of
MISAB, which has shown once again that through efforts
by African countries themselves, and with full and timely
support by the Security Council, the stability and
development of the countries involved can be gradually
secured.

China has always maintained and supported the view
that the Council should pay attention to the problems
faced by Africa. In resolving these problems, the

 

reasonable demands of the African countries should be
respected and the necessary support rendered.

The draft resolution before us will authorize the
establishment of the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINURCA) to replace MISAB, so as to
help the Government and the people of that country realize
their ultimate goal of national reconciliation.

The Chinese Government supports this operation. For
us, the draft resolution before us is a rather good document.
On the one hand, it has accommodated the specific requests
of that country and of other African countries. On the other
hand, it has made reasonable and proper provisions for the
mandate, functions and time-frame for MINURCA.

We believe that MINURCA will follow the good
practices of MISAB, will fully respect the Government of
the Central African Republic, will, responding to the
specific situation in the country, continue to promote
communications and dialogue among all sides and will
accomplish the tasks set forth in the draft resolution.

A journey of 1,000 miles starts with the first step. The
country has already taken its first step on the road towards
national reconciliation and the restoration of the national
economy. Basically, the stability and the progress of the
country depend on its people and its Government. We hope
that the adoption of this draft resolution will actively
promote national reconciliation and economic reconstruction
and help the country move gradually towards peace,
stability, development and prosperity.

For these reasons, the Chinese delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution before us.
