Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
introduction at the beginning of this meeting. I would
also like to express my gratitude to the Under-
Secretary-General for his briefing.

Belgium associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by our colleague from Slovenia in his
country's capacity as President of the European Union.

The Israeli and Palestinian peoples are living
through a very trying time, which has aroused concern
among Belgian officials. Given the impact of the
escalation of violence on the civilian populations of
Israel and Gaza, Belgium has reiterated its resolute
condemnation of Palestinian rocket launches. While
acknowledging the right of Israel to defend itself, my
country's officials have joined the Secretary-General in
condemning the disproportionate nature of Israel's
response. Moreover, along with its European partners,
Belgium has unreservedly condemned the terrorist
attack against Yeshiva Mercaz Harav on 6 March 2008.

There are reasons for both hope and despair in the
current diplomatic situation. As far as the elements for
hope, we should commend the political courage of
President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert, who,
while continuing dialogue, have not allowed violence
to destroy the bilateral negotiations process launched at
Annapolis.

While leaving it up to the parties to negotiate the
parameters of a final settlement, it is incumbent upon
the international community to support their efforts. In
that connection, Belgium regrets that, despite its
repeated efforts, the Security Council has not been able
to play its role in condemning violence and
encouraging diplomacy.

We welcome the first meeting organized between
the parties by General Fraser. Whatever will there may
be on the part of the Palestinians and the Israelis to
reach a solution, we must admit that, more than ever
before, the absence of progress on the ground will
undermine the political process. Belgium therefore
encourages the Quartet and its Representative, Tony
Blair, to support and complement the efforts of General
Fraser to help the parties to implement their respective
commitments, beginning with those under the Road
Map and the Agreement on Movement and Access.

Although they may appear to be difficult to
implement, that difficulty pales in comparison with the
price the Palestinians and Israelis will have to pay if
the peace process becomes bogged down once again.
The urgency of this matter has led the international
community to become deeply involved. Its
commitment was evidenced at Paris last December, and
will once again be on display on the security and
economic fronts at the upcoming conferences to be
held in Bethlehem and Berlin.

Nevertheless, those efforts will be productive
only if they complement those of the parties. It is for
that reason that we launch an urgent appeal to Israel to
halt the expansion of existing settlements, dismantle
illegal outposts and gradually lift obstacles to
movement in the West Bank. We call on the Palestinian
Authority to intensify its efforts in the area of security,
including by proceeding to restructure its security
forces and to dismantle terrorist infrastructure.

With regard to the situation in and around the
Gaza Strip, Belgium welcomes the peace that has
prevailed in recent days, as well as the partial
reopening of the crossings at Kari and Sufa. As for
Hamas, which has de facto control over the Gaza Strip,
the current calm must urgently be followed up by
concrete steps to assume its responsibilities towards
the Palestinian population, and that of Gaza in
particular. We therefore demand that Hamas put a
complete end to the launching of rockets, restore the
rule of law, which the Palestinian people deserve, and
return control of the Gaza Strip to the sole legitimate
control of the Palestinian Authority.

In that regard, and given the serious humanitarian
crisis in the Gaza Strip, Belgium reaffirms the
readiness of the European Union to facilitate the
implementation of a solution that makes possible the
reopening of crossings for humanitarian and
commercial purposes.

I should like to conclude by saying a few words
about Lebanon. Regardless of the obstacles
encountered, Belgium would like to reiterate its
unreserved support for the mediation efforts of the
League of Arab States and its Secretary-General,
Mr. Amre Moussa. We hope that in the days remaining
before the holding of the Damascus summit, all parties
will be able to assume their responsibilities and make a
constructive contribution.

The seventeenth postponement of presidential
elections should not deter us from goals that all of us
know are crucial to stabilizing Lebanon and the whole
of the region. We would like to reaffirm our support to
the Lebanese Government and armed forces. Pending a
resolution of the current issues through the resumption
of a national dialogue, those institutions have been able
to ensure the unity, sovereignty and independence of
Lebanon. We also support the efforts of the Secretary-
General to implement all aspects of resolution 1701
(2006) on the basis of the deployment of Lebanese
forces and the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon south of the Litani River. The political
process set out in August 2006 includes all the
elements necessary to guarantee Lebanon's sovereignty
and stability in an atmosphere of lasting peace.

