The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.

Peru notes with great concern the developments in
Syria. In the face of military action, as a response to
information on the use of chemical weapons against the
civilian population in the country, we reiterate the need
to keep the situation from spiralling out of control and
causing a greater threat to stability in the region and to
international peace and security.

Peru condemns any use of chemical weapons as an
atrocity crime. For that reason, we have supported the
urgent deployment to Syria of an Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Fact-finding Mission,
as well as the establishment ofa dedicated, independent,
objective and impartial attribution mechanism. We
regret the stalemate in the Security Council and our
inability to take a decision on the issue. In that regard,
Peru encourages the Secretary-General to redouble his
efforts in accordance with the prerogatives entrusted to
him in the Charter of the United Nations with a view to
helping to resolve the stalemate in the Council and to
establish the attribution mechanism. Peru believes that
any response to the crimes committed in Syria, as well
as a solution to the conflict in Syria overall, must be
consistent with the Charter, with international law and
with the Council's resolutions.

As the Secretary-General has reminded us, the
Council is the organ with the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
and it is up to its members to act in unity and to uphold
that responsibility. Peru joins the Secretary-General's
urgent appeal to all Member States to act with restraint
in these dangerous circumstances and to avoid any
act that could escalate the situation and worsen the
suffering of the Syrian people. My delegation reaffirms
its commitment to continue working in order to achieve
sustainable peace in Syria, to guarantee protection
for the civilian population, to ensure that there is no
impunity for atrocious crimes, as well as to help defuse
the situation.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The representative of the United Kingdom has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

