Mr. Daeic' (Serbia): I am honoured to participate
in today's meeting of the Security Council convened
to discuss the maintenance of international peace and
security, and specifically the settlement of conflicts
in the Middle East and North Africa and the struggle
against terrorism in the region. The importance of this
meeting is amplified by the consideration of some of
the most challenging issues of the present-day world
that are closely connected with the migrant wave that
we are currently facing.

I take this opportunity to extend my gratitude to
the Russian Federation, and Foreign Minister Lavrov in
particular, for organizing this important meeting, the
holding of which highlights the need for the continued
attention and commitment by United Nations States
Members to questions of regional and global security
in a world ofincreasing global interdependence.

The current situation in the Middle East and North
Africa makes it incumbent upon us to intensify our
common efforts to solve this crisis and bring about long-
term stabilization in the region. For some time now, the
region of the Middle East and North Africa has been
the epicentre of instability, characterized by political,
social, economic, inter-ethnic and ideological tensions.
Many of its countries are increasingly becoming
breeding grounds for terrorist groups that practice
violent extremism. Evidently, these developments
present a challenge not only for the region but also for
the entire international community, both with respect to
peace and weapons proliferation and in the humanitarian
field. The lack of serious dialogue, based on genuine
readiness to compromise, serves only to exacerbate and
radicalize the situation, increase tensions and intensify
extremisms of each and every stripe.

Serbia is firmly committed to addressing present-
day security challenges. Aware of the complexity and
interrelatedness of internal crises and their effect on
and potential to spawn terrorism, we have coordinated
our efforts internationally in an effort to find a
comprehensive response. We have friends of many
decades in the Middle East and North Africa - no small
reason for our determination to make a constructive
contribution alongside our partners the world over to
the suppression of terrorist threats and all types of
extremism and to dialogue aimed at finding political,
sustainable solutions for the current crises in the
Middle East and North Africa. We strongly support
concerted actions to be taken through the institutions
of the United Nations system, the indisputable world
leader in this regard.

We are all experiencing the consequences of these
crises. The migrant wave from the conflict-ridden areas
flooding many European countries has not by-passed
my country either, which has found itself in the path of
the wave. The migrant crisis bursting through and over
the political, cultural and administrative borders of
States speaks tellingly ofthe interrelatedness offaraway
countries and peoples and highlights the consequent
need for a responsible and energetic approach to the
quest for a lasting and comprehensive solution to this
burning issue. Partial and limited local steps are not
a solution; cooperation and coordination of our efforts
internationally and stabilization of crisis areas, the
Middle East and North Africa in particular, are.

Independent of the new wave, Serbia has been
home to 44,000 refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Croatia for two decades now, as well as to 204,000
internally displaced persons from Kosovo and Metohij a.
Yet it has demonstrated its readiness to address the
situation, within its powers and possibilities, and do
responsibly what it should and could do every step of
the way. We have received recognition and acclaim
from throughout the world for the manner in which we
treated these men and women. However, Serbia cannot
bear the burden all by itself. We are short of capacities
and accommodation, human and financial. Since the
beginning of the year more than 170,000 registered
migrants have entered Serbia, and somewhat more than
500 have submitted requests for asylum.

I agree with those who qualify these developments
as yet another mass migration of peoples. They leave
States weakened by protracted political instability,
conflicts, bad economies and activities of terrorist
groups. There are evidently systemic problems that
cause people to leave their homes in these numbers and
in this way. In the process of solving these problems,
the support of all of us, the Member States of the
most important multilateral global Organization, is of
paramount importance.

We ought to use our meeting today to exchange
views and define the next steps in our efforts to render
full support to the stabilization of the conditions in the
region in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles of international law. Also,
this meeting provides yet another opportunity for all
of us to underscore our commitment to helping the
countries of the region find ways and means to respond
to the current security and other challenges and arrive
at a solution jointly and by building mutual confidence.
In that context, it is clear that we need concerted
international efforts, especially efforts aimed at
encouraging dialogue and solving political and security
crises. Without the dialogue and the support of the
international community, we cannot expect to find a
proper answer to the deepening and complex crisis that
we are being faced with.

Stepping up activities to promote the culture of
peace, mutual understanding and confidence in the
region must be done alongside the efforts to encourage
readiness to concessions and compromise. By its own
example, my country has demonstrated very clearly
what results can be achieved with hard work and
dedication to strengthening regional confidence and
tolerance. We are ready to make a contribution in that
regard on a broader international plan.

Peace cannot be achieved by force. For it we need
mutual understanding and agreements. Talk alone,
though, will not suffice; belief andjoint work will.

