The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

We thank the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), Permanent Representative of Colombia Osorio,
for his briefing on the work of the Committee. The
Committee has worked actively during the reporting
period, staying strictly within its mandate. The
Committee needs to continue to work specifically in
that vein, as does its Panel of Experts, which provides
the Committee with practical assistance. The activities
of the experts must be structured on an impartial and
independent basis, and they must use only reliable
sources and accurate information.

Russia fully complies with all requirements of the
sanctions regime with respect to Iran. We believe that
all members of the international community must
strictly comply with the requirements of the Security
Council sanctions resolutions and not go outside of
their framework.

Russia views the 18 November resolution
(GOV/2011/69) of the Board of Governors of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on the
situation with respect to the Iranian nuclear programme
as a new type of instrument, which, we hope, lays a
solid basis for addressing the issues related to the
programme. It is important to remember that that
resolution is aimed not at condemning anyone but,
instead, at continuing dialogue and easing the tensions
that have recently been heightened with respect to the
activities of Iran in the nuclear area. We do not deny

the serious nature of the problems that exist with
respect to restoring confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of the Iranian programme, and we
share the concerns of the international community in
that regard.

At the same time, we oppose attempts to
artificially worsen the atmosphere with regard to this
issue, which could have a negative impact on the
Agency's cooperation with Iran and undermine
prospects for a continued dialogue between the six
international mediators and the Iranians. Russia has
consistently favoured resuming that dialogue without
preconditions.

We are committed the principles of reciprocity
and a phased approach with regard to making progress
in addressing issues related to Iran's nuclear
programme. It is important that the resolution of the
IAEA Board of Governors refers to those principles
and reaffirms the intention of the international
community to seek a comprehensive, negotiated
settlement. Russia continues to do its utmost to bring
about a prompt resumption of the negotiations between
Iran and the six parties.

I now resume my functions as the President of the
Security Council.

I once again call on Ambassador Osorio to
respond to the questions and comments that have been
made.

