Mr. Schieb (Germany): We very much welcome this
extremely timely debate on the link between security
and development. It is a truism that security and
development are interlinked and mutually reinforcing.
Long-term peace and security are not possible without
sustainable development and vice-versa. That is why
it is so important for the United Nations system to
"break down the silos", as the excellent concept note
(S/2015/845, annex) prepared for this debate rightly
points out. It is time that all parts of the United Nations
system take account of the connection between security
and development and act accordingly.

Making the United Nations fit for purpose is not
only about more efficiency, better capacities and lighter
procedures, but also about changing mindsets. Let me
highlight three points that are of immediate importance
to us.

First, the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) was a truly global success, not least
because we overcame one important impediment to
global progress, namely, our tendency to see the world
as divided between North and South, with development
and progress being a one-way street. In adopting
the Agenda, we have created high expectations for
improved coherence and a comprehensive approach in
tackling the challenges of the twenty-first century. This
also applies, by the way, to the United Nations system.
I shall cite but one example. Reducing violence in all
its forms, as pledged in Goal 16 of the Agenda, will
require new forms of cooperation between the Security
Council and other parts of the United Nations system.

Secondly, as German Foreign Minister Steinmeier

underlined during the high-level week of the General
Assembly, human rights, peace and security are
inextricably intertwined and have to be dealt with as
such within the United Nations system. Gross and
systematic human rights violations are often a root
cause of conflict and one of the main reasons why
people flee their homelands. Introducing human rights
tasks into the mandates of peacekeeping missions, and
making these tasks more and more comprehensive over
the years, was an important step. But we need to think
about how we can do this more systematically, and
how we can make the best possible use of the synergies
between the many parts of the United Nations system.
Incidentally, a smart human rights policy is among the
best safeguards against crises.

Thirdly, we are in the midst of the most severe
global refugee crisis since the Second World War. Sixty
million people have fled their homes. In Germany
alone, we expect to receive more than 1 million refugees
in the course of this year, and there will be more. If
we want to come to grips with this situation, we will
need to develop answers at the national, regional and,
of course, global levels. The root causes are manifold,
and include armed conflict, lack of good governance,
poverty or a general lack of prospects to sustain a
living. Refugees fear for their lives as war has destroyed
their homes. Others flee because they are persecuted at
home for their beliefs or their way of life. The United
Nations system is a crucial part of the global response.
Thousands of people are committed to helping refugees
and improving living conditions in the countries of
origin and the transit countries.

We are deeply grateful to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
International Organization for Migration, the World
Food Programme, the International Committee of the
Red Cross, and countless other organizations for their
indispensable and outstanding efforts. But we need
to better combine their work. We need to reframe our
perspective to focus on what is necessary - what needs
to be done - and not on whose turf it is. From the
United Nations country teams to the Security Council,
we need to be aware that these are extraordinary times.
Business as usual cannot be the answer.

To conclude, there are many more examples
underlining the necessity of jointly resolving security
and development issues, let us draw on the entire
wealth of United Nations instruments to this end. The
effects will be mutually reinforcing. Positive economic
prospects and sustainable development will lead to
more stability and thus eventually bring about peace
and long-term security. A stable level of security is
a precondition for economic activity and in the end
prosperity, which is in the best interests of all.

