Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Mr. President, the Chinese delegation would like to
welcome Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, who is
attending a formal meeting of the Council today for the
first time in his capacity as Secretary-General of the
United Nations, and we thank him for his brief
statement made just now.

Over sixty years ago, the founders of the United
Nations entrusted the Security Council with the solemn
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security. Since then, both the United Nations and the
Security Council have gone through unusual times and
experienced major tests. In particular, after 11
September 2001, there has been a profound change in
the challenges to international peace and security, with
traditional security threats continuing unabated and
non-traditional security threats becoming ever more
acute.

In the face of this grave situation, the Security
Council has not budged or tried to evade its
responsibilities. On the contrary, it has worked hard to
change with the times. Its tasks have gradually evolved
from the deployment of peacekeeping forces to
peacebuilding and reconstruction, and from merely
alleviating symptoms to addressing root causes. The
Council has also taken a series of actions in response to
new threats such as terrorism and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.
In September 2005, leaders of the 15 countries
members of the Council gathered here, at the head of
State level, to engage in important discussions on how
to respond to threats to international peace and
security- discussions which resulted in the
unanimous adoption of resolutions 1624 (2005) and
1625 (2005).

Changes in the international situation have
prompted progress in the work of the Council and
expanded the scope of its Council's agenda. The
Security Council, as the core of our collective security
system, has been confronted in this new century by an
ever-changing international situation and numerous
grave challenges. The common task of the 15 members
of the Security Council and of the United Nations
family as a whole is to enhance the Council's
capabilities and effectiveness so that it can better
address the issue of hotbeds of tension worldwide.

In the view of the Chinese delegation, the first
priority is for multilateralism to be upheld and
enhanced and the authority of the Security Council
preserved. On major issues relating to peace and
security, the Council should base its judgment on the
practical aspects of the situation and take collective
action in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations.

Secondly, the Council should adopt a long-term
strategic perspective; devote greater attention to the
comprehensive management of conflicts so as to
address both their symptoms and root causes; and
formulate and gradually enhance a comprehensive
strategy covering aspects ranging from conflict
prevention to the restoration of peace, and from
peacekeeping to post-conflict reconstruction.

Thirdly, the Council should enhance its
coordination with the General Assembly and pay heed
to the views and concerns of non-Council members,
especially those of affected States. It should also
strengthen communication and cooperation with the
relevant regional organizations, further improve its
own working methods and enhance its efficiency.

As the chief administrative officer of the United
Nations, the Secretary-General has a unique role to
play in mediating issues relating to national and
regional hotbeds of tension. It is undeniable that the
Security Council, in addressing the items on its heavy
agenda, has benefited from the support provided by the
diligent work of successive Secretaries-General and

their teams. The Chinese Government deeply
appreciates the work done by Mr. Kofi Annan, the
former Secretary-General, over the past decade. We
have every reason to expect an even more outstanding
performance from Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
Mr. Ban, coming from Asia and known for his
diligence, perseverance, moderation and knack for
constructive compromise - which are characteristic of
Asians - will surely give full play to the unique role
of Secretary-General in the maintenance of peace and
the promotion of development.

Together with other members of the Security
Council, China will, as always, continue to support the
work of the Secretary-General, enhance its cooperation
with him and work actively for the maintenance of
international peace and security. I am convinced that
the future of the United Nations and the Security
Council will be a bright one.

