Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin my statement, Mr. President, by reiterating
the delegation of Mali's warm congratulations to
your country, the Eastern Republic of Uruguay, on its
election, on 16 October 2015, to the Security Council as
a non-permanent member. It is a particular pleasure for
me to see you, Sir, preside over the Security Council
in January 2016, coincidentally with the start of your
country's term on this important organ dedicated to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

I would also like to express the delegation of Mali's
appreciation for the outstanding way in which the
United States of America led the work of the Security
Council last month, with, in particular, the adoption of
important resolutions, including resolution 2253 (2015),
on Daesh, and resolution 2258 (2015), on Syria.

I would also like to reiterate my delegation's
congratulations to Egypt, Senegal, Japan and Ukraine
on their elections as non-permanent members of the
Security Council. The delegation of Mali would like
to assure all the new members of its full and complete
cooperation.

I would also like to commend Chile, Jordan,
Lithuania, Nigeria and Chad, whose mandates ended
on 31 December, and to express our appreciation
for the extremely important role they have played in
the Security Council with respect to resolving the
multidimensional crisis that has affected my country,
Mali, since 2012.

On behalf of the President of the Republic, His
Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, as well as the
people and the Government of Mali, I would like to
pay tribute to all the members of the Security Council,
non-permanent and permanent alike, and to the entire
international community for their support and spirit of
solidarity, from which my country has benefited during
this crisis.

I would also like to reiterate our deep gratitude to
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to Algeria,
head of the international mediation team and Chair of
the Monitoring Committee for the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, to the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States,
the European Union, the Organization for Islamic
Cooperation, France, Chad, Burkina Faso, Mauritania,
Nigeria, the Niger and the United States of America,
which have spared no effort to restore peace and
stability in Mali.

1 would also like to bow reverently in memory of
all the victims - civilian and military, foreign and
Malian - who have lost their lives during the crisis in
Mali and express our deep appreciation to the United
Nations and the troop-contributing countries for all the
sacrifices they have made.

The delegation of Mali thanks our dear friend
Mr. Herve Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his briefing on the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Mali (S/2015/1030), which we applaud for its balanced
character, its analysis of the situation on the ground
and its acknowledgment of all the efforts made by
the Malians - their Government, armed forces and
population in general - but also its recognition of the
important challenges and difficulties encountered in the
implementation of the Agreement. I thank Mr. Ladsous
for the report.

Before going any further, I would like to make
some preliminary remarks.

First, the determination of the Government of
Mali to implement the provisions of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali is firm and total.
In that context, my delegation welcomes the positive
momentum initiated in recent months by signatory
movements that have set aside their differences.

Secondly, we must take note of the resurgence
in terrorist attacks as the main obstacle to the
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. Terrorist groups have retaken
the field and are now acting openly to intimidate
communities and extending their actions to reach
strategic targets, including hotels, as seen in, inter alia,
the deadly attacks at the Byblos Hotel in Sevare and the
Radisson Blu Hotel in Bamako.

Thirdly, as mentioned previously, I would like to
draw attention to the significant progress made in the
implementation of the Agreement under the leadership
of President Keita, despite the difficulties encountered,
which are inherent in any process of this nature.

It should be recalled that, at the 6 October 2015
meeting of the Security Council (see S/PV.7528), the
delegation of Mali informed the Council of the actions
and initiatives its Government had undertaken in the
framework of the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. These actions and
initiatives continued with the support of our partners.
In July, the Government prepared and submitted a plan
of action, which has become the document of reference
for the implementation of the Agreement. It contains a
precise timetable. I am therefore pleased to add to the
list of institutional actions and measures taken by Mali,
which Mr. Ladsous previously reported, as follows.

In the area of economic, social and cultural
development, pursuant to the Agreement, the
international conference for the economic recovery and
development of Mali was held on 22 October 2015 in
Paris, under the joint auspices of the Government of
Mali and the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD). It was attended by
representatives ofthe parties signatory to the Agreement,
civil society, the Malian and international private
sector and 64 partner countries and organizations. The
opening ceremony was chaired jointly by the Heads of
State of Mali and France and the Secretary-General of
the OECD.

At that meeting, the Government of Mali expressed
its determination to create the conditions needed to speed
up growth throughout Mali and, first of all, reaffirmed
its commitment to implementing a decentralization
process giving the regions responsibilities and effective
control of local issues and regional development. It
presented the outline for a specific development strategy
for the country's northern regions, as recommended in
the Agreement, and announced a contribution from
the Government's own resources of €451 million for
the period 2016 to 2018. In addition, the Government
announced the establishment of a sustainable
development fund as provided for in the Agreement,
which will be administered under joint and inclusive
oversight and will conform to the highest standards of
accountability and transparency.

The international conference for Mali's economic
recovery and development was an opportunity to take
stock of Mali's partners' financial pledges, which,
as was just mentioned, represent a commitment of
€3.2 billion for the period 2015 to 2017, including
€596 million for the northern regions, based on the first
announcements made during the conference. I should
point out that the overall cost of the early recovery
activities, poverty-reduction and development has
been assessed at about €3.5 billion. I should like take
this opportunity to thank all of Mali's partners, and
the United Nations in particular, for mobilizing their
support and commitment.

In the area of infrastructure development, the
Government has already conducted an assessment of
road infrastructure needs and is working to mobilize
the financial resources needed for them. In that regard,
I would like to note that financing is in place for the
strategically important Gao-Bourem-Taoussa road,
while the Kidal-Bourem section is partially funded.

Concerning basic social services, the Government
has launched various efforts on the humanitarian
emergency front. In the past few months we have
prioritized the areas of anti-malaria response and
education, for which a Government assessment team
has been out in the field organizing the opening of
classes, which have now begun in Kidal. We have also
distributed kits to students in some schools in the Kidal
region. After an absence of several years, the national
electricity company, with the help and cooperation of
the signatory armed groups, has installed generators in
Kidal and Menaka, and the electricity is back on. We
must note that the regrettable lack of cooperation on the
part of some of the signatory movements, particularly
their occupation of classrooms, has interfered slightly
with the smooth running of the process, but the work in
this area continues.

The support arrangements consist essentially of
the Comite de suivi de l'accord and its subcommittees,
which are already in place and holding meetings
regularly. However, the Government of Mali regrets the
delays and inefficiencies in the work of that body, which
has too often wasted too much time on procedural and
representational questions.

On the political and institutional front, besides
the measures noted in the Secretary-General's report,
it should be recalled that, at the request of the Head
of State, the Government has established a ministerial
department dedicated to State decentralization and
reform. The department is led by a native of Kidal who
is familiar with the challenges that those regions are
dealing with and of the importance of acting as quickly
as possible to institute political and institutional
reforms. A detailed plan has been drawn up in
accordance both with the Government's plan of action
and the timetable for implementation of the Agreement.
The start of the new year is the right time for us to start
to operationalize this extremely vital job.

We have also established a national coordination
committee for implementing the Agreement, led by
the Prime Minister and Head of Government, with the
assistance of a technical secretariat. I should note here
that the committee and its technical secretariat have
been set up in order to help to ensure national ownership
of the process by Malians and the Malian Government.
The mechanism, which, as Mr. Ladsous indicated, is
open to the signatory groups, will work closely with
the Comite' de suivi de l'accord. The Government of
Mali and its technical and financial partners have also
set up a consultation mechanism designed to ensure
the best possible and most transparent management of
the resources for implementing the Agreement. Its first
meeting took place on 24 December.

With regard to reconciliation, justice and
humanitarian efforts, the main achievements in this
area have been the communal dialogues, all part of
a process of reconciliation between communities
at the base. Since the Anefis initiative, in which the
Government played a major role and which encouraged
a rapprochement and lessening of tensions among the
groups, these activities have multiplied on the ground.
It is also important to note that the Truth, Justice and
Reconciliation Commission has been set up and its
operationalization problems resolved. In that regard,
on 23 December, the Council of Ministers of the issued
a decree authorizing the Commission's expansion with
a View to ensuring its inclusivity.

Where defence and security are concerned, in
general, the overall security situation on the ground is
somewhat improved, thanks mainly to the cessation of
hostilities between the parties and to the messages of
peace and support to the Agreement issued regularly
by all the parties. The Commission technique de
securite provided for in the Agreement has been set
up and is meeting regularly. However, the Mecanisme
operationnel de coordination is not yet operational,
despite the resources that the Government has made
available to it in order to speed things up. It would
therefore be highly desirable to see the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) become more involved in
operationalizing the joint Mecanisme operationnel.

With regard to the commissions on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR), on
29 December, as was noted just now, the Council of
Ministers issued a decree on the creation, organization
and operating procedures of a national commission for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, along
with a similar decree for an integration commission.
The texts were produced following a workshop on a
draft document for a comprehensive DDR strategy and
operational texts organized by the Ministry of Defence
and Former Combatants, with, I should emphasize,
the participation of representatives of the signatory
movements. The cantonment phase, according to
the Government's concept and wishes, provides for
cantonment with all basic amenities. In that regard, I
would like to draw the Security Council's attention to
the need to speed up the cantonment process, as was
also noted just now, and to urge MINUSMA to play its
full part in that process and to induce the armed groups
to cooperate in order to ensure that the operation is
conducted successfully and on time.

Where the joint patrols are concerned, the
Government of Mali was pleased with the first
operation, which was carried out in November. Once
again, however, we share Mr. Ladsous's opinion that
more are needed. It is even more important that the
Malian armed forces and MINUSMA work together
to ensure better securitization of these communities.
Unfortunately we find even more regrettable the
lack of cooperation on the part of our brothers in the
Coordination des mouvements de l'Azawad, who claim
to have neither the heavy weapons or the vehicles
needed to continue with the joint patrols. However, to
some extent the Government has the means to enable it
to do this itself.

As we can see, tangible progress has been made by
the Government in the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. However, a number
of persistent challenges, in particular the threat linked
to the presence of terrorist groups in northern Mali,
both worries us and calls for our attention. The threat is
real and constitutes the main challenge to the return of
peace in Mali today. Indeed, the resurgence of terrorist
activities in the north of the country is clearly aimed at
halting the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation and at creating alarm within the
business and investment communities, whose interest
in Mali - the promise of which had been renewed
following the successful Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development meeting in Paris on the
country's economic recovery - had fortunately been
rekindled. That is the nefarious objective ofthe terrorist
group Ansar Dine, which has been inscribed on the
sanctions list of the Security Council, as well as of its
partners in the Front de libe'ration du Macina and other
terrorist groups, such as the Organization of Al-Qaeda
in the Islamic Maghreb and Al-Mourabitoun, that have
claimed responsibility for a series of terrorist acts that
have regrettably plunged our country and many other
friendly nations into mourning.

That was the case, for example on Friday,
20 November 2015, when fanatics from a bygone era,
fiercely determined to commit a heinous massacre,
attacked the Radisson Blu Hotel in Bamako. Sadly,
friends of Mali of various nationalities lost their lives in
that tragedy. Recalling those painful events, allow me
to once again express the most heartfelt condolences
of the people and Government of Mali to the bereaved
families and nations. As the President of the Republic,
Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, recalled, the reopening
of the Radisson Blu Hotel on 15 December 2015 was a
global symbol of resilience and rejection of terror.

The Government of Mali is fully aware that
peacekeeping operations are not mandated to combat
terrorism. Unfortunately, it is clear that MINUSMA now
operates in an environment marked by the presence and
activities of terrorist groups. In the framework of their
State functions, it should be recalled that the Malian
defence and security forces are on the front line in the
fight against terrorism. However, given the vastness of
the country and the asymmetrical nature of this war,
they cannot cope with this phenomenon alone.

Today, 11 January, which marks the third
anniversary of the launch of Operation Serval, provides
us with the opportunity to reiterate our appreciation to
France not only for its life-saving intervention in Mali,
but also for the remarkable work accomplished by the
Barkhane force in the fight against terrorism.

Given the persistence of the terrorist threat, 1 once
again invite the Security Council to consider, in the
framework of the review of the mandate of MINUSMA,
strengthening its operational capacity with a View
to adapting it to the particularly fluid and evolving
security environment. As stated in the report of the
Secretary-General, there is concern that

"MINUSMA is likely to continue to face
significant security challenges posed by actors
outside the peace process, namely, extremist and
terrorist groups and transnational drug traffickers"
(S/2015/1030, para. 60).

In the light of this situation, which poses a threat
to international peace and security, I reiterate the
desire expressed many times by the Heads of State
and Governments of African regional and subregional
entities to establish a rapid intervention force to
combat terrorism by pooling the efforts of countries of
the region. Our concern is all the greater as we fear
unrest throughout the region due to interaction, or
even possible cooperation between the various terrorist
groups operating in the Sahel, in particular in northern
Mali - several of which I have just mentioned - as
well as in Libya, where the presence ofthe Islamic State
is now a reality, and in the Lake Chad Basin, where
Boko Haram conducts its deadly operations.

We must take the threat of terrorism in the Sahel
region very seriously. Being selective in our fight against
terrorism would be a grave mistake. Acts of terrorism
of any kind are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless
of the motivation, time or place of commission, or
the perpetrators. That is why the delegation of Mali
welcomed the 17 December 2015 adoption of resolution
2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, inter alia, and invites the Security Council to
consider taking stronger measures against the terrorist
groups operating in the Sahelo-Saharan region.

The obscurantists who attacked the Radisson
Blu Hotel in Bamako; who took so many lives at
the Bataclan in Paris; who wrought havoc in San
Bernardino, California; and who have claimed so
many innocent victims elsewhere around the world are,
unfortunately, all driven by the same ideology of hatred
that would subject human beings to an inhumane order.
These lawless, faithless individuals have nothing to do
with the religion of Muhammad, which is above all a
religion of peace, humanism, respect for others and
peaceful coexistence among people that advocates the
preservation of the sacred nature of of humankind and
human life. We are of the firm conviction that nothing,
absolutely nothing, can justify terrorism. No cause can
justify this scourge, which has no country, religion or
border. We must show exemplary solidarity and unity
in the face of this phenomenon. Only then will we be
able to proclaim loudly that terror will not triumph. We
are convinced that, united, we will defeat terrorism.

I cannot conclude without thanking my friend,
Mr. Mongi Hamdi, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of MINUSMA, who is
about to step down from his position after a year of
intense activity that culminated in the conclusion of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
among others. I commend him for the work he has
accomplished as Head of MINUSMA and wish him, on
behalf of the Government of Mali, every success in his
new role.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate my brother and friend, Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, a seasoned diplomat with extensive
peacekeeping experience, on his selection to
head MINUSMA. I express the full readiness of
the Government of Mali to work with him on the
accelerated implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali and, above all, on ensuring
the success of his mission, which is of necessity the
success of the Malian people.

As 2016 begins, I would like to wish the members
of the Security Council a happy new year. May this new
year see the efforts of the international community in
its fight against terrorism and the restoration of peace
and stability in the world, be crowned with success.

Finally, on quite another matter, in the light of all
the advances made in my country thanks to the presence
of the United Nations Mission, I would like to invite the
Security Council to request the Secretariat to conduct
an in-depth study with a View to the development of
a exit strategy for MINUSMA. This is not premature.
We believe that any operation should allow for the
consideration of an eventual exit. Beginning to reflect
on the matter now would allow us to better to assess what
capacities to develop, what resources to make available,
and what strategies to employ to ensure a much faster
transition to the Malian defence and security forces.

The idea is to gradually draw down MINUSMA as a
number of milestones are reached. It will then gradually
be replaced by the State and its rebuilt defence and
security forces within the framework of our sovereign
mission to ensure peace and stability in our country.
That is the objective that we wish to share with the
Council in an effort to offer constructive inputs as we
look towards the future. Once again, we wish to express
our tremendous gratitude for all the efforts that have
been made and continue to be made to help our country.
As partners and friends, we believe that it is important
for us to think ahead about the ways in which we can
best support the efforts being made to assist Mali.

