Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to thank the delegation of Guatemala, in
its capacity as President of the Security Council, and
the Security Council itself as the body charged with the
maintenance of international peace and security, for the
holding of this timely debate.

Uruguay believes that peace and justice are two
fully complementary and mutually reinforcing values.
It is short-sighted to believe that one of these values
may be overlooked in order to achieve the other, and
although such a view has occasionally prevailed in
the actions of individuals, countries or international
organizations, we cannot conceive that, in the twenty-
first century, there can be talk of peace without justice,
and of both without referring necessarily to the full
attainment of the rule of law at both the national and
international levels.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the entry
into force of the Statute of the International Criminal
Court and thus the beginning of the end of international
impunity. In this regard, we welcome the issuance this
year of the first judgment with conviction of the Court
in the case of The Prosecutor - whom we identify with
the international community - vs. Thomas Lubanga
Dyilo, and the completion of the second trial, which is
currently in the stage of sentencing.

We call for the prompt ratification of the
amendments to the Statute of the Court made at the
Kampala Review Conference. We are pleased to report
that my Adminstration has sent a message to the
national Parliament requesting its approval. We hope
that this approval will be given as soon as possible.

We welcome the fact that, from 1998 to date, the
membership of the Court has grown to 121 States
parties. This number corresponds roughly to two-thirds
of the total membership of the United Nations. We hope
that this trend will continue so that the membership of
both organizations may be identical in the near future.

We understand that, in accordance with the
provisions of article 115 (b) of the Rome Statute, the
United Nations should help finance the expenses
incurred as a result of referrals by the Security
Council in order to share the financial burden of
international criminal justice. On this basis, we expect
that, in accordance with article 13 of the Relationship
Agreement between the two bodies, arrangements shall
be made to implement such cooperation.

With respect to the cases referred by the Security
Council, we are pleased that this practice in now in
effect, and advocate its continued use. We continue to
view with concern the impact of armed conflict and the
increase in the number of those responsible for serious
violations of human rights. We believe that consistent
action should be taken by the Security Council in
situations or cases of a similar nature.

For this reason, we agree with a group of countries
that deem it appropriate to request the Security Council
to refer the case of human rights violations in Syria
to the Court for the prosecution of its perpetrators,
whoever they may be or represent. In this context, we
recall the proposal of the group of five small nations,
in its draft resolution before the General Assembly,
recommending that the permanent members of the
Security Council consider refraining from using
the veto to block Council action aimed at preventing
or ending genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity.

For the reasons stated, and to conclude, we
believe that cooperation should be deepened between
the Security Council and the Court, involving the
establishment of a follow-up mechanism for cases
referred by the Council to the Court.

