Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to welcome Foreign Ministers Hoxhaj and
Jeremic' back to the Council. I would also like to
welcome Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Farid Zarif to the Council and to
thank him for his briefing. Let me take a moment to
express our gratitude and appreciation for former
Special Representative Lamberto's service to the
United Nations and leadership of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We wish him continued success during his term as
Secretary-General of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe.

I would like to make four points today. First,
following the recent events and violence in northern
Kosovo, we welcome the common understanding
reached between the leaders of Kosovo and Serbia with
the goal of reducing further tensions. We expect both
sides to peacefully and fully adhere to the
understanding and scrupulously respect it. We
commend the Kosovo Force for facilitating the process
leading to the common understanding and for working
to maintain a safe and secure environment and freedom
of movement, in accordance with its mandate pursuant
to resolution 1244 (1999).

As an independent and sovereign State, Kosovo
has the right to extend its authority and enforce the rule
of law throughout its territory, and to ensure a unified
police chain of command. Strengthening the rule of
law, including in Kosovo's North, is critical to
Kosovo's development as a European State,
fundamental to ensuring the welfare and security of all
Kosovo's citizens, regardless of ethnicity or location,
and in the interest of its neighbours and the entire
region. We remain deeply concerned by the
engagement of Serbian Interior Ministry police in
northern Kosovo, in direct violation of Kosovo's
sovereignty and in breach of resolution 1244 (1999),
which demands the withdrawal of such military police
and military forces.

Secondly, I would like to point out that the
European Union-facilitated dialogue between Kosovo
and Serbia is already bearing fruit. Indeed, as a result
of agreements reached thus far, travellers should find it
easier to move throughout the region, students have
clearer prospects of having the records of their
academic achievements accepted in neighbouring
countries, and ordinary citizens will have access to
more accurate civil registry records, thereby
strengthening the rule of law.

We support the intention of Belgrade and Pristina
to continue the European Union (EU) dialogue in
September, and remain hopeful that they can arrive at
an arrangement of positive reciprocity at the border,
through which people and goods can move freely in
both directions. We call on both sides, in line with their
European aspirations and the economic interests of the
greater region, to resolve that impasse and to end their
respective trade restrictions. It is unfortunate that the
Government of Kosovo felt forced to impose reciprocal
trade restrictions on Serbia. At the same time, we have
to recognize the truth, which is that Serbia imposed a
similar embargo on goods from Kosovo more than
three years ago.

The EU-facilitated dialogue is not about
Kosovo's status. Kosovo is a sovereign and
independent country. Neither partition nor territorial
adjustments are on the table, and such suggestions only
sow fear and undermine stability in the region. The
dialogue is about realizing both Kosovo's and Serbia's
European futures. Both benefit from each other's
progress on the path towards full European integration.

Thirdly, we welcome the progress made by the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) in securing the necessary personnel,
facilities and equipment for its Task Force, dedicated to
conducting a thorough and transparent investigation
into the allegations contained in Special Rapporteur
Marty's report to the Council of Europe. The United
States has offered its support to the EU Task Force, and
we welcome the appointment of a lead prosecutor.

The Secretary-General's report notes the positive
cooperation that EULEX is already enjoying from the
Albanian authorities on that and other cases. We fully
expect the Task Force, throughout its investigation, to
continue to enjoy the full cooperation of all local
authorities in the region. We fully support EULEX in
leading an investigation into the substance of the report
on the basis of relevant evidence or sources. Kosovo
law and EU joint action on EULEX explicitly provide
that EULEX can investigate and prosecute serious
crimes, such as those alleged in the report, and do so
independently. As demonstrated by the Geci case
detailed in the EULEX addendum (see S/2011/514, annex), EULEX already has the jurisdiction and ability
to investigate and prosecute crimes committed outside
Kosovo as well.

The assertion that all investigations into war
crimes in the ex-Yugoslav realm have taken place
under Security Council auspices is not correct. There
have been and remain today many cases in domestic
courts in the region. Such an approach is intrinsic to
the completion strategy of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
Lastly, I would like to underscore again that the
United States remains committed to a stable,
prosperous, multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo that is
at peace with all its neighbours. We welcome the
continued progress in the region to grapple with the
difficult legacy of the 1990s. The renewed sessions of
the Working Group on Missing Persons after nearly a
year's hiatus give hope for resolving that difficult
legacy. We also welcome the progress achieved by
local authorities in reintegrating both voluntary and
forced returnees into Kosovo society.

Eighty-one countries share our Vision for the

region and have recognized Kosovo. We once again

call on the remaining countries to contribute to

stability in the region by welcoming Kosovo into the
international community through formal recognition.

