Mr. Lamamra (Algeria) (interpretation from French):
First I wish to congratulate you, warmly, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I am
convinced that the personal and professional qualities that
you have demonstrated in carrying out several successful
economic and social initiatives in the United Nations will
be equally beneficial to the Council in performing its tasks.
I also congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador Legwaila
of Botswana, for the wise and effective way he conducted
the work of the Council during March.

On 2 April the Permanent Observer Mission of
Palestine brought to the Council's attention grave facts
relating to what that mission rightly referred to as Israel's

"siege and strangulation of the Palestinian territory,
the Palestinian people and their economy"
(S/1996/235).

As early as 21 March the Algerian Government
condemned the repressive measures and practices which in
nature and scope amounted to a collective punishment
imposed by Israel in violation of international humanitarian
law and of Israeli-Palestinian agreements. The gravely
negative developments since the striking success of the
democratic elections to establish the institutions of the
Palestinian National Authority have added to the economic
and social distress of the Palestinian people caused by
cordoning off of the Palestinian territory. Further dangers
are inherent in Israel's questioning of key commitments,
such as withdrawal from the town of Al-Khalil Hebron,
which should have been completed by 28 March, and the
beginning of negotiations on the definitive status of the
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, which it clearly
appears will be deferred.

This has created a serious situation, which has the
potential to erode the hope that we felt justified in feeling
in the peace process, despite the many difficulties. Until
now it had seemed possible to overcome such difficulties.

The Group of Arab States called for this formal
meeting of the Security Council because it believed in the
Council's ability to use its authority to promote respect
for international law as the natural support for and
prerequisite to a continued peace process in the Middle
East. Given the disquieting deterioration of the situation
in the territories under the jurisdiction of the Palestinian
National Authority, and its incalculable potential
consequences, the Council has responsibilities to shoulder
and prerogatives to exercise at a time when Israel's
deadly acts of aggression against Lebanon threaten the
whole region with a dangerous resurgence of the spirit of
confrontation to the detriment of the peace process which
all parties have agreed to promote, and which the
international community is duty-bound to protect.
With your permission, Mr. President, I shall return
to Israel's acts of aggression against Lebanon in the
debate on Lebanon which the Security Council will hold
later today.

