Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to express my delegation's pleasure
at seeing you, Sir, the Foreign Minister of Gambia,
presiding over this important meeting of the Security
Council. It is also my pleasure to welcome Mr. Omar
Muntasser, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Libya.

This formal meeting of the Security Council is also
being attended by representatives of the victims of the
Lockerbie incident. We hope that it will be the harbinger of
a solution.

This meeting was convened in response to a request
from Libya supported by both the Committee of Seven of
the League of Arab States and the Committee of Five of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU); those
Committees are concerned with the dispute between Libya
and the United States of America and the United Kingdom
over the Lockerbie incident. The meeting is particularly
significant in the light of the recent important developments
in respect of the legal approach to the dispute. As previous
speakers have recalled, the International Court of Justice
handed down two important Judgments on 27 February last,
both confirming, first, that there is a legal dispute between
the parties concerning the interpretation or application of
the 1971 Montreal Convention for the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation, and
secondly that the Court has jurisdiction in that dispute on
the basis of article 14 of the Convention. The Judgments
also confirmed the admissibility of Libya's claim
notwithstanding Security Council resolutions 748 (1992)
and 883 (1993).

The overall legal situation, as taken up and decided by
the highest international judicial authority, confirms that the
dispute is in fact between Libya and the United States and
the United Kingdom, as has been repeatedly stated by the
relevant regional organizations ever since the crisis began.
This was recently reaffirmed by President Mugabe, current
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, during the
ministerial-level Security Council meeting on the situation
in Africa on 25 September 1997; in the resolution adopted
by the Council of Ministers of the OAU on 27 February
last; in the resolution adopted by the Council of the League
of Arab States last July; in the resolution of the Islamic
Conference of Foreign Ministers at its session in Doha,
Qatar, in March 1998, and the many statements of the
Non-Aligned Movement, the most recent being that of the
Ministerial Conference in New Delhi in April 1997.

The Montreal Convention, which the International
Court of Justice determined is the instrument concerned,
recognizes the principle of universal jurisdiction. Under
that Convention, Libya is entitled to hold the trial on its
own territory. Still, it has not taken this course, as a
gesture of its goodwill and out of its belief in the
necessity of reaching an understanding leading to the
holding of the trial and the establishment of the facts.
Furthermore, and this is an important matter, the results
of the investigations undertaken by certain States have not
been communicated to Libya, making it very difficult to
hold a trial within an integral framework that would
ensure justice.

Once more, I reiterate that the two Judgments of the
Court confirm that the dispute is of a purely legal nature
and, consequently, it should not be politicized. Moreover,
an appropriate legal reading of the Judgments handed
down by the Court on the Libyan claim and on the
rejected American and British submissions clearly
demonstrates that the Court has jurisdiction. Libya's
submission to the Court predates the adoption of
resolution 748 (1992), so it cannot be said that the
provisions of the resolution supersede the jurisdiction of
the Court.

The Charter clearly defines the functions and powers
of the main organs of this Organization, including the
International Court of Justice and the Security Council.
Consequently, all these organs are governed by the
constitutional framework set forth by the Charter.
Although the Charter grants the Security Council vast
powers in relation to its responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, nevertheless these
powers should not, under any circumstances or any
conditions whatsoever, extend to what would result in the
imposition of collective sanctions against peoples and
States on the basis of mere suspicion.

In this respect I must be very clear: no one is
endeavouring to create, nor does anyone wish or intend to
create or have an interest in creating, a constitutional
crisis that would adversely affect the credibility of the
Council or the dignity of the International Court of
Justice. But the continuation of the form the Council has
followed over the past few years with regard to reviewing
the sanctions on Libya, resulting in a routine review

 

without regard for new factors and developments, will
ultimately lead to just such a crisis. Here, I must once again
stress what Egypt has said during previous deliberations: it
is essential for the sanctions regime in general to be
substantively and comprehensively reviewed, because
practical experience shows that it is in dire need of such a
review, particularly in respect of the time-frame for the
imposition of such sanctions and of their "automatic"
renewal.

The only way out of the present impasse and to put an
end to the suffering of the families of the victims, and of
the brotherly people of Libya and the neighbouring
countries, is to endeavour to give the suspects a fair trial
while ensuring the integrity and fairness of the trial, in
application of the principle of due process, which provides,
as is well recognized in all judicial systems in all States,
that a defendant is innocent until proven guilty. With the
rendering of the two Judgments by the Court, the matter
has now become abundantly clear, in that it is for the
Court, and the Court alone, to settle the dispute, on the
basis of the Montreal Convention, and to determine the
venue of the trial.

It is worth noting that over the past few years there
have been many tangible and positive developments
towards implementing the relevant Security Council
resolutions, particularly the following. First, one of the
outstanding problems between Libya and the United
Kingdom has been solved with regard to the United
Kingdom's recent inquiries in connection with the Irish
Republican Army. Secondly, the French magistrate has
effectively completed his investigations, which pave the
way for the French judiciary to undertake a trial in
absentia. Thirdly, Libya has taken practical and tangible
steps towards severing all relations with any groups which
may be suspected of involvement in terrorist operations.
Also, Libya continues comprehensively to reject terrorism
in all its forms.

In its desire to do its part in seeking a just and speedy
solution to the problem, Libya, in the context of
responsiveness to the provisions of Security Council
resolution 731 (1992) has accepted or put forward a number
of initiatives and proposals, all of which have been adopted
by the League of Arab States, the Organization of African
Unity, the Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of
the Islamic Conference.

The Security Council must now assume its
responsibilities and look into selecting one of the options
that have been submitted. These are, first, to try the
suspects in a neutral country to be determined by the
Security Council not by Libya or any other State;
secondly, to try them at the seat of the International Court
of Justice at The Hague by Scottish judges and in
accordance with Scottish law; and thirdly, to establish a
special criminal court at the Court's headquarters at The
Hague to try the suspects; that would be similar to the
Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda.
Such options undoubtedly are serious and practical
proposals in order to settle the dispute peacefully and
without imposing further suffering on the families of the
victims who, for long, have endured pain in the wake of
the accidents, nine years ago.

That is why it is important for the States concerned
to take into account the positive positions expressed by
many of their nationals from among the families of the
victims who consider it necessary to accept one of the
options in order to achieve justice and establish the facts.
Moreover, there is an urgent need, which cannot brook
any delay, to put an end to the suffering of the Libyan
people as a result of the sanctions and which was clearly
reflected in the report of Mr. Petrovsky to the Secretary-
General following his last visit to Libya, and an end to
the damage sustained by neighbouring countries as well,
resulting from the imposition of sanctions.

The Security Council cannot ignore what the
International Court of Justice has decided on 27 February
last. It cannot pretend that this development has never
occurred. On the contrary, what the Court has decided is
indeed an additional incentive to all the parties to the
dispute to reach an agreement on the settlement and to
proceed with the trial in a way that is acceptable to all
parties. What is being requested now, after all these years,
is for justice to be served and for truth to be revealed.
This requires that the suspects should be tried speedily
and in a venue conducive to the achievement of justice.
A reconsideration of the sanctions imposed on Libya
has become an urgent matter at this stage, in order to
prepare for the attainment of an agreement or until the
objective and final Judgment of the Court on the dispute
has been pronounced with regard to this dispute. This
requires that a meeting of the Security Council be held as
soon as possible to take such a decision, and to end the
suffering of the Libyan peoples.

