Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The multi-year conflict eroding Syria today,
due to terrorists fuelled with weapons from the outside,
Violations and flows ofinternally displaced persons and
refugees, has seen a deterioration in the humanitarian
situation in Syria. At the same time, following the
establishment of the ceasefire regime, we have seen
some progress. Humanitarian access has increased
significantly and difficulties are being discussed in
the special format of the International Syria Support
Group.

The Government of Damascus is doing a great deal
to ensure that, in such a difficult context of internal
armed conflict, its citizens can enjoy a normal life. As
a result of the unrelenting work of Russian specialists
based in Hmeimim, the number of residential areas
participating in the ceasefire is now 209. More than 60
armed opposition movements have stated their intention
to implement the ceasefire regime. There are ongoing
talks with armed militias about extending the ceasefire
to the governorates of Daraa, As-Suwayda and Horns.
Russia is providing humanitarian assistance to Syrians
through both the State and civil society. In this regard,
we stress the need to establish a sound process for the
return of internally displaced persons to reconciled
regions and to rebuild public infrastructure there.

The priority format for humanitarian operations
remains by land, with the direct agreement of the
Syrian Government. As a last resort, airdrops could be
used. Air delivery has become a lifesaver for hundreds
of thousands in Deir ez-Zor, besieged by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham. Humanitarian supplies are
dropped with the active participation of Russian forces.
This has been effective for the provision of assistance
to those in Al-Hasakah, and we can therefore only
welcome the opening of the air bridge in Qamishli.
However, let us not forget that the situation arises from
the fact that Turkey has been blocking the crossing
point from Nusaybin for several months now. We hope
that Ankara will make the right decision to alleviate the
suffering of Syrian civilians.

We call on the United States, the United Kingdom
and other allies of Turkey and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization to provide Turkey with the necessary
assistance. I recall that when we discussed the opening
ofthe crossing point to Damascus, our Western partners
imposed preconditions or linkages almost every day. We
stress that it is unacceptable for fighters to use civilians
as human shields. It is well known that opponents of
the Syrian Government often use this tactic, trapping
people in blocked-off residential areas.

We do not question the need for humanitarian
assistance, including in besieged areas. However,
we believe that the Government of Syria's military
operations to block and destroy terrorists aim to
reinstate law and order. In a number of cases, as a
result of such actions, fighters terrorizing locals have
signalled their readiness to lay down arms.

We are deeply worried about information that, as a
consequence of strikes led by the United States coalition
in the area of Manbij, in the north of the country, dozens
of people, including women and children, have been
killed and injured in camps. We are struck by the fact
that not a single word has been said about this incident
in the statements made by the representatives of the
United Kingdom, France and other participants in the
coalition. We hope that this incident will be discussed
in detail by the representative of the United States, who
will take the floor after us. We do not need promises of
investigations. We have been waiting five years for an
investigation into civilian bombing victims in Libya,
but we still have not heard a word about that either. I am
therefore sure that United States military knows how
the situation stands now.

The news of the atrocious attack on a Palestinian
boy, beheaded by bandits from the Harakat Nour al-Din
al-Zenki, was heart-wrenching. Some have supported
this armed group and its cronies in Syria, calling them
moderate opposition members, including them in the
ceasefire regime, and by any and all means protecting
the group from due payback. It is high time for the
Security Council to add to the list of terrorists wreaking
havoc in Syria.

As a result of the intensified actions carried out
over the ceasefire period by Jabhat Al-Nusra and its
allies, the situation in Aleppo remains urgent. Terrorists
use the ceasefire regime to receive reinforcement from
abroad, resupply and mobilize fresh forces, including
through the recruitment of minors. As in other besieged
areas, the fighters entrenched there are regularly
provided with military assistance. The Castello Road
is no exception; we have information to the effect that
this route is actively being used not for the provision
of humanitarian assistance to civilians, but to provide
terrorists with weapons and armaments, as well as for
the passage of jihad-mobiles with suicide bombers.
We also know that those in eastern areas of Aleppo
can easily move by day to the western part of the city,
where the situation is significantly better. Of course,
however the situation might be in Aleppo, there is a
need to prevent a humanitarian disaster there.

Just a few words on Darayya: fighters holed up
there are carrying out broad artillery strikes, making
the provision of humanitarian assistance impossible.
At the same time, the supplies that do get there are
flowing into the markets of eastern Ghouta. These
types of commercial arrangements have characterized
extremist-controlled areas. Our delegation has always
spoken about the futile effect of unilateral sanctions
against Damascus. Such measures should be lifted, as
they cause suffering to people.

First and foremost, there is a need to lift the ban on
the provision of medications and fuel. The intermittent
pitting of Security Council members one against the
other on the humanitarian dossier, the imposition
of new ultimatums on the Government of Syria and
calling upon Russia to bring pressure to bear on the
Government is counterproductive. We believe instead
that people should go to Damascus, establish working
contacts and actually do something useful. It is clear
that foreign sponsors are not upholding their obligations
with respect to working with the opposition. They
have primary responsibility for a lack of humanitarian
access in terrorist-held areas, first and foremost Fo'ah
and Kefraya, where the food situation is extremely
difficult. Incessant shelling byjihadists there is killing
peaceful resident.

Fighters continue with artillery strikes, and
the people suffer. We call upon United Nations staff
to carefully discharge their mandate, uphold the
sovereignty of Syria, not deviate from the principles of
neutrality and impartiality, and work to provide help for
all those in need, not just those who are in territories
controlled by the opposition. We really cannot shake
the impression that the spotlight is being intentionally
focused on the provision of humanitarian assistance to
those areas where the Government of Syria is carrying
out counter-terrorism operations. In certain areas
controlled by the Government, where people are just
as much in need, humanitarian convoys do not seem to
be any special hurry. These double standards must be
done away with; all need help without exception and
without any artificial linkages with those areas in Syria
approved by Damascus.

Tasks have to be realistic and cooperation close
with the Syrian Government. There is a need to heed the
Government's view, including in the design of supply
routes. The justified view of Damascus in ensuring
security for humanitarian staff is often not taken
into account. This was recently demonstrated by the
incident in which a driver from the Syrian Red Crescent
sustained injuries in a hastily equipped humanitarian
convoy sent by night.

Just a few words on politics: let us stop the foot-
dragging and resume United Nations-led Syrian talks.
Russia is sparing no effort to bring the sides to a
peaceful settlement on the basis of international law.
An integral element of this strategy is cooperation with
the United States, as co-Chair of the International Syria
Support Group, as well as with other partners in this
very special format. We hope that all partners will seek
to shore up rather than erode achievements.

