Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (interpretation from French): First, I would like to express my
delegation's gratitude to you, Mr. President, for having
convened this important meeting. I would also like to
express my thanks to Mr. Guehenno, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, and to Mr. Peter
Piot, Executive Director of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS, for their exhaustive and
enlightening statements.

One year has passed already since the first
meeting of the Security Council devoted to the
question of the global epidemic of HIV/AIDS. For us it
was a glimmer of hope and a first concrete step
towards the recognition of the importance of the threat
of this disease and what it represents to human security
and its devastating effects in all areas.

The Security Council subsequently adopted
resolution 1308 (2000), in which it states its deep
concern at the scale of the pandemic and, in particular,
the seriousness of the crisis in Africa. The resolution is
aimed at intensifying the battle against AIDS, and it
calls on countries to develop and implement long-term
strategies to push back the disease. It also stresses the
importance of training and prevention among
peacekeeping personnel.

The seriousness and urgency of the situation,

particularly in Africa, have led the international
community to make the fight against this pandemic a
priority. Indeed, during the Millennium Summit, the
heads of State and Government renewed their
commitment to combat AIDS and, on that occasion, set
themselves the goals of slowing the progress of the
virus. The General Assembly decided to convene a
special session to consider this question from all
aspects.

My delegation notes that While important stages
have been passed during the past year, we cannot but
express our deep concern, given the serious
developments of the situation. The new cases of
infection for 2000 number 5.3 million, with 3.8 million
in sub-Saharan Africa alone. This sad reality teaches us
that despite all the efforts made to date, the virus
continues its ravages just about everywhere in the
world. We are convinced of the need for the
international community to mobilize additional
resources to deal with the spread of this pandemic.

It is in this spirit that we stress the importance of
the commitment of all the United Nations parties to
unite their efforts and to devote their energies to
containing this alarming situation. International
solidarity remains the only viable option in the light of
the complexity of the problem and its consequent
dangers. Moreover, we reaffirm our conviction that
humanity as a whole should benefit from progress
made in the area of medical research. We consider it
unacceptable that a part of humanity should be denied
the right of access to drugs.

One of the priorities of the international
community is, indeed, to ensure that drugs in sufficient
quantities and at accessible prices are made available to
the countries of the south. We are convinced that this
idea should be the foundation of any international
partnership in the fight against AIDS.

Africa remains the continent most affected by this
disease. It is now home to 70 per cent of adults and 80
per cent of children infected by the HIV/AIDS virus
worldwide. A little more than 25 million out of the 36
million affected by the virus live in sub-Saharan
Africa. This situation is becoming intolerable. It
creates new conflicts, devastates entire communities
and negates decades of development efforts. The
effects of this disease have spared no sector of life and
continue to complicate situations. It is clearer today
than ever that while waiting for a vaccine that will
protect everyone from infection by HIV/AIDS, access
to treatment remains a priority that all should endorse.

The role of uniformed and peacekeeping
personnel in the prevention of the spread of the virus is
very important. In this respect, we welcome the efforts
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
UNAIDS in the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1308 (2000), and we encourage them to
continue their efforts.

The use of educational material in order to raise
awareness among peacekeeping personnel, the training
of trainers, medical training models and the holding of
targeted seminars are all positive actions undertaken by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in this
regard.

All these actions help make uniformed personnel
more responsible and prepare them to play an
important role in combating the virus. However, we
feel that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
can fully assume its responsibilities only if it is given
adequate means for accomplishing its task. This is why
we feel it is useful to strengthen the financial and
human resources of that Department.

Before concluding, I wish to join you, Mr.
President, and my colleagues who have spoken before
me in paying a heartfelt tribute to our friend
Ambassador Richard Holbrooke for having
courageously introduced the question of AIDS into the
Security Council agenda and for his tireless efforts in
the service of the United Nations. We are grateful to
him for having initiated a debate on a question that
affects almost all countries, particularly those of the
African continent. On this last day of his term, I say to
him simply, thank you, Richard.

