Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Zuev and Ms. Ochoa
Nifio for their very informative briefings today. We,
too, would like to extend our appreciation to those
brave individuals and organizations that put their
lives on the line to mitigate landmines, improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) and unexploded ordnance in
conflict-ridden areas. We hope that today's discussion
will help us continue to highlight the importance of
humanitarian mine action, countering the threat of
improvised explosive devices and mitigating the danger
of explosive remnants of war.

The United States has been the world's single largest
financial supporter of such efforts. We have provided
more than $2.8 billion in such aid since 1993 in more
than 99 countries for conventional weapons destruction,
which includes the clearance of my landmines and
unexploded ordnance, including in Colombia where
we are the largest donor in the sector. We urge other
Member States to join us in a robust international
partnership to reduce the humanitarian impact of
landmines, unexploded ordnance and improvised
explosive devices on vulnerable communities around
the world.

Today public and private sector organizations
are playing a Vital role in clearing IEDs and other
explosive devices often before conflict and violence
have completely ceased. These partners will continue
to provide essential support to ease the safe return of
civilians in areas where fighting has taken place.

Nowhere are these challenges more prevalent than
in our ongoing efforts to defeat the Islamic State of
Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). Many of the areas that have
been liberated or are in the process of being liberated
from ISIS are severely contaminated with landmines
and IEDs. Some of these explosive devices operate
as booby traps meant to spread terror even after ISIS
fighters have departed. An important part of defeating
ISIS involves clearing these landmines, IEDs and
unexploded ordnance so internally displaced persons
and refugees can return to their homes. This also
involves ensuring key infrastructure points are free
of landmines and IEDs so that water service can be
restored and sanitation services resumed.

However, there remains the potential for confusion
about the role of humanitarian mine action implementers
and military and security personnel who are operating
in evolving conflict areas to mitigate IEDs. In order
to best protect mine action personnel, it is important
that Member States not conflate IED clearance with
military counter-IED activities. Affected States,
donors, the United Nations and humanitarian mine
action implementers should work together to make sure
that all personnel searching for and disposing of IEDs
have the appropriate skills to do the job. The aim should
be to ensure the safe, effective and efficient disposal
of IEDs.

The United States will continue to support the
efforts of the United Nations and others to mitigate the
humanitarian consequences of landmines, unexploded
ordnance and IEDs.

