Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): We have
heard the major interlocutors with great interest. I
would like to thank them for their remarks, with one
necessary clarification on one point, with regard to
paragraph 23 of the Council's report - and I am
looking to my friend, Ambassador Kumalo - so that
there is no misunderstanding as to what the Security
Council has in mind with respect to the inter-
Congolese dialogue. I think that it is a very important
point. The Security Council is strictly following the
text of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. The Council
spent a great deal of time to find the wording to
express what we had in mind.

We all hope that the inter-Congolese dialogue
will end in a closing ceremony bringing together all the
participants, so that, in the presence of Sir Ketumile
Masire, there will be a consensus bringing together,
without exception, all those who did such tremendous
work at Sun City.

However, we are in a fairly delicate phase, in
which we see the risk of the crystallization of two
opposing blocks of unequal size, but which could lead
to the risk of a partition. The risk of the crystallization
of antagonistic positions prompts us to say that, in the
current phase, it is desirable to promote direct and
discreet contacts. That is what we did in the presence
of all of the Ministers of the Lusaka Political
Committee in Luanda on 2 May, where the three parties
signatories of the Lusaka Agreement, the armed
parties, met before our official meeting. That format
was not without precedents. In fact, before the opening
of the Sun City meeting, there were, with the
agreement of Sir Ketumile Masire, two meetings
among the same three parties. The meetings were
useful for reconciling the points of view. One of the
meetings was held in Geneva with the discreet
participation of a representative of Sir Ketumile and of
our friend, Ibrahima Fall. The second meeting was held
in Abuja, using the same format. Those two meetings
get things moving and in favourable conditions for the
Sun City meeting.

So, what we have in mind - I think it is
worthwhile to clarify it for everyone - is to promote
in the current phase a discreet dialogue, without any
preconditions - that is important - and in a spirit of
openness, in order to reconcile the points of view and
to arrive at an inclusive agreement that leaves no one
out. Such an agreement obviously includes civil society
and the political parties. The problem today is that civil
society and the political parties have taken sides, when
what we need is to bring the whole together through
the process, which could be effective in the current
phase - we think - but should be discreet. That is the
clarification I wanted to bring to the attention of our
friends, in particular to the Ambassador of South
Africa.

