Mr. Boubacar Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): I would first of all like to welcome the
presence in the Chamber of the Secretary-General. His
presence here reaffirms, if indeed there was a need for
such reassurance, the great importance he attaches to
our debate today.

Like previous speakers, allow me also to convey
my delegation's appreciation to Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for the comprehensive briefing he has just
given us on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I would also like to convey our gratitude to
Mr. Javier Solana, Secretary-General and High
Representative for the Common Foreign and Security
Policy of the European Union, who has just returned
from a visit to Central Africa, for his extremely
informative statement, which my delegation has
listened to closely. I would also like to take this
opportunity to express my delegation's gratitude to
Mr. Amos Namanga Ngongi for his informative
statement and for the effective manner in which he
guided the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) during a
particularly difficult period replete with challenges.

The holding of this meeting 10 days after the
session devoted to the human rights situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo illustrates our
shared concern and determination to find a speedy and
lasting solution to the fratricidal conflict that has
ravaged that country for several years now. The date of
30 June 2003, which is a key day in the country's
political development, marked the official
announcement of the membership of the Transitional
Government of National Unity. That important event
was followed by the swearing-in of the four Vice-
Presidents, with the swearing-in of the other members
of the new Government team being expected tomorrow.

This is a clear demonstration of the will of the
Congolese people to reconcile their differences and
forget the bitterness of the past so that, together, they
can devote their energy to building a homogeneous and
strong nation that can take charge of its own destiny.

Furthermore, that demonstration of will fully
reflects the vision of President Kabila, who recently
stated:

"The elements and entities utilized in the context
of the inter-Congolese dialogue are now a part of
the past. Since we are embarking upon a process
of transition, such labels must disappear. Neither
tribal nor ethnic considerations, neither political
affinities nor regional factionalism, can take
precedence over the highest interests of the
country."

While welcoming such significant progress, we
would like to remind the Council that the journey
ahead will be long and rife with hidden dangers. The
Congolese people have not yet completed their arduous
task and, with the support of the international
community, must work to meet those challenges.

My delegation believes that one of those
challenges will be the dismantling of the armed groups,
whose pernicious actions, as we are all well aware,
have contributed to the fragmentation of the country.
The effective implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, in which
priority must be given to the problem of child soldiers,
is thus of major importance and cannot be ignored.
This must be accompanied by appropriate arms-control
measures.

Furthermore, we cannot remain silent in the face
of the numerous violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law - massacres, rape and
other atrocities - committed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, particularly in the north-eastern
part of the country. We believe that there can be no
definitive peace in the country if impunity is tolerated,
whether overtly or covertly.

Such violations must be the subject of intensive
investigation, so that the sponsors of such crimes and
those who perpetrated them are punished to the fullest
extent of the law. To that end, it is our duty to
contribute to the establishment of the necessary
institutional framework.

Furthermore, the decision of the Security Council
to send the Interim Emergency Multinational Force to
Bunia has proved to be a wise and effective one, as the
presence of that Force on the ground has, at the very
least, made it possible to restore calm and reassure the
population. In order to consolidate that action and
expand the Force throughout the territory, my
delegation shares the view that the troops of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) should be
strengthened and provided with a more robust mandate.
The information provided earlier by Mr. Guehenno
further strengthens that conviction.

In this connection, the draft resolution already
negotiated at the expert level should by adopted by the
Council as soon as possible, as that will facilitate the
transition, under conditions of security and in a timely
manner, from the multinational force to the second
MONUC task force.

The illegal exploitation of natural resources is
another very important aspect of the climate of
violence that has prevailed to date in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. A victim of insatiable greed,
the country has been subjected to systematic
dismemberment by armed movements and groups that
have bled it dry. Apart from the economic profits
generated for these groups, this has led to the
balkanization of the territory and the consequent
strengthening of the influence of such groups, which
have thereby consolidated their political domination.
That situation, which is very damaging to the unity and
integrity of the country, has further served to unravel
the social fabric and weaken central authority. It is
urgently necessary to reverse that trend and thereby
allow the Congolese people to regain sovereignty over
their national resources.

My delegation would like to thank Ambassador
Kassem and his team; their insight and skill have
helped to reveal the mechanisms by means of which
such plunder has occurred. We encourage them to
continue their activities, and await with interest their
mid-term assessment, which, we are sure, will shed
new light on this issue.
In conclusion, I should like to emphasize that,
over and above the efforts of the Congolese people -
efforts backed by a genuine will to succeed - the
cooperation of neighbouring States will be
indispensable for the ultimate restoration of peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Without their
understanding and political will, the many efforts that
are being made will not succeed. That is why my
delegation would like once again urgently to appeal to
them to make the best possible use of their positive
influence to contribute to the realization of that
objective.

There is no doubt that the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is a complex web
and that it has many ramifications. If it is to untangle
that web, the international community has no choice
but to assist the Congolese people in their quest for
national harmony, stability and development. What is
at stake here is the future of peace in the subregion, in
Africa and throughout the world.

