Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia - and the associated
countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, and the European
Free Trade Association countries that are members of
the European Economic Area, Iceland and
Liechtenstein, align themselves with this statement.

Each meeting of the Security Council brings us
closer to the crucial deadline of the elections in Kosovo
next November. We welcome the regularity of these
open debates, which give us the opportunity to take
stock of current and future developments in the region.
In this connection, I should like to thank Mr. Guehenno
for his excellent briefing. This meeting also gives me
an opportunity to confirm once again the European
Union's support for the efforts made by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and by the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Mr. Hans Haekkerup, to implement
resolution 1244 (1999).

We attach particular importance to recent
developments in Kosovo because they are decisive
steps towards a democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo.
We have warmly welcomed the publication of the
Constitutional Framework for Provisional Self-
Government. Now, for it to become a reality, it is
essential that all the communities participate in the
elections next November as well as in the Kosovo
transitional institutions that will emerge from the
elections.

In this connection, we welcome the support
offered by Belgrade for the registration of the Serbian
electors in Kosovo. We are also glad that several
political parties have already registered for the ballot.
We hope that the parties which have begun the
procedure - the Serb parties in particular - will carry
it to conclusion so that all the communities are
represented on the electoral rolls. The Union notes with
satisfaction that the process is moving forward, but, as
Mr. Guehenno has just pointed out, more progress is
needed. We hope that Belgrade will actively encourage
the Serb community to participate in the elections. The
European Union is indeed convinced that all
communities should take part in the elections in order
to ensure a multi-ethnic future for Kosovo.

In general, relations between Belgrade and
UNMIK have developed very positively over the last
few weeks. We have often expressed how important we
consider these relations to be, and we welcome the fact
that Deputy Prime Minister Covic and Mr. Haekkerup
are meeting now, and we hope that that collaboration
will intensify in the future.

The European Union is well aware of the
problems that persist in Kosovo, particularly as regards
security, missing persons and the return of refugees and
displaced persons, as well as regarding organized
crime. In this respect, we are taking the concerns of the
various communities very seriously. We welcome the
measures or initiatives already taken, and we
encourage UNMIK and the other players involved to
continue their efforts in these areas.

An encouraging sign for the whole region was
sent to us by the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia with the signing of the Framework
Agreement by President Trajkovski and the leaders of
the four major political parties. We hope that
Parliament will consider it with attention with the aim
of approving it as soon as possible. The Union urges all
the parties faithfully to abide by the agreement and to
take all the measures needed for its speedy and full
implementation. It is essential that everyone observe
the ceasefire scrupulously from now on. The success of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization operation
"Essential Harvest", as well as the whole peace
process, depends on this. We remain confident, despite
the uncertainty of the situation.

In this context, the frontier between Kosovo and
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia remains
extremely sensitive, as others have noted this morning.
We encourage the Kosovo Force to continue to devote
the greatest attention to it.

The European Union will pursue its efforts to
promote stability, democratic development and
prosperity in the region, in close collaboration with all
the parties. In following up on the commitments
entered into at the Zagreb summit, the countries of the
region have made encouraging progress along the path
of democracy, peaceful coexistence and regional
cooperation. We are certain that these efforts will
ensure peace and stability for all the communities of
the region.

