Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
The Council has shown that it is capable of responding
firmly to terrorist acts aimed at destabilizing States and
jeopardizing international peace and security. It has
done so by unequivocally condemning such acts, as
well as by demanding that those responsible and their
supporters be tracked down and brought to justice.

Furthermore, for some years now the Council has
been committed to patient work aimed at strengthening
the capacity of all the members of international
community to combat terrorism. Indeed, that is the
raison d'etre of the three Committees that have just
submitted their reports.

The Council is making an invaluable contribution
to the international struggle to combat terrorism, which
is now an important item on its agenda. In the months
to come, as we consider the Secretary-General's
strategy in this area, we must ensure that the Council's
place in that common effort is fully recognized. The
adoption by the General Assembly of a universal
definition of terrorism would provide a solid
foundation for that strategy.

In the meantime, we must regularly assess the
progress achieved. In the near future, the Council will
be focusing on the comprehensive examination of the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate provided for
in resolution 1535 (2004). Although the Directorate
now has all the human resources that it needs, we must
commit ourselves to undertaking a genuine debate on
action in support the Committee so that we can
determine its priorities.

Under the chairmanship of Ambassador Loj, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) has caught up, to a significant extent, with its
backlog in considering State reports. We are also
pleased that it now includes the implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005) on incitement to terrorism in its
discussions with States. We now hope that it will be
able to devote more time and resources to visits on site.

The visits that have already taken place have
enabled us to make a much better assessment of the
efforts of States to implement their obligations
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) than would have
been possible working from written reports alone.
Those visits have also enabled us better to determine
what assistance States may need in future. We therefore
hope to see an increase in CTC visits.

The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities is also making considerable efforts to
improve its working methods.

We welcome the adoption of resolution 1617
(2005), which has provided useful clarifications. The
resolution calls on the Committee to review its
guidelines in order to enhance its effectiveness. We
believe that such a review is necessary. It is
particularly important to enhance transparency in the
context of the Committee's procedures for listing and
delisting and in those relating to humanitarian
exemptions. Such transparency, which justice demands,
will improve Member States' understanding of the
work of the Committee and therefore contribute to
enhancing their cooperation.

The visits made by the Committee and the group
of experts to Member States represent an important
part of their work. It is important that such visits focus
on States requiring the greatest assistance for the full
implementation of the sanctions determined by the
Council.

I wish to devote particular attention to the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) at a time when, under your
chairmanship, Sir, it is presenting an assessment that
France believes to be very positive. This battle was not
easily won, but now the Committee is working quickly,
and the group of experts has carried out an exceptional
in-depth analysis of the national reports.

We believe that the position of States vis-a-vis
resolution 1540 (2004) is shifting, as seen at the recent
seminar organized by Argentina in Buenos Aires.
Many States had felt that, by resolution 1540 (2004),
the Security Council was legislating in their place, but
they now seem to better understand the objectives of
the resolution and are passing laws to ensure
compliance with its provisions.

France is convinced that the threat of weapons of
mass destruction, their means of delivery or related
materials falling into the wrong hands poses a very
serious threat for all States. We draw attention to that
problem in all forums in which we participate - in the
G-8, the European Union, the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), and today in the General
Assembly, to which we have submitted a draft
resolution on radiological terrorism that we hope will
be adopted by consensus.

The renewal of the 1540 Committee's mandate
will have to be discussed a few months hence. Today
we wish to say that the Committee is very useful. It is
now gaining a full understanding of the control
systems for sensitive installations and materials
worldwide - an understanding that really has no
equivalent in disarmament forums. We should use that
understanding to better direct our own efforts. Of
course, we can continue to request reports, but it might
be more effective to make better use of the existing
database in order to identify priorities; match up
requests for and offers of assistance; and identify
intelligent responses to resolution 1540 (2004) of
which note could be taken, such as the information we
have culled from reading the reports submitted by
India and South Africa.

As I said earlier, to be effective, the fight against
proliferation requires that all States shoulder their
responsibilities in the area and recognize the benefits
they can derive. I believe that the Committee can
provide assistance in that respect by identifying
regions, requirements, partnerships and models and
drawing conclusions in order to make concrete
progress.

The establishment of zones free of weapons of
mass destruction has played a major role in the
elaboration of the regional security policies of the
countries of the South, and the establishment of
nuclear-weapon-free zones could in future also
strengthen international security. Resolution 1540
(2004), which encourages cooperation among States,
provides an opportunity in that direction.

