Mr. Bolton (United States of America): Four
months have passed since the Security Council called
upon Iran to fully and verifiably suspend its nuclear
programmes, and nearly two months have passed since
the European Union three (EU-3) plus three made its
generous offer, inviting Iran to enter into negotiations
and avoid further Security Council action. Let us not
forget that this diplomatic activity was preceded by
more than three years of Iranian non-compliance with
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and its International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) Safeguards Agreement. Sadly, Iran has
06-44964

consistently and brazenly defied the international
community by continuing its pursuit of nuclear
weapons, and the continued intransigence and defiance
of the Iranian leadership demands a strong response
from the Council. The resolution adopted today does
just that.

We are pleased that the Council has taken clear
and firm action in adopting this resolution. The pursuit
of nuclear weapons by Iran constitutes a direct threat to
international peace and security and demands a clear
statement from the Council in the form of a binding
resolution.

This resolution also demands action. It sends an
unequivocal and unambiguous message to Tehran: Take
the steps required by the IAEA Board of Governors,
including full and sustained suspension of all
enrichment-related and reprocessing activities,
including research and development, and suspend
construction of your heavy-water reactor. It also calls
upon Member States to prevent the transfer of
resources to Iran's nuclear and missile programmes,
and Iran should understand that the United States and
others will ensure that the financial transactions
associated with these proliferation activities will be
subject to scrutiny as well. The United States expects
that Iran and all other States Members of the United
Nations will immediately act in accordance with the
mandatory obligations of this resolution.

This is the first Security Council resolution on
Iran in response to its nuclear weapons programme,
reflecting the gravity of the situation and the
determination of the Council. We hope the resolution
will demonstrate to Iran that the best way to end its
international isolation is to simply give up the pursuit
of nuclear weapons. We look forward to Iran's full,
unconditional and immediate compliance with the
resolution. We hope that Iran makes the strategic
decision that the pursuit of programmes of weapons of
mass destruction makes it less, not more, secure. We
need to be prepared, however, that Iran might choose a
different path. That is why it is important that the
United States and other member States have expressed
their intention to adopt measures under Article 41 in
the event that Iran does not comply with the resolution.

In closing, I would like to thank all members of
the Council for their efforts in helping us to secure a
strong resolution.
3
