The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of France.

Allow me to begin by warmly thanking Nicholas
Haysom and Ambassador Saikal for being with us
today and for their respective briefings. I should like
in advance to align myself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union and to make
three comments.

I should first like to welcome the fact that
Afghanistan continues to move forward in its
transition, as reflected by the continued reforms
undertaken by the Government since September 2014.
The recent appointments to senior Government posts
and governors' posts are also to be welcomed. France
reiterates its full support to the Afghan Government and
encourages it to continue its efforts. I should like also
to reiterate my country's commitment to cooperating
with Afghanistan in the areas set out in the important
Franco-Afghan Friendship and Cooperation Treaty,
which has bound our two countries since 2012.

Secondly, as the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/532) points out, the circumstances remain
difficult and the challenges manifold. Beyond the need
to sustain political and economic reforms, the priority
continues to be ending the fighting and re-establishing
lasting security. The recent attacks, particularly that of
yesterday and the one carried out on 19 April last in
Kabul, which left 64 people dead and 327 wounded, show
that the situation remains fragile. On behalf of France,
I wish to express once again our deep condolences in
connection with these tragic events and to pay tribute
to the courage and resilience of the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces, which, in addition to the
Taliban, must also deal with the challenge caused by
terrorist groups affiliated with Da'esh.

The refusal by the Taliban to respond to the offer
of direct talks with the Afghan Government made by
the Quadrilateral Coordination Group on Afghanistan
is of course a disappointment for the international
community. It can only continue to pointlessly prolong
the violence and the suffering of the Afghan people.
Frances hopes that the dialogue can resume as soon as
possible so as to put an end to the conflict and move
towards national reconciliation. France also calls
upon all countries of the region to actively support the
stabilization of Afghanistan and to contribute positively
to the establishment of lasting peace in the country.
In that context, prospects for an economic opening
towards Central Asia and Iran are positive.

The illicit economy, corruption and the production
and trafficking of drugs must be actively combated by
Afghanistan and its regional partners, because these are
also major obstacles to the re-establishment of security
in and the development of the country.

Thirdly, and finally, this fragile context makes the
international community's support for Afghanistan
even more important in order to help the country
make progress towards greater stability, prosperity
and democracy. The support of the United Nations
in particular remains crucial, particularly in the
provision to the population of basic services and
international assistance.

France is particularly committed to UNAMA's
good-offices role. Resolution 2274 (2016), adopted
in March, allowed the international community to
reassert its determination to maintain its support for
Afghanistan. It is essential that the United Nations
continue to have the resources necessary to achieve the
objectives set out in the resolution. The NATO Summit,
to be held in Warsaw on 8 and 9 July, and the Brussels
conference on Afghanistan, to be held on 5 October,
must reaffirm the international community's support to
Afghanistan and the process that led to the National
Unity Government.

In conclusion, allow me again to pay tribute to
the work carried out by Nicholas Haysom as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
UNAMA and to wish him much success in his future
duties. France is pleased to continue to cooperate very
closely with his successor, Mr. Yamamoto.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the State Secretary for Foreign
Affairs of Sweden.

