Mr. Friis Bach (Denmark): At the outset, my
delegation would like to join others in condemning
today's terrorist attack on the United Nations offices
in Somalia in the strongest possible fashion, and to
express our since condolences. It is a cowardly act that
will not impede the establishment of a peaceful and
stable Somalia.

On behalf of the Nordic countries - Finland,
Iceland, Norway, Sweden and Denmark - I am
honoured to address the Council on the important issue
of conflict-prevention and natural resources. The issue
deserves serious attention and is also the mark of an
effective preventive diplomacy.

Please note that a longer and more detailed version

of this statement is being distributed.

The root causes behind the eruption and continuation
ofany violent conflict often involve a complex pattern of
political and economic factors. It is a paradox that many
of the poorest and most conflict-affected countries are
simultaneously very rich in natural resources. We must
strive to ensure that natural resources become a force
for positive change and development.

The illicit extraction of natural resources has many
repercussions, not least illicit financial flows, which
negatively impact economic development. Such flows
undermine state-building and, ultimately, democracy,
promote corruption, result in poor investments,
facilitate crime and terrorism, and destabilize the
financial system, to cite several examples.

Governments, donors, the private sector and civil
society need to take a multi-faceted, integrated approach
in addressing conflicts with regard to non-renewable
natural resources. First, such an approach should take
account of establishing and enforcing a regulatory
framework for natural resource management. Secondly,
attention mustbe paid to transparency and accountability
in public-sector expenditure. Thirdly, there is a need
for security sector reform and a rule-of-law approach,
including the training of police, border management,
governance, sound public financial management,
human rights and land rights. Fourthly, reconciliation
and the creation of options for viable livelihoods for
people affected by the extraction operations must be
fostered.

A number of international processes and
actors - many of them supported by the Nordic
countries - are active in the field ofconflict-prevention
and natural resources. One central actor that we would
like to highlight is the Peacebuilding Commission, which
plays an important role in encouraging and promoting
coherence, coordination and knowledge-sharing at all
levels, and between processes and stakeholders that are
of paramount importance.

I welcome today's debate as the co-chair of
the International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and
Statebuilding, together with the Finance Minister of
Timor-Leste, and to which all the Nordic Countries are
committed.

The New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States,
emanating from the Dialogue, defines five peace- and
state-building goals, among them the need to create
economic functions and ensure State revenues that
in turn will safeguard public service delivery. In that
regard, equitable natural resource management is on
the agenda as an essential and contributory factor to
a durable and sustainable peace as the main building
block for long-term development.

I would like to highlight the importance of
respecting country-led and country-owned strategies.
It is crucial that we support the ground-breaking
work undertaken by the Group of Seven Plus States.
Businesses have a clear interest in promoting peace,
security and stability and in ensuring that natural
resources are a blessing, not a curse. We therefore
encourage them to engage proactively in voluntary
initiatives in this field - the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative, the Kimberley Process, the
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights and
the United Nations Global Compact. In that regard,
we need multi-stakeholder consultative processes and
the participation of youth, women and marginalized
groups.

We commend the Secretary-General for his
proposal to establish a partnership facility. We believe
that the international financial institutions have a
crucial partnership role to play in managing natural
resources. Public income and expenditure reviews are
critical, as are requisite regulatory frameworks and
procedures.

We must strengthen existing local structures that
promote conflict-free mining, such as the Regional
CertificationMechanismoftheInternationalConference
of the Great Lakes Region and the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Due
Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of
Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas.
The international community, especially the United
Nations, should strive to improve coordination on the
ground and support the implementation of the OECD
Due Diligence Guidance. International partners should
ensure that the Guidance is better known and used by
their agencies and field offices.

Lastly, civil society has a crucial and active role
to play in resolving disputes and in holding States and
businesses accountable. In that regard, civil society and
free media should serve as our watchdog to monitor
compliance with standards and oversight arrangements
in order to improve transparency in extractive industries
and in Governments' management of their resource
revenues.

Let this important issue unite us and compel us
to exert greater efforts in future. Unfortunately, today
the Council did not make any statement on this very
important topic, but we thank it for the dialogue and
the debate.

