Mr. Bamba (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
In his statement during the Security Council debate
on 10 December, the Minister of State and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire,
warned of the imminent threat posed by the increasing
presence of terrorist groups in northern Mali:

"Northern Mali is gradually being transformed
into a sanctuary for terrorist groups engaged, with
total impunity, in the worst possible abuses and
massive violations of human rights. That terrorist
presence threatens every State in West Africa and
the Sahel, but also those ofthe Maghreb and beyond.
We are talking about a real danger to international
peace and security, which therefore demands a
comprehensive and determined response on the
part of the international community." (S/PV6882, 
p. 10)

Resolution 2085 (2012), which the Council has
just adopted and which authorizes the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA), is
for us proof that the Council took that warning very
seriously, properly assuming its legal responsibility in
that regard under the Charter of the United Nations.
The resolution provides the necessary international
legitimacy to carry out the necessary actions to restore
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Mali. On
behalf of His Excellency President Alassane Ouattara,
current Chairman of the Council of Ministers of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), I should like to express the satisfaction of
ECOWAS at the adoption of this historic resolution that
responds to the expecations of all of Africa in the face
of the tragedy in Mali.

First, I would like to point out that this resolution is
timely. Its adoption before the end of this year is in fact
an outstanding message of hope and solidarity both for
the victimized people of northern Mali, who can now
begin to believe that their nightmare will soon come
to an end, as well as to the millions of people who are
suffering similar violence; they, too, will be able to
believe in the ability of the United Nations to take the
life-saving decisions that will bring them the security
to which they have a right.

Secondly, resolution 2085 (2012) sets out a political
strategy that provides every opportunity for peace. The
strategy is based on the framework agreement agreed
by the Malian parties on 6 April, which was later
endorsed by ECOWAS, the African Union, the United
Nations and all our development partners, with a view
to developing a road map aimed at the full restoration
of the constitutional order and the re-establishment of
national unity, in particular by organizing free, fair and
transparent presidential and legislative elections next
year.

Moreover, resolution 2085 (2012) sends out an
unambiguous political message calling for the military
to refrain from all political activity, for the holding
of an inclusive political dialogue, as well as for the
unrelenting pursuit of negotation and mediation with
both independence-seeking and separatist armed
groups and other groups that have clearly distanced
themselves from terrorist groups.

Thirdly and lastly, resolution 2085 (2012) sets
out a military strategy focused on the deployment
of AFISMA that provides for the following crucial
goals: contributing to rebuilding the Malian armed
forces; operational support to Mali's authorities aimed
at retaking the territory under the control of terrorist
and extremist groups; and a transition to stabilize
the security situation with a View to placing security
matters back in the hands of Mali's authorities.

It is clear that the noble goals of resolution
2085 (2012) will be achieved only with significant
mobilization and the commensurate international
support. It is for that reason that, together with
ECOWAS, the African Union calls for a financial and
logistical support package financed through United
Nations assessed contributions to be quickly agreed by
the Security Council. We believe that will be the only
way to provide the means to ensure the sustainability
and effectiveness of AFISMA's action.

ECOWAS welcomes the singular perspective
and agreement on action that has developed between
it and the African Union on the issue of Mali. This
convergence of views has extended to all international
partners, first among which is the Security Council.
On behalf of President Ouattara, I would like to
expres the great gratitude of ECOWAS for the great
sense of responsibility demonstrated by the Council
in unanimously adopting resolution 2085 (2012) to
authorize the deployment of an international force to
Mali to put an end to the presence of terrorist groups in
the north of the country and to restore the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of this very important African
country of the Sahel.

