Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I, too, would
like to join other Security Council colleagues in
welcoming the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Lamberto Zannier; the Foreign Minister
of Kosovo, Mr. Skender Hyseni; and the Foreign
Minister of Serbia, Mr. Vuk Jeremic', to the Council
Chamber today.

I would also like to express our thanks to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2009/300) on developments in Kosovo over the
reporting period, and commend the ongoing and
important work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to
promote stability and reconciliation in Kosovo. We
would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for his
leadership and hard work.

The Secretary-General's report illustrates that,
despite economic difficulties and continuing
intercommunal tensions, Kosovo is making good
progress. There is a growing number of United Nations
Member States - now 60 - that recognize Kosovo,
and that growing recognition was evident in the recent
overwhelming support shown for Kosovo's
membership of the international financial institutions.
We would also like to recognize the first anniversary of
the adoption of Kosovo's Constitution on 15 June.

We share the Secretary-General's concern about
recent tensions over renewed house-building in
Mitrovica. The response of the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) was both
effective and proportionate. We welcome the
reconciliation work undertaken by the Kosovo Force
and UNMIK, which helped to bring about a solution
whereby both communities are now rebuilding their
properties. The United Kingdom is committed to
assisting the Kosovo Property Claims Commission in
its work to restore rightful title to property for
Kosovars of all communities, and we welcome the fact
that displaced people continue to return to Kosovo,
albeit at a low rate.

We welcome the good cooperation that exists
between the United Nations and the European Union
on Kosovo. The role of the EU continues to increase
through EULEX, which achieved full operational
capacity in April and is making important progress in
strengthening the rule of law and re-establishing
customs controls. It is right, therefore, that UNMIK
should continue to draw down and to focus on those
areas where it can play a useful and relevant role, such
as supporting Kosovo's engagement with external
organizations and promoting returns and reconciliation.

Given global economic difficulties, it is now
more important than ever that United Nations missions
should be no larger than strictly necessary. We note the
View of the Secretary-General that the revised UNMIK
budget meets in full the Mission's future mandate
requirements. We also call on the Government of
Kosovo to engage constructively with UNMIK in order
to assist its work, which does not diminish Kosovo's
status.

Promoting the rule of law, implementing the
decentralization process and encouraging the
participation of all Kosovo's citizens in local
democratic processes remain key to building a better
future for all in Kosovo. UNMIK, EULEX and other
international partners must continue to cooperate
closely to manage new challenges and achieve these
objectives. Local and regional Governments must be
prepared to work pragmatically with the
representatives of the international community. That
will be particularly important to advance the
decentralization process, and that is central to the
creation of Viable local government to engage with the
organs of the State for the benefit of its communities,
unlike the unrecognized parallel institutions.

The Kosovo Government must also reach out to
all communities to demonstrate its commitment to
implementing minority rights and must strive to
achieve well-supported free and fair local elections. As
the Secretary-General's report notes, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe can also play
an important role in capacity-building to assist the
elections.

Despite its position on Kosovo's status, the
Government of Serbia should continue to engage with
the European Union and to encourage the active
participation of Kosovo's Serbian minority in the
decentralization process. Kosovo's Serbs will benefit
from the rule of law and the opportunity to play a part
in running their own communities. To obtain those
benefits, they will need to participate actively in the
local elections and should be encouraged to do so.

The United Kingdom remains committed to
supporting the efforts of the international community
to promote stability, reconciliation and economic
progress in Kosovo, progress that will enable it to
advance towards an eventual European Union
perspective, in parallel with its neighbours.

