Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): My
Government warmly welcomes this opportunity to
address the situation in Iraq through this open debate.

It is appropriate, in fact crucial, that the Security
Council hear the views of the general membership of
the United Nations on all matters of international
security, especially of peace and war, before reaching
its decision.
A long series of resolutions detailing the
international and legal obligations of Iraq have been
adopted in this room. It was, and remains, the
responsibility of the Iraqi Government to fulfil its
obligations as determined by the Security Council in
the interest of maintaining international peace and
security.

(spoke in English)

We would not be here today, if the Government of
Iraq had fulfilled its obligations to the Council and, by
extension, to all the rest of us. Many governments,
including the Canadian Government, have already
delivered directly to the Government of Iraq the clear
message that they must accept the immediate return of
inspectors and that they must work with the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) openly and
unconditionally. This means full cooperation and
prompt and unfettered access to all sites that
UNMOVIC and IAEA decide to see, including so-
called sensitive sites and Presidential sites.

Canada therefore welcomed the decision by the
Government of Iraq to accept the return of United
Nations inspectors. The unconditional return of
weapons inspectors is the essential first step in Iraq's
demonstrating its compliance with the will of the
international community.

However, as the ceasefire provisions established
in Security Council resolution 687 (1991) make clear,
the return of weapons inspectors is not the end. It is the
means. The end, as has been set out in the decisions of
the Council, is the destruction of all Iraqi weapons of
mass destruction and long-range missiles and the
termination of all Iraqi programmes to develop them.

United Nations inspections are essential to verify
this compliance. Regrettably, given the record of the
past 11 years, world opinion has learned to be sceptical
of the assurances it has been given by the Government
of Iraq. We have seen too much evasion, obstruction
and misinformation to rely on anything other than the
judgements and reports of our own weapons inspectors.

That is why Canada fully supports current efforts
to send a new and unambiguous message for Iraq. That
message should spell out in clear and unequivocal
terms what is required of the Government of Iraq, that
is, immediate, unconditional and unrestricted access to
all sites for weapons inspectors, at the discretion of
UNMOVIC and the IAEA themselves.
Equally, it must leave no doubt that Iraq will face
serious consequences, should it fail once again fully to
comply with decisions of this Security Council, acting
on behalf ofthe entire international community.

Canada's position has always been that these
issues should be dealt with within the framework of the
United Nations Security Council. The Council has an
obligation to respond, clearly, decisively, and with one
voice, to the challenge Iraq has posed it.

We remain conscious as well of the plight of the
people of Iraq. Our concern for them has only
intensified as tension has mounted and as we find
ourselves debating yet once again the issues of non-
compliance and their consequences. The Iraqi people
have paid and are continuing to pay a very heavy price
for the past miscalculations and brinksmanship of their
leaders.

The Government of Iraq has assured us that it
wants to return to the family of nations and to see the
lifting of sanctions. If that is the case, the Government
of Iraq should have no doubt that the road to
acceptance runs through the Security Council. In any
case, the Government of Canada expects to see an early
and unconditional return of weapons inspectors.

To the Council, we urge complete clarity and
unity in the message you send on behalf of us, the
international community. Let there be no assertion now
or later of contradictory or misleading signals.

The Council should adopt a new and
unambiguous resolution that lays out the terms for
compliance, against which the Council itself will bear
the responsibility of measuring Iraq's response.

In turn, Iraq must serve the best interests of its
own people through full cooperation with United
Nations inspectors and the full implementation of all
Security Council resolutions.

