Mrs. Mungwa: On behalf of His Excellency
Ambassador Tete Antonio, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations, who is away
from New York this week, I would like to begin by
joining previous speakers in commending you,
Madame President, for having organized this debate on
the interdependence between security and
development, a theme of paramount importance to
Africa as a developing region. The organization of this
open debate is not only a mark of strong political
support for this theme by the Council; it also illustrates
the role the Council plays in generating new ideas to
boost related efforts being made by Member States,
bilateral and multilateral donors, United Nations
agencies and regional organizations such as the African
Union in its overall work for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

We are grateful for the leadership of His
Excellency Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, Minister of
External Relations of Brazil, who travelled to New
York to preside over this meeting in person, and for the
participation of the Secretary-General, the Ministers
from Germany, Colombia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Portugal, India, Gabon, Costa Rica and Slovenia and
the various other participants who made statements
during this debate.

As the Security Council is aware, several
countries in Africa have been the theatre of conflict
linked to factors such as the illegal exploitation of
resources, poverty and a lack of economic
empowerment opportunities, unconstitutional changes
46

of Government, often conducted with backing from
illegal criminal networks, and a lack of opportunity,
overall in particular for young people.

A new dawn has emerged in Africa, however,
following intense efforts deployed by the continent to
assume its share of responsibility for its own security
and development. This new vision of renaissance and
growth is set out in the Constitutive Act of the African
Union and other instruments of the organization, which
clearly assert the interdependence between security and
development. One is not possible without the other, as
has been affirmed by a number of speakers during this
debate.

The African Union therefore, right from its
launch, explicitly recognized that the persistence of
conflict would undermine its broad democracy and
development agenda, and therefore adopted a proactive
approach to resolving conflicts in the continent. This
approach emphasizes early response to potential
conflict situations and active mediation on the
continent in order to avert potential conflict situations.
Furthermore, the policy shift from non-interference, as
practiced by the former Organization of African Unity,
to one of non-indifference in the African Union is a
clear mark of Africa's commitment to eliminating the
phenomenon of unconstitutional changes of
Government that often lead to instability and
insecurity, thus undermining democratic governance
and development on the continent.

The African Union approach on the
interdependence of security and development also
underscores the core imperative of addressing the root
causes of conflict in order to ensure social justice and
thus attain sustainable development. Furthermore, the
objectives of the Union's principles, as set out in
articles 3 and 4 of its Constitutive Act, include clear
provisions for the promotion of democratic institutions
and respect for human rights, the rule of law and
gender equality in order to strengthen popular
participation and democracy. This is also vividly
captured in the human security and development
approach embraced by the African Union, which
establishes the linkage between the financial and
political stability of the State and the physical and
psychological security of its people.

Though much remains to be done, Africa, with
the support of the international community, has made
significant progress in the ardent pursuit of this vision
11-23198
for security and development, both through
thematically-focused initiatives and integrated
programmes and projects. These include the
multilayered and synergized continent-wide peace and
security architecture of the African Union, which
comprises the Peace and Security Council supported by
the Continental Early Warning System, the African
Peer Review Mechanism, the Panel of the Wise and the
African Standby Force, to name just a few.

The experience of Africa in its peace support
operations in contexts including Burundi, Chad, and
currently Somalia, has illustrated that military and
security services can indeed work in conjunction with
civilian stakeholders to achieve socio-economic
stability and recovery through the implementation of
quick-impact projects incorporated within peace
support missions, which should therefore be supported.
These provide early peace dividends to local people
and help in confidence-building and reconciliation,
which are prerequisites for attaining sustainable peace
and development in such situations.

The Continental Early Warning System of the
African Union in particular is designed to ensure that
development trends that could undermine or trigger
insecurity are detected and addressed in a timely and
preventive manner. This also emphasizes the
importance of communications capability to the nexus
between security and development.

The Panel of the Wise was established to draw on
the wisdom and experiences of Africans with track
records in addressing peace and security issues in order
to provide early engagement with emerging situations
of concern to prevent conflict from erupting and
sapping already limited resources from development.
However, it has also been well established that
predictable and sustainable funding is crucial both for
timely and effective conflict prevention and for the
long-term consolidation of peace in order to sustain an
environment conducive to development.

Ongoing processes of security sector reform
should also help to enhance professionalization of the
security sector, for instance to enable engineering and
service corps to increase their contributions to national
efforts to address the social and development needs of
their peoples.

The African Union Border Programme, which has
been mentioned by a number of speakers, is also
seeking to address the challenges of secure movement
around the continent and to help curb the illicit
trafficking of small arms and light weapons, as well as
other illicit transborder activities that fuel conflict and
undermine development in a number of areas around
the continent.

As has been underscored by several speakers, the
African Union fully shares the view that post-conflict
reconstruction and development constitute a key track
for promoting integrated security and development
objectives in countries emerging from conflict. It is
within this context that the African Post-Conflict
Reconstruction Policy Framework was adopted within
just three years of the launch of the African Union.
Related efforts, such as those of the African Ministerial
Committee on Post-Conflict Reconstruction and
Development in the Sudan, clearly demonstrate both
the feasibility and the benefits of linking security and
development in such contexts.

In the same vein, we continue to express the
appreciation of the African Union to the Peacebuilding
Commission for its efforts on the five African countries
on its agenda, and in particular for the leadership of
Brazil, which has been crucial to the advances we have
seen in a number of situations.

Having said that, we are also aware that the
Millennium Declaration and the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) process have revealed the
extent to which Africa remains vulnerable due to the
persistent socio-economic and development challenges
it faces - a situation that has been exacerbated by the
financial and economic crisis. Current trends indicate
that several African countries are unlikely to attain the
MDGs by the target date of 2015. The African Union
therefore seizes this opportunity to underscore the
importance of ensuring that all possible steps are taken
to help the African States to meet the MDGs in order
eliminate some of the socio-economic and root causes
of instability and insecurity in a number of countries
on the continent.

On its part, the African Union launched the New
Partnership for Africa's Development to implement its
vision of renaissance and growth, and we seize this
opportunity to underscore the importance of stronger
support from the United Nations and international
community for its implementation. In this context, the
African Union also continues to develop partnerships
with various bilateral and multilateral actors and with
the African diaspora, civil society and expert
47
organizations, through which development and security
are increasingly considered in an interlinked and
integrated approach.

Furthermore, in its efforts to address some of the
factors impeding the mobilization of resources for the
continent's financial security and development, the
African Union is currently conducting preparatory
processes towards establishment of pan-African
financial institutions, as provided for in article 19 of
the Constitutive Act of the Union. These include three
key institutions - the African Central Bank; the
African Monetary Fund, to be based in Yaounde,
Cameroon; the African Investment Bank to be based in
Abuja, Nigeria - and a pan-African stock exchange.
The African Union is counting on the support of the
international community for the successful launch of
these institutions in order to harness the nexus between
security and development.

In conclusion, we wish to note that, in its
observance of 2010 as the Year of Peace and Security
in Africa, the African Union launched various peace
and security initiatives that brought together
Government, private sector and civil society actors.
This experience confirmed the view that opportunities
abound for promoting linkages between security and
development on the continent. Therefore, enhanced
assistance is essential for regional organizations such
as the African Union so that they may fully develop the
capacity to leverage such opportunities in order to
promote development on the continent. The African
Union thus re-iterates its readiness to continue to
participate in policy debates such as that today in the
Council, and to implement in the field related
opportunities arising within the continent and in
partnership of the United Nations and international
partners.

