Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to welcome
Ms. Sylvie Vale'rie Ba'ipo-Temon, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Central Africans Abroad of the Central
African Republic, and to express my thanks for their
comprehensivebriefings to Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General;
Mr. Sma'il Chergui, African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security; Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing
Director for Africa of the European External Action
Service; Ambassador Omar Hilale, Chair of the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission; and Ambassador Gbolie Desire Wulfran
Ipo, Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African
Republic. I will focus on four points.

With regard to the political process, Polandwelcomes
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic, reached in Khartoum
between the Central African Government and 14 armed
groups and signed in Bangui, as a positive and long-
awaited step in the ongoing dialogue under the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation. We hope it will
enhance the country's peace process and pave the way
for lasting stability there. We call on all the signatories
to the Agreement, who are ultimately responsible for
delivering concrete results for the people of the Central
African Republic, to honour their obligations and
ensure that the Agreement's implementation responds
to the aspirations that the people have expressed. It
will require strong engagement and good faith on
both sides, and the upcoming elections in 2020 and
2021 will be a clear demonstration of adherence to the
commitments made. It will be critical to ensure that the
Agreement is implemented speedily, transparently and
with the participation of representatives of civil society,
including women and young people.

My second point concerns the extension of State
authority. It is important to ensure that the reconciliation
process goes hand in hand with an extension of State
authority throughout the country. Poland welcomes the
progress that has been made in deploying civil servants
across the territory of the Central African Republic,
but a far bigger presence of State institutions outside
the capital is needed to support long-term stability.
Ensuring that State authority and resources are
gradually decentralized is a top priority, and we hope
that the necessary related legislation will be enacted as
soon as possible. Besides that, redeploying the national
security forces remains a key element in the restoration
of State authority. We greatly appreciate the work that
the European Union Training Mission is doing to train
and enhance their capacities, and we encourage them to
further coordinate their efforts.

At the same time, Poland urges all the armed groups
to immediately end their violence against civilians,
United Nations peacekeepers and humanitarian
personnel and engage effectively in the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation
programme. We also believe that the mixed security
units will help to stabilize the situation in the areas
worst affected by the conflict. It is reasonable for
society in the Central African Republic to expect the
reconciliation process to bring security and justice,
among other things by holding those responsible
for violations of international humanitarian law and
violations and abuses of human rights to account. It is
important to address the fight against impunity through
transitional justice mechanisms in a way that contributes
to efforts to achieve sustainable national reconciliation.

With regard to the regional dimension, Poland
believes that it was the genuine engagement of
the international partners and the Central African
Republic's close neighbours that made it possible to
reach a comprehensive peace agreement, and we hope
that commitment will continue. We encourage the
African Union, the United Nations, the European Union
and all other partners to give constructive support
to its operationalization, especially the transitional
security arrangements, participate actively in its
follow-up mechanism and continue their cooperation in
assisting the people of the Central African Republic.
We also acknowledge the primary responsibility that
the subregional partners and neighbouring countries
have for stabilizing the Central African Republic
by addressing cross-border challenges such as the
smuggling of arms and natural resources, including
gold and diamonds, trafficking, illegal trade networks
and irregular migration, which have a critical impact on
the whole region.

With regard to the socioeconomic situation,
the political crisis has had a negative impact on the
country's economy and humanitarian situation. We
share the view that the peace agreement represents a
possibility for expanding economic recovery and good
governance throughout the country. Poland commends
the Peacebuilding Commission's efforts to bring
improvements to the lives of the people of the Central
African Republic, as well as the progress made on the
National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan.

In conclusion, Poland commends the important work
that the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) is doing to protect civilians and support
the peace process in extremely difficult conditions on
the ground. I would like to take this opportunity to
express our special thanks to Special Representative
Onanga-Anyanga for his valuable contribution to a
better future for the Central African Republic during
his term as Head of MINUSCA. We also welcome his
successor, Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, and wish him all the
best in discharging his heavy responsibilities at this
important stage of the political developments in the
Central African Republic.

