Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine): I should like to join you,
Mr. President, in conveying my Government's sorrow and
condolences to the people of Japan, including the families
who lost loved ones during the horrible earthquake there.

(spoke in Spanish)

Allow me at the outset to join in the congratulations
that have been extended to you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council. Directing the work
of one of the most important bodies of the United Nations
entails shouldering great responsibilities and making
decisions that affect the future. It is a great honour for a
diplomat and politician. In recent days, we have had
occasion to witness your diplomatic skills, your tact and
your ability to relate to colleagues. All of this has
contributed to the constructive decisions that have been
adopted in connection with certain complicated
international problems.

I also wish to express my appreciation to the
Ambassador of Rwanda for his successful work as
President of the Council in December.

At the beginning of this, my first statement before
the Security Council this year, I wish to extend a warm
welcome to the new non-permanent members of the
Council. The States Members of the United Nations have
placed great confidence in them. I express my
appreciation to the five members of the Council that have
carried out with dignity the difficult mission entrusted to
them by the international community.

(spoke in Russian)

The dramatic changes that have occurred throughout
the world in recent times are, to varying degrees
connected with the end of the cold war. Not all of these
changes have justified the hopes of the peoples of the
world for peaceful, safe and stable development. This is
primarily because the positive processes around the world
have not been pursued, while the negative trends and
phenomena have not been identified or prevented in good
time. As a result, old threats have been exaggerated while
the international community has minimized new, more
destructive threats.

In this context, the position paper of the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, "Supplement to An
Agenda for Peace", is in our view an attempt to assess
and respond to the many current challenges connected
primarily with the emergence of a new generation of
conflicts. The poison of ethnic and religious intolerance
has increasingly afflicted States and even entire regions,
giving rise to a dangerous corrosion of the emergent post-
confrontational system of international relations.

How can we not be concerned at the fact that such
conflicts are so often accompanied by unprecedented
violations of human rights and are marked by
considerable casualties among peaceful civilians? This is
a challenge to the very basis of their rights - that is, the
right to life. The defence of human rights in

 

contemporary circumstances can no longer be considered as
the exclusively domestic affair of a given State.

In this regard, promoting the observance of human
rights and cooperating with the United Nations in this
sphere - including the dispatch of fact-finding verification
missions - should be a moral injunction, incumbent upon all
States without exception. Such missions will, in our View,
promote the creation of a climate of freedom from fear,
which, as Dag Hammarskjold said, is the quintessence of
the whole philosophy of human rights.

In our View, the part of the position paper in which
the Secretary-General sets forth his view of the role and
place of individual instruments for ensuring peace and
security within the peacemaking activities of the United
Nations are worthy of our particular attention. In this
connection, I should like to draw the Council's attention to
a truth which is as old as the world itself but which,
unfortunately, is often disregarded: an ounce of prevention
is worth a pound of cure. That is why placing stress on
active preventive diplomacy that would make it possible to
avert new conflicts should become the hallmark of the work
of the United Nations in the area of maintaining
international peace and security.

The delegation of Ukraine believes that the United
Nations must make active use, both bilaterally and
multilaterally, of its potential for persuasion vis-a-vis the
parties to a conflict. It is important constantly to expand
and bring into active play a whole arsenal of methods of
persuasion, so as to prevail upon the leadership of those
parties to make use of the Organization's peacemaking
services. And insistence on this should not be viewed by
States as an attempt to interfere in their domestic affairs.
This role, in our view, could be entrusted to the standing
institution of international mediators being set up in the
Office of the Secretary-General. It could include the most
authoritative and eminent politicians and statesmen,
representing all continents. At the same time, they could be
entrusted with certain functions of other instruments for
ensuring peace and security - in particular, post-conflict
peace-building, an important element of which is
monitoring of elections.
Another important aspect of preventive diplomacy is
that of seeking individual approaches to emerging conflicts.
In our view, this is a task that could be successfully
performed only by professional conflict specialists who had
been formally trained and would be represented within the
structure of the United Nations Secretariat - for example,
within the Department of Peace-keeping Operations.

An analysis of recent successes and failures in
peace-keeping operations shows that an imperative in
producing the mandate for operations and in laying down
their fundamental principles is clear-cut observance of
universally accepted norms of international law, in
particular respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity and
inviolability of frontiers.

Many practical difficulties in the sphere of the
command and management of peace-keeping operations
could, in our view, be performed by revitalizing
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations that, in
our view, have been forgotten - and wrongly so. I refer
in particular to Article 47, which defines the role and
functions of the Military Staff Committee. According to
paragraph 4 of that Article, that Committee,

"with the authorization of the Security Council and
after consultation with appropriate regional agencies,
may establish regional sub-committees".

The delegation of Ukraine believes it would be
appropriate to consider the question of expanding this
practice and also the possibility of including in the
membership of these regional sub-committees
representatives of appropriate countries that are
contributing troops to peace-keeping operations deployed
in a given region.

In the final analysis, the success of peace-keeping
operations depends to a large extent on swift deployment
of national contingents provided by States to the United
Nations. In this regard, Ukraine has supported the idea of
the creating of, and has given its assent to participation
in, what is known as a United Nations reserve force. At
the same time, experience has shown that the existence of
a reserve force does not in itself lead to bringing it
swiftly into play. In these circumstances, the Secretary-
General's proposal for the creation of a rapid reaction
force is in our view worthy of our attention. This would
be a strategic reserve for the Security Council, prepared
for deployment in case of an urgent need for the dispatch
of a peace-keeping force. We believe that the availability
to the United Nations of such units would in itself
exercise a restraining effect on the actions of potential
parties to a conflict.

 
In our view, the need also arises for further study of
such elements of this idea as command of the force and
criteria for representatives of national contingents in a
peace-keeping force. Here, criteria should take into account
historical, political and geographical factors.

The active application of sanctions raises a multitude
of questions, which the Secretary-General has attempted to
answer in his position paper. While paying a tribute to the
efforts of the Secretary-General to this end, I should like to
share with the Council our own views on this score.

A fundamental contradiction in the practice of
sanctions is that when they are introduced the main
foundation is the interest of the international community,
but when they are lifted the dominant factor is national
interests - sometimes not even genuine ones - on the part
of individual States. Furthermore, a particularly glaring
contradiction lies in the interpretation of the degree to
which the goals of sanctions have been attained, an
interpretation based on a subjective appreciation by States
of their end results. In recent years, in connection with the
active use by the Security Council of economic
enforcement measures as an important instrument of
international efforts to resolve regional conflicts, the
problem of the negative consequences of sanctions in
general and their effect on outside countries in particular
has taken on an entirely new resonance.

The Security Council imposes sanctions on behalf of
the whole international community. Therefore, all its
members should bear the responsibility for their
implementation and their consequences. The urgent need to
help countries that have encountered difficulties, as a result
of the application of sanctions, in solving their special
economic problems is recognized by practically everyone
today. This is also recognized in the position paper of the
Secretary-General. But this, in our view, is clearly
inadequate. What we need are bold and concrete proposals,
appropriate practical steps, both on the part of the
international community as a whole and on the part of its
individual members.

In this regard, we believe it appropriate to return once
again to the question of creating a special compensatory
mechanism that would include a compensation fund. What
requires further study as one of the possible elements of
this mechanism is the question of reducing the contribution
for the financing of peace-keeping operations by the total
losses which would have been calculated by United Nations
methodology. Here, the functions of appreciation of the
economic losses already sustained by States, study of the
economic, political and social consequences of the
application of sanctions, coordination of efforts to
minimize their consequences for the most vulnerable
groups of the population and also for outside countries,
and monitoring of their implementation could be entrusted
to a standing committee of the Security Council on
sanctions.

The inability of the world community to provide a
swift and effective answer to the problems arising from
the application of sanctions may undermine trust in the
very institution of sanctions and call into question the
very principle of collective activity in the implementation
of enforcement measures by the United Nations.

Our analysis of the position paper presented by the
Secretary-General is by no means exhausted by the points
I have already made. Regarding the report as a point of
departure for a thoroughgoing discussion of ways and
means of enhancing the capacity of the world community
to react effectively to the challenges of the day, the
Ukrainian delegation intends to take an active part in the
work on a comprehensive concept of peacemaking
activity on the part of the United Nations in the twenty-
first century.

