Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
participating in today's meeting, as well as Mr. Mike
Pence, the Vice President of the United States of
America. I also thank all briefers for their updates.

We are confronted with a worrisome humanitarian
crisis whose implications may go beyond Venezuela
and neighbouring countries if not addressed urgently.
There is no doubt that the crisis will have negative
repercussions on regional security and stability in a
way that will make it difficult to contain the further
political and economic implications.

We are concerned about the humanitarian situation
in Venezuela, whose people are struggling with a severe
shortage of food, medicine, water and electricity, all
of which are major life necessities and reflect a grave
economic situation and unprecedented inflation. That
has led to a major displacement of people in recent
years, the majority of them women and children.
Such displacement has placed significant economic
and political pressures on neighbouring countries
and their ability to provide refuge and food to those
displaced people.

Some 3.5 million Venezuelans have taken refuge in
15 neighbouring countries, while 7 million more are in
need of urgent humanitarian assistance, according to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
as we heard from Mr. Lowcock. We therefore urge the
Venezuelan Government to open the country's border
crossings in order to allow humanitarian assistance,
including food and medicine, to reach the largest
number of people in need, in line with international
principles and standards.

We call once again on all Venezuelan parties to
refrain from any provocative measures and to prioritize
the national interest of Venezuela in order to preserve
its security, stability and unity while advancing the
aspirations of the Venezuelan people. We call on them
to launch a serious and inclusive dialogue to prevent
bloodshed and preserve the dignity of the Venezuelan
people. Such dialogue should address the root causes of
the crisis and spare Venezuela and the countries of the
region any further violence and instability. We support
all efforts that seek a peaceful solution to the crisis.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait reiterates its
full commitment to the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, which call for respect for the
sovereignty of States and non-interference in their
internal affairs, in line with Article 2 of the Charter of
the United Nations.

