Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I wish to join
other Council members in thanking the Secretary-
General for his descriptive briefing on his Myanmar
visit 10 days ago. We are particularly appreciative of
and grateful for the Secretary-General's personal
efforts and commitment in making this visit, given his
very tight schedule. I also thank Ambassador Than
Swe, Permanent Representative of Myanmar, for his
statement.

It is our view that the visit was timely and
necessary, given the overall situation in Myanmar at
this juncture. In reality, it has further confirmed the
role of the United Nations, represented by the
Secretary-General, as a key mediator and its
commitment to helping the Government and people of
Myanmar with a broad-based, forward-looking package.

As we have learned directly from the Secretary-
General, all activities scheduled for the visit except one

were realized. He had two meetings with Senior
General Than Shwe and several meetings with high-
level Government officials, at which he straightforwardly
raised his views and recommendations on the current
situation. He also had a frank exchange of views with
leaders of 10 registered political parties, including a
separate private meeting with the National League for
Democracy and representatives of ceasefire groups. In
particular, he met with and made public critical
comments to a large audience comprised of over 300
participants from non-governmental organizations,
civil society groups and the diplomatic corps, which is
yet another sign of Myanmar authorities' continued
respect for the Secretary-General and his opinion.

We regret but understand from the local legal
perspective the Secretary-General's inability to meet
with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. We regard the Secretary-
General's meeting with Tripartite Core Group as very
important, for it again gives added value to the
successful cooperation between the United Nations, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the
Government of Myanmar.

While sharing the common wish to see faster and
more tangible progress in all fields of life in Myanmar,
we take positive note of the decision by the
Government of Myanmar to grant amnesty to prisoners
and enable them to participate in next year's elections,
which we hope will be free, fair and inclusive, as a first
concrete measure in follow-up to the Secretary-
General's Visit.

At the same time, taking into account the
complex situation of Myanmar as a country emerging
from years of, and still suffering from, political
tension, economic underdevelopment and disastrous
natural calamities, we believe that the visit has proved
to be a meaningful step in a process needed for
Myanmar to become a peaceful, stable and prosperous
country. In this process, it is the people of Myanmar
who will determine their own destiny. The assistance
of the international community and the United Nations
is extremely important and will be effective when it is
based on the engagement of and cooperation with the
Government and the people of Myanmar, as has been
the case, particularly in the present context of the
country's seven-step road map towards democracy and
national reconciliation.

As stated on many occasions, Viet Nam supports
a comprehensive approach in helping to address the
root causes of the challenges that Myanmar is facing,
which lie in poverty and economic underdevelopment.
In that connection, the establishment of a national
economic forum, with a focus on agriculture, will be
pivotal. For that to be realized fruitfully, we believe
that United Nations agencies and donors should and
could play a more active role.

Finally, as a country in the region with a high
stake in seeing peace, stability and development
promoted in Myanmar, Viet Nam wishes to reaffirm its
continued support for the Secretary-General's good
offices and all other efforts conducive to the national
reconciliation and democratization process in that
country. In ways that we deem appropriate and
productive, we will continue to be a constructive part
of that process.

