Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Let me thank the Togolese presidency for its
initiative to hold today's meeting on such a relevant
topic. We view this meeting as a contribution to
strengthening the central coordinating role of the
United Nations and the Security Council in the fight
against terrorism. We are grateful to the Secretary-
General for his participation in the meeting and for his
briefing on today's topic. We would also like to thank
the Director General of the Intergovernmental Action
Group against Money Laundering in West Africa for
the information he provided.

In spite of the significant efforts of the
international community, terrorism remains one of
the most serious threats to international peace and
security. Unfortunately, today Africa has come to
be at the forefront of the fight against this scourge.
Regional extremist groups have joined forces among
themselves with criminal elements, circulating freely
through porous borders, updating their sources of
financing, and vigorously arming themselves with
regional weapons flows from Libyan arsenals. We have
warned of such dangers on many occasions. It was to
put up reliable roadblocks to stop the spread of Libyan
weapons, including man-portable air defence systems,
that Russia initiated resolution 2017 (2011).

Substantial finances flow to terrorists from the
illicit drug trade. One of the major staging grounds
for the smuggling of cocaine into Europe is West
Africa. The region is setting up production of synthetic
narcotics, and developing existing and new routes for
the delivery of Afghan heroin. One result ofthis process
is the broadening of the geography of terrorist activity,
with an increased number of terrorist attacks and ever
great proliferation of organized crime. Extremists
are increasingly attempting to capture positions of
Government authority. We are especially troubled by
the tendency to weave terrorism into regional armed
conflicts, which directly threatens the territorial
integrity of States and undermines the foundation of
international peace and security. One illustration of
this is the ongoing instability in Mali and throughout
the Sahel region.

We welcome the adoption of resolution 2100 (2013),
which confirms that the international community is
working together to find a solution to this problem.
Against this backdrop, we cannot but regret that the
Council has yet to identify a solid position regarding
the condemnation of terrorist attacks and threats in the
context of Syrian events, especially bearing in mind the
growing influence among the ranks of the opposition of
terrorist groups affiliated with Al-Qaida.

African countries are adopting more active
initiatives to solve the continent's problems. In that
regard, we welcome partnerships between the United
Nations and the African Union and other regional
organizations in maintaining peace and stability in
Africa. Nevertheless, in the prevailing conditions, the
assistance of the entire international community in
building the capacities of the security forces of African
States is essential. Broad and comprehensive measures
must be implemented, with a focus on strengthening
border and airport security, broadening the exchange
of information, and training law enforcement officers.

We note the key role of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, the Secretariat focal
point on the implementation of the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, in providing technical assistance to
the States in Africa. We welcome the regional initiatives
of those agencies.

In strengthening the capabilities of African States,
Russia is focusing above all on providing humanitarian
assistance through United Nations channels and,
bilaterally, in providing assistance to countries of the
region trough training of professional staff, including
in law enforcement services. We believe that in the long
term, more attention must be paid to the deradicalization
ofpopulations, especially young people. We must focus
on solving the problems of employment and education.
Maintaining our effectiveness remains a challenge,
and we must strengthen it in countering extremist
tendencies, which are the ideological basis and a
breeding ground for terrorist groups in the region.

It is vital to increase efforts to establish an
environment that rejects the ideology of violence. We
should use the media and civil society to that end. We
must nip in the bud all attempts to involve regional
diasporas in terrorist activity. We believe it important
to further activate provision under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, encouraging regional
and subregional organizations to take proactive steps
in preventive diplomacy and the peaceful resolution of
disputes.

We hope that the concerns we have heard today will
be taken into due consideration by the Secretary-General
in the preparation for the Council on possible further
steps in this area. We believe that their implementation
will become an important component of global efforts
of the international community to withstand the threat
of terrorism, and will help ensure the security and
stable development of African countries.

