Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): It gives me pleasure, Sir, to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October. We are fully
convinced that your expertise in international affairs
will be a major contribution to the success of the
Council's work this month. We wish also to convey to
your predecessor, His Excellency the Permanent
Representative of Mali, our thanks for his unstinting
efforts and for the outcome of the Council's work,
especially during its millennium summit.

This meeting is of particular importance in terms
of putting an end to the volatile and extremely
dangerous situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories. The present incidents began on 28
September when the leader of the Likud party, Ariel
Sharon, accompanied by a large number of Israeli
troops, stormed the forecourt of Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
The next day, Israeli forces, under orders from the
Israeli Government, launched unprecedented, brutal
attacks on worshippers. This provoked and exacerbated
tensions and heightened anger not only among
Palestinians but throughout the Arab and Muslim world
and among all members of the international
community. It revealed Israel's dangerous, insidious
intention to consolidate its occupation of the Palestinian
territories, including Holy Jerusalem, the cradle of
human civilization, of tolerance, and of the religious
beliefs of the majority of the world's peoples.

The shameful images broadcast worldwide by the
media clearly showed the brutality of the massacres
and other crimes perpetrated by the Israeli occupation
forces against unarmed Palestinians, including women
and children. They have used weapons of all kinds -
including helicopters, tanks, heavy artillery, missiles
and weapons that are subject to international
prohibitions - to kill stone-throwing children and to
erode the peace process. It was supremely ironical -
and unacceptable - that members of the Israeli
security services disguised themselves in Palestinian
uniforms to arrest and imprison Palestinian children
and young people during the funerals of the martyrs.

In fact, this is not the first time that such things
have taken place. Previous Israeli Governments
perpetrated similar brutal crimes against unarmed
Palestinians, starting with the massacres at Kafr Kassim
and Deir Yassin, proceeding with the occupation of
Palestine in 1948, which was completed in 1967, and
continuing with the Sabra and Shatila massacres - which
were orchestrated and supervised by Ariel Sharon himself
in Lebanon in 1982 - and other subsequent massacres that
we are still witnessing.

The political leadership of the United Arab
Emirates accords the highest importance to the
unfortunate developments in the occupied Palestinian
territories, and was among the first to engage in
political and diplomatic contacts with a view to
containing the situation. Among such activities were
two messages from His Highness Sheikh Zayed bin
Sultan Al-Nahyan, President of the United Arab
Emirates, to the President of the United States of
America and the President of France, as well as
contacts by our Minister of State for Foreign Affairs,
His Highness Sheikh Hamdan bin Zayed Al-Nahyan,
with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation and with the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, with a view to taking decisive, effective
international and bilateral measures to protect the
Palestinian people and the holy places, and to put an
end to the ongoing crimes perpetrated by the Israeli
forces against unarmed Palestinians, including stone-
throwing children and women. These violations
contradict, in letter and substance, all the norms of
international humanitarian law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949.
They emphasize the need for the two parties, the
Palestinians and the Israelis, to resume negotiations in
order to seek a peaceful solution based on relevant
resolutions and international legitimacy. There is also a
need for an impartial international committee to
investigate the causes of the crimes perpetrated against
the Palestinian people and prevent the recurrence of
such crimes, in conformity with international law.

Despite the Paris meeting yesterday between the
two parties, in the presence of the Secretary-General
and the United States Secretary of State, to seek a
ceasefire and a peaceful solution to the present
situation, based on United Nations resolutions and the
agreements concluded between the two parties, the
Israeli Government continues to carry out massacres
and aggression against the Palestinian people and to
put them in detention. The number of martyrs exceeds
74, and there are more than 2,000 wounded, most in a
critical condition. Israeli forces continue to destroy
electricity stations in Palestinian towns and villages.
Furthermore, they are arresting and incarcerating
Palestinians simply because they are defending their
legitimate rights, covered by resolutions on
international legitimacy, as do other people of the
world.

The United Arab Emirates strongly condemns
these dangerous developments and incidents, the
violations and brutal crimes that the Israeli forces
continue to commit, and holds the Israeli Government
fully responsible for the results of these crimes against
the Palestinian people and for peace and security in the
region. Therefore, we call on the co-sponsors of the
peace process, other active countries and the Security
Council to assume their legal, political and historical
responsibilities. The Council, being responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, must
defend its relevant resolutions on the Palestinian
question by immediately implementing the necessary
measures to end the oppression and brutal murders
carried out by the Israeli forces throughout the
occupied Palestinian territories.

In conclusion, we reaffirm our full solidarity with
the Palestinian people and the Palestinian National
Authority, and support their legitimate aspirations to an
independent State, with Holy Jerusalem as its capital;
the return of Palestinian refugees to their homeland,
Palestine; and the removal of illegal Israeli colonialist
settlements. We also emphasize that a just and lasting
peace in the region requires the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), based on the principle of land for peace.
Without the Israeli Government's full compliance with
those resolutions, based on international legitimacy, the
problem in the Middle East will continue, resulting in
an instability in the region that will reflect on
international peace and security.

