Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for your leadership in convening
this meeting and for your leadership of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006). We also
appreciate Mr. Feltman's briefing.

This is the ninth time this year that the Security
Council has met in reference to North Korea. At
the Council's previous meeting on North Korea's
development of nuclear weapons, the United States
made it clear that the future of North Korea was in
the hands of its own leaders (see S/PV.8042). If they
chose the path of peace, then the world would live in
peace with them; but if they chose the path of defiance,
we would respond appropriately. The choice, we said,
was theirs.

Yesterday the North Korean regime made a choice.
It chose to fuel its nuclear aggression. It chose to thumb
its nose at the civilized world. It chose to challenge the
patience ofa world united against its recklessness. With
that choice comes a critical decision point for the rest
of the world. The world has responded powerfully to
North Korea's outrageous and lawless actions.

The Council has taken unprecedented measures
to stop North Korea's development of a nuclear-tipped
ballistic missile. We have levelled the most impacting
sanctions that any country has experienced for a
generation. We have cut deep into North Korea's major
export industries to eliminate the revenue for its illegal
missile programme. We have reduced the country's

military access to the refined petroleum required to run
its war machine.

In addition to our work here in the Security Council,
many nations have taken their own strong actions against
North Korea's threat to peace. This year alone, as North
Korea's behaviour has become increasingly intolerable,
more than 20 countries from all corners of the globe
have restricted or ended their diplomatic relations with
North Korea. Mexico, Peru, Italy, Spain and Kuwait
have expelled North Korea's Ambassadors from their
countries. Portugal and the United Arab Emirates have
suspended diplomatic relations. The Philippines and
Taiwan have suspended all trade with North Korea.
Singapore - formerly North Korea's seventh-largest
trading partner - has cut all trade ties. Uganda has
halted all military and security ties. The European
Union, Australia, South Korea and Japan have made
additional sacrifices for peace and security by going
well beyond the requirements of the Security Council.

All of the countries that have taken actions to
isolate North Korea have acted based on deep concern
for that regime's dangerous refusal to abandon its
nuclear programme. They have selflessly placed our
collective security above their individual political and
economic interests. They have won the gratitude of the
international community for their responsible actions.

Regrettably, not all countries have done the same.
All States Members of the United Nations are, at the
very least, obligated to fully implement all United
Nations sanctions. However, we know that that is not
happening in every case. The Council has banned
coal exports from North Korea, and yet we have
reports of the regime continuing to smuggle coal into
neighbouring Asian countries, using deceptive tactics
to mask the coal's origins. The Council has required
that all refined petroleum imports into North Korea
not exceed the annual cap, and we banned ship-to-ship
transfers. Yet we see North Korea illegally obtaining
refined petroleum from neighbouring States through
ship-to-ship transfers in the Yellow Sea and the Sea
of Japan.

There are countries that are continuing to fund the
North Korean nuclear programme by violating United
Nations sanctions and obstructing our efforts. The
world knows who many of them are. As successful as
we have been in levelling multilateral sanctions against
it, the North Korean regime continues to test new and

more powerful missiles and, in doing so, continues its
march towards a functional nuclear arsenal.

The continuing development of those missile
systems demands that countries further isolate the
Kim Jong Un regime. Therefore, today we call on all
nations to cut off all ties with North Korea. In addition
to fully implementing all United Nations sanctions, all
countries should sever diplomatic relations with North
Korea and limit military, scientific, technical and
commercial cooperation. They must also cut off trade
with the regime by stopping all imports and exports and
expel all North Korean workers.

Just last week, the world was given a stark reminder
of the barbarity of the North Korean regime when
one of its own soldiers fled the country. Even more
than the dramatic video of the soldier's escape, more
shocking was his medical condition unrelated to his
bullet wounds. While being treated by a South Korean
medical team, doctors discovered that the soldier had
parasites and uncooked corn kernels in his digestive
tract - clear evidence that the North Korean regime is
unwilling to properly feed even its own high-ranking
military troops. That is the incomprehensible nature of
North Korea.

Yesterday's missile launch was more advanced than
previous launches. No one can doubt that this threat
is growing. No one can doubt that the North Korean
dictator is getting more aggressive in his obsession
with nuclear power. Yesterday, the regime declared
itself a nuclear power, saying that it had

"completed the State nuclear force, tipped with a
super-large heavy warhead capable of striking the
whole mainland of the United States".

But the North Korean regime missed something
very important; as we have said before, being a nuclear
Power comes with certain standards. It comes with
being responsible enough to know that you do not
threaten other countries with nuclear weapons. You
do not starve your own people in order to fund nuclear
weapons. You do not bully and play games with nuclear
weapons. The regime has shown time and again that it
does not want to talk. Kim Jong Un did not even speak
with President Xi Jingping's envoy when he was sent to
talk to the regime.

The regime has emphatically said it will not
eliminate its nuclear production * and North Korea is in
clear violation of multiple Security Council resolutions.

We are once again at a time of reckoning. We have some
options. First, we should continue to treat North Korea
as the international pariah it has become, by taking its
United Nations rights and privileges away, including
its voting powers. Secondly, we know the main driver
of its nuclear production is oil. Through sanctions, we
have cut off 90 per cent of North Korean trade and
30 per cent of its oil, but the crude oil remains. The
major supplier of that oil is China.

In 2003, China actually stopped the oil to North
Korea. Soon after, North Korea came to the table. We
need China to do more. President Trump called Chinese
President Xi Jinping this morning and told him that
we have come to the point where China must cut off
the oil for North Korea. That would be a pivotal step
in the world's effort to stop this international pariah.
As I mentioned, many countries have made some big
economic and political sacrifices by cutting ties with
North Korea, which they did to serve the peace and
security of us all. We now turn to President Xi J inping
to also take that stand. We believe he has an opportunity
to do the right thing for the benefit of all countries.
China must show leadership and follow through. China
can do that on its own, or we can take the oil situation
into our own hands.

The dictator of North Korea made a choice yesterday
that brings the world closer to war, rather than taking
it further away from it. We have never sought war
with North Korea, and still today we do not seek it.
If war does come, it will be because of continued acts
of aggression such as we witnessed yesterday. And if
war comes, make no mistake, the North Korean regime
will be utterly destroyed. The nations of the world
have it within their power to further isolate, diminish
and - God willing - reverse the dangerous course of
the North Korean regime. We must all do our part to
make that happen.

