Mr. Wittig (Germany): The situation in the Horn
of Africa region and the role of Eritrea therein led to
the adoption of resolution 1907 (2009) in December
2009, imposing sanctions on Eritrea. These sanctions
have never been an end in themselves, and have not
aimed at punishing the Eritrean people. Their purpose
has always been to engage Eritrea in finding a peaceful
solution to its problems with its neighbours.

Unfortunately, Eritrea has failed to comply with
the main provisions of resolution 1907 (2009), as
outlined in great detail in the report of the Monitoring
Group on Somalia and Eritrea (see S/2011/433) and
confirmed by the representatives of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
this morning. We are concerned that the country
continues to support armed opposition groups
throughout the region, especially in Somalia.
Moreover, Eritrea continues on its path to self-
isolation, and has halted its cooperation with the
United Nations and other organizations, such as the
European Union.

The Security Council and its Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and
1907 (2009) discussed at length and in great depth the
necessary reactions and the scope and content of a
reinforced sanctions regime. Resolution 2023 (2011),
which has just been adopted, bears in mind the fate of
the people of Eritrea. It is calibrated and takes into
account the difficult humanitarian situation in the
region. It does not impose new economic sanctions or
increase the burden of the Eritrean people; rather, it
demands more transparency from Eritrea and calls on
3
those doing business with the country to make sure that
funds are not used for illegitimate purposes. Resolution
2023 (2011) sends a clear political message to Eritrea
that it must stop all activity that destabilizes the region,
and it must cooperate with its neighbours.

In return, we call on the neighbours of Eritrea to
cooperate in good faith with that country. In this
respects, all forums and platforms - first and
foremost, the regional organizations - should be used.
We encourage IGAD to swiftly decide on Eritrea's
request to reactivate its membership.

