Mr. Cho Hyun (Republic of Korea): At the outset, I would like to express our deep condolences following the tragic accident of the Ukrainian aeroplane crash. I commend your initiative, Mr. President, to convene today's open debate on this timely and important topic. I take this opportunity to thank Secretary-General Guterres and Mrs. Mary Robinson for their enlightening briefings. Seventy-five years ago, the founders of our Organization came together to sign the Charter of the United Nations, which enshrines the strong collective commitment to save future generations from the scourge of war, protect human rights and dignity, respect international law and promote social progress and better standards of living. The Republic of Korea is a country whose very existence is a living testament to the relevance of the United Nations Charter. It was the United Nations that helped Korea overcome the horrors of war. Had it not been for the help of the United Nations in post-war reconstruction, the Republic of Korea as it stands today would not exist. At the General Assembly in September last year, President Moon Jae-in declared the three principles of peace on the Korean peninsula: zero tolerance for war, a mutual security guarantee and co-prosperity (see A/74/ PV.3). Based on those guiding principles, he proposed transforming the demilitarized zone that cuts across the middle of the Korean peninsula into an international peace zone. As we continue our journey towards establishing permanent peace on the Korean peninsula, we hope to receive the vital support of the international community through concerted action and unity. Despite the significant achievements made over the past 75 years, the Charter still faces daunting challenges. Protracted armed conflicts, large-scale human rights abuses and complex transnational issues, such as terrorism and human trafficking, are just a few of the challenges we face today. Amid the slow progress of the international community on such issues, multilateralism and the United Nations are being viewed with increasing scepticism. In this difficult context, we need to once again renew our overarching commitment to international cooperation and the principles of the Charter. That is because all of the challenges that we face today are global ones that call for global solutions. How can we enhance our collective efforts to that end? First, we need the Security Council to play a central role in exemplifying the value of international cooperation and bringing the Charter to life. The Charter bestows upon the Security Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. The Council must do more to overcome divisions, embrace the prevention and peacebuilding agendas and make greater use of mediation and other tools set out in Chapter VI of the Charter. It is also vital to realize a consensual reform of the Council to ensure that it becomes more democratic, transparent, inclusive, effective and with equitable geographical distribution, as contained in Article 23 of the Charter. Secondly, we need to strengthen coordination within the United Nations system to address international peace and security issues. The United Nations is the only organization with both the legitimacy and the capacity to bring the knowledge and resources of the international community together to tackle global challenges. In order to enhance the effectiveness of the Organization, we must break down silos between the main organs, continue to pursue reform under the leadership of the Secretary-General and foster mutually reinforcing and coordinated efforts among the main organs. Carrying a sense of responsibility commensurate with the progress it has made, Korea is ready to do its part. We strongly support the Action for Peacekeeping initiative led by the Secretary-General. The initiative enjoys broad support because its key goal is to bring together all partners and stakeholders in supporting United Nations peacekeeping operations and we believe that it will contribute to a more effective implementation of the Charter. In support of that goal, we look forward to hosting the next Peacekeeping Ministerial in Korea next year. In Article 55 of the Charter, the United Nations resolves to promote higher standards of living and conditions of economic and social progress and development. Today, one of the biggest challenges to realizing that goal is our deepening climate crisis. To strengthen global solidarity for implementation of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the Sustainable Development Goals, Korea will host the second round of the Partnering for Green Growth and the Global Goals 2030 summit later this year. As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter of the United Nations, we greatly look forward to its reinforcement and full implementation. The Republic of Korea reaffirms its strong commitment to playing its part in realizing the goals of peace, human rights and sustainable development, as envisioned by the founders of this Organization.
