Mr. Sealy (Trinidad and Tobago): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the States members of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) that are Members
of the United Nations.

Our delegations welcome the report of the
Security Council mission on its visit to Haiti, which it
undertook in conjunction with that of the Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on Haiti of the Economic and Social
Council. The conjoint mission was the first time either
of those two principal organs of the United Nations had
sent political missions to Latin America and the
Caribbean and clearly demonstrates, given the high
level of representation in both missions, the profound
interest in and concern which the international
community has with respect to the grave political,
economic, social and security crisis with which the
people of Haiti are currently confronted. Nowhere is
the intrinsic link between security and development
more clearly evident than in the current Haitian
situation.

The mission's report describes in graphic detail
the challenges confronting Haitian society in many
spheres and at varying levels. Insecurity or the lack of
personal safety continues to be a predominant feature
of the Haitian landscape, caused in no small part by the
actions of illegally armed groups. One can only express
the hope that, through the firm resolve of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
together with the Haitian National Police, not only will
there be an increased sense of security for Haitians as
they go about their daily business, but that there will be
such a degree of stability and security as to enable the
political/electoral process, which has just begun with
the registration of voters, to lead to the holding of free,
fair, transparent and inclusive elections, the results of
which would lead to a democratically elected
Government that can command widespread and
universal recognition and support.

CARICOM. delegations would therefore support
the recommendations of the Security Council mission
which seek to ensure that the electoral timetable is
adhered to, that the required funding is provided to the
Provisional Electoral Council and that MINUSTAH's
military troop and civilian police strength is reinforced,
as appropriate, so as to guarantee the peaceful conduct
of these crucial elections, scheduled for October and
November. CARICOM. delegations note that the
electoral timetable envisages the inauguration of a
newly elected Government in Haiti on 7 February
2006, and they would be prepared to support the
continued presence of MINUSTAH in Haiti after the
holding of the elections and for such time as would
provide that new Government with the necessary
security and stability.

The report of the Security Council mission to
Haiti (S/2005/302) addresses a number of other
pressing issues, including the need for the observance
of human rights. CARICOM. supports the view that
respect for human rights contributes to reinforcing
stability and security and reiterates that the interim
administration has a special responsibility in adhering
to human rights, in particular respect for fundamental
political and civil rights and due process. These should
be addressed as a matter of urgency in order to restore
the confidence of all Haitians in the law, the police and
the judiciary.

In that connection, CARICOM. wishes to draw to
the attention of the Council the situation of Mr. Yvon
Neptune, former constitutional Prime Minister of Haiti,
who, after voluntarily turning himself in to the Interim
Government in June 2004, has yet to be brought to
trial. That is in violation of procedures under the
Haitian Constitution. CARICOM. heads of State or
Government, meeting in February of this year, stated
that the indefinite detention of Lavalas leaders and
activists - of which the detention of Mr. Neptune is
the most glaring example - can be construed only as
arbitrary detention on the basis of political affiliation.
These persons must either be afforded their right of
judicial process or be released forthwith. We are
particularly concerned that the prolonged detention of
Mr. Neptune has led to the deterioration of his health,
with potentially tragic consequences.

CARICOM. continues to stress the importance of
inclusiveness in the political process in order to
promote national unity and an atmosphere conducive to
free and fair elections.

The Security Council mission's report also
addresses to some extent the dire socio-economic
conditions facing Haiti's population, and note has been
taken of the observation that Haiti is unlikely to
achieve any of the Millennium Development Goals
before the year 2015. CARICOM. delegations consider
that the international donor community must live up to
its obligations and responsibilities to Haiti, a least
developed country, and, in order to address the most
central of all the Millennium Development Goals -
halving by 2015 the proportion of the population living
in extreme poverty - must provide it over the short,
medium and long term with meaningful and substantial
international cooperation assistance such as would
enable the people of Haiti to improve their quality of
life and would bequeath to future generations a country
that is capable of supporting itself economically and of
providing for its own domestic law and order, and that
guarantees to its people good governance in both the
economic and the political spheres. In the immediate
future, however, priority attention should be devoted to
helping Haiti build the necessary absorptive capacity to
utilize most effectively the assistance that is being
provided by the donor community.

In conclusion, CARICOM. delegations wish to
assure the members of the Security Council that
CARICOM. Governments remain committed over the
long term to securing the requisite political, social and
economic progress for Haiti. In that regard, we would
urge the international donor community and the United
Nations system through its funds, programmes and
agencies to collectively provide all the necessary
support and assistance to Haiti, thus enabling it to rise
above and overcome the tremendous challenges it is
currently facing.

