Ms. Sapag Mufioz de la Pena (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I thank Ambassador Roman Oyarzun
Marchesi and his team for presenting the quarterly report
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) and for their effective conduct
of its work.

Chile welcomes the start of the implementation of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on 18 October,
known as "adoption day". On 15 October, Iran complied
with the agreed measures with the International Atomic
Energy Agency, as reported by that body. We hope
that the measures set forth in resolution 2231 (2015)
can be verified promptly by the International Atomic
Energy Agency on what has come to be known as
"implementation day".

We note with concern the information provided
by the Panel of Experts on the possible violation of
paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010). It is important
that we act responsibly and in accordance with the
resolutions of the Council, while taking into account
the political context. By the same token, it is important
to underscore the responsibilities incumbent upon all
Members of the Organization in complying with the
sanctions regime.

The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons is a cornerstone of the nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation regime. The implementation of
its three pillars - disarmament, non-proliferation and
the right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy - must
be balanced. Chile recognizes the right of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to develop nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes and values the efforts on the part of Iran
and the international community to implement the
commitments they have undertaken.

In this discussion, we must not forget the need
to move forward as well on the nuclear disarmament
obligations set out in article VI of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty. The establishment of internationally recognized
and verifiable nuclear-weapon-free zones is a political
and legal commitment. We therefore reiterate the
importance of establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in the Middle East and that the international community
must contribute to its establishment.

