Mr. Hughes (New Zealand): May I express my
delegation's pleasure at seeing Mr. Ramos-Horta here
in the Council today, and also convey our appreciation
to Mr. Vieira de Mello for his excellent briefing earlier
today.

I am sure we are all greatly encouraged by the
progress made in the territory over the past six months.
We congratulate the East Timorese people and the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) on their achievements in the face of
enormous odds.

Today, we stand on the verge of the next critical
phase in East Timor's evolution: the elections to the
Constituent Assembly in a month's time. We
understand the apprehensions and even disquiet which
may surround this event, but we are heartened by the
signing earlier this month of the pact of national unity,
whereby the political parties committed themselves to
respecting each other and the election outcome and to
defending multi-party democracy. We look forward to
the East Timorese people expressing their will freely
and peacefully in order to cement the next step towards
regaining their independence for the first time in some
500 years.

New Zealand remains very concerned, however,
by the activities of militia groups and the threat they
continue to pose to the goal of a stable and secure East
Timor. It is depressing to read in the Secretary-
General's report that some hard-line militia elements
have been encouraged to plan the resumption of
offensive operations by the derisory sentences handed
out to the killers of three staff members of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees at
Atambua and by the insignificant jail term handed out
to a well known militia leader.

It is also of great concern to note from the report
that some groups may be deliberately lying low until
independence in the belief that the international
military presence will then be removed. Clearly, it is
essential that we should not, however inadvertently,
send any signals that might encourage them in this
belief. In these circumstances, it goes without saying
that any decisions on adjustments to the United Nations
presence - post-elections or post-independence -
must be based on conditions on the ground, including a
thorough security and threat assessment. They must
also take into account the views of troop-contributing
countries, as was recognized in the Council's resolution
1338 (2001) of January this year.

The Government of Indonesia is to be
congratulated on having carried out a refugee
registration exercise last month. It was an important
first step. New Zealand, along with others, stands ready
to assist Indonesia in the next steps of repatriation and
resettlement, but only in circumstances in which the
security of international workers can be guaranteed. We
urge the new Indonesian Government to move quickly
to fulfil Indonesia's obligations to this Council to
disband and disarm the militia groups in West Timor so
that this can take place.

While dealing with these issues, we would also
like to take the opportunity to express our appreciation
for recent efforts by the Indonesian Government to
bring the killers of Private Manning to justice. We
welcomed the visit to the crime scene in East Timor,
and subsequently to New Zealand, of an Indonesian
police investigation team. We look forward to
cooperation between UNTAET and Indonesia, as the
parties with jurisdiction, producing an effective trial
and sentences commensurate with the seriousness of
the crime.

We remain aware, however, that there are other
cases, such as that of Private Devi Ram J aishi of Nepal,
that have yet to see progress. The Secretary-General
also notes in his report that the Atambua verdicts are
yet to be appealed and that the decree establishing an
ad hoc tribunal for human rights violations in East
Timor is still to be amended. We very much hope that
the new Indonesian Government will give prompt
attention to meeting international expectations in these
matters.

Both the Secretary-General in his report and the
Special Representative in his briefing earlier today
have addressed the question of a United Nations
successor mission to UNTAET after independence. We
fully share the view that it is wrong to equate East
Timor's attainment of political independence with the
establishment of effective administration. We welcome
the fact that significant progress has been made in
planning for an integrated mission mandated by the
Security Council and funded from assessed
contributions to succeed UNTAET, and we look
forward to the Secretary-General's further report
towards the end of October. As a troop contributor, we
have already indicated to the Secretary-General our
willingness to maintain a significant military presence
with the United Nations in East Timor as far ahead as
November next year.

New Zealand strongly believes that the United
Nations must equip East Timor to take full
responsibility for its own affairs. We must also provide
the people of East Timor with a clear understanding of
the implications of right-sizing the United Nations
presence over time. Above all, however, my
Government is convinced that the Security Council
must stay focused on and fully committed to East
Timor. This operation is unique and in turn offers the
United Nations the opportunity of an all-too-rare
success. Comparisons are occasionally drawn with the
operation in Kosovo and, certainly in terms of their
complexity, the two share some aspects in common.
But East Timor is very much the child of the United
Nations, from the 1999 popular consultation onwards,
in a way that other operations are unlikely ever to be.
East Timor can and indeed will succeed as an
independent State, but for some time to come a
continuing United Nations presence will be critical to
ensuring a return on the investment we have
collectively made so far in terms of lives and financial
and other resources.

