Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), Mr. Abou
Moussa, for his comprehensive briefing. I will first
discuss the efforts to combat the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA) before commenting on the Central African
Republic and UNOCA's activity.

For 25 years now the LRA has been striking at the
heart of Africa. According to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, its
systematic violations of international law, human rights
and international humanitarian law have resulted in
more than 100,000 deaths, between 60,000 and 100,000
children abducted and 2.5 million people displaced.
Two hundred and twelve attacks were reported last year
alone, resulting in at least 45 deaths and 220 abductions,
25 per cent of which involved children. More than
60 attacks and 30 deaths were reported during the first
quarter of 2013, and March saw a disturbing jump in
attacks, particularly in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. While the LRA's forces have definitely lessened
over the years, they continue to pose a serious threat to
the region and its civilian population. We must therefore
remain on our guard. In that regard, we commend
today's draft presidential statement, which signals the
Security Council's determination to fight the scourge
that is the LRA.

In order to eliminate this threat, the multidimensional
regional strategy that the United Nations adopted last
year must be vigorously implemented. In that context,
we welcome the Secretary-General's announcement,
on 19 April, of the gradual implementation plan for
the regional strategy. We hope that the plan's more
systematic approach, coordinated by UNOCA, as well
as the implementation of the regional strategy's various
priority projects, will help strengthen the fight against
the LRA. The implementation plan's communication
strategy, as well as meetings such as this one, will help
ensure that combating the LRA remains a priority on
the international community's agenda.

We welcome the progress made in implementing
the African Union's Regional Cooperation Initiative to
combat the LRA, the first of the five steps that make
up the regional strategy of the United Nations. We
especially welcome the finalization of the strategic
documents needed to activate the African Union
Regional Task Force against the Lord's Resistance
Army. We encourage States affected by the LRA to
provide the contingents required in order to reach
the authorized strength of 5,000 troops. For its part,
Luxembourg undertakes to make a voluntary financial
contribution to support the strengthening of the
Regional Task Force. It is Vital that the United Nations
and the African Union continue to work closely in this
area. The joint awareness and mobilization mission
conducted from 27 March to 4 April in South Sudan,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the Special Envoy of the African Union, Mr. Francisco
Madeira, is a good example of the synergy that can
result in this way.

The efforts of the United Nations and the African
Union are not enough. The primary responsibility for
protecting their civilian populations from the threat of
the LRA rests with the authorities of the countries that
are directly affected by its violent actions. Generally
speaking, we encourage all States to cooperate in
executing the arrest warrants issued by the International
Criminal Court almost eight years ago for Joseph Kony,
Okot Odhiambo and Dominic Ongwen. Those leaders
of the LRA, accused of war crimes and crimes against
humanity, including murder, rape and child recruitment,
must be brought to justice.

Sadly, it cannot be repeated too often that women
and children are the LRA's main victims. In that
context, we would like to recall the conclusions reached
on 19 April by the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict on the situation of child victims of the
LRA. I will highlight three of their recommendations:
first, the need for the United Nations to keep sufficient
means for protecting children at the heart of its
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
in the region - and, if such means are lacking, to
increase them; secondly, advising the African Union
to integrate child protection activities into the work of
the Regional Task Force; and, finally, recommending
that the World Bank and donors mobilize the resources
necessary for liberating, repatriating and reintegrating
children formerly associated with the LRA.

The progress that has been made in recent years
in the fight against the LRA risks being nullified if
security and stability are not restored in the Central
African Republic. Operations against the LRA there
must be resumed without delay if the country is not to
become a sanctuary for this armed group. In general, we
share the Secretary-General's extreme concern about
the situation in the Central African Republic and its
effect on peace and security in the subregion. The total
absence of public order, the disastrous humanitarian
situation, the continued looting and serious violations
of human rights demand a determined response on the
part of the international community and the Security
Council in particular in support of the African Union
and the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS). All these elements - the ongoing tensions
in the central African region, the constant threat of the
LRA, the impact of transnational organized crime in
every form, including ivory poaching and trafficking,
which most likely form a significant source of financing
for armed groups, including the LRA - make the work
of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa all the more essential. Luxembourg welcomes
UNOCA's efforts to facilitate and encourage closer
regional cooperation in central Africa. Its work,
particularly in collaboration with ECCAS, has helped
improve cooperation in the areas of mediation and good
offices.

In conclusion, I would like to commend the work
done by UNOCA and the United Nations Office for
West Africa in combating piracy off the coasts of States
on the Gulf of Guinea, which is an increasing threat
to the economies of the States concerned as well as to
trade and international relations in the region. Thanks
to the good groundwork facilitated by the United
Nations, we hope the regional summit of Heads of
State and Government on piracy and armed robbery in
the Gulf of Guinea to be held in Cameroon on 24 and
25 June will produce concrete results.

