Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I too would like to thank
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in Afghanistan,
including the recently concluded parliamentary
elections. I should also like to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Zaimal Rassoul to the Council's meeting today. I
will limit my intervention to issues of political
developments, elections, security, economic
development and the regional dimension.

We congratulate the Government and the people
of Afghanistan on the successful holding of the
parliamentary elections on 18 September 2010. With

many candidates competing for many parliamentary
seats, the challenges of conducting the parliamentary
elections in the face of threats of violence from diehard
insurgents were quite daunting. Nigeria therefore
salutes the courage and resilience of the Afghan people
for defying the odds and exercising their rights, noting
that they demonstrated their determination to
consolidate the country's fledgling democracy with a
large turnout during the voting in spite of threats and
intimidation. The increased participation of women,
especially those seeking elected office, is another
demonstration of the continued commitment to
democracy.

We commend the Independent Electoral
Commission for managing and facilitating the electoral
process. We also commend UNAMA for providing the
training and the technical and logistical support needed
for the election.

As we await the full and final outcome of the
voting, the challenge facing Afghanistan's political
leaders is to ensure that the efforts and sacrifices of the
people are not wasted. The results should therefore
reflect the will of the people. In this regard, we urge
that all the complaints filed with the Electoral
Complaints Commission be thoroughly investigated.
The partial recount of votes from seven of the
country's 34 provinces, ordered only yesterday, should
also be painstakingly conducted. We urge all aggrieved
parties to act with caution and seek recourse to legal
channels for redress. The Electoral Complaints
Commission is encouraged to apply lessons learned
from previous elections and to resolve all irregularities
and complaints in a timely manner and in accordance
with the law.

Resolving the political impasse over the
remaining nominations to the Cabinet, as agreed at the
Peace J irga, is equally important to the consolidation of
Afghanistan's democratic process. We urge both the
legislative and the executive branches to act
expeditiously to resolve the impasse.

To support reconciliation and a political settlement,
there should be sustained negotiations and dialogue
between the parties. We therefore hope that the
Government's appointment, on Tuesday, 28 September,
of the members of the High Peace Council - comprising
warlords, village elders and women - will give impetus
to the reconciliation process in the country.

Nigeria shares the Secretary-General's concern
about the deteriorating security situation in
Afghanistan. The more than 300 cases of attacks in the
period leading up to and during the elections confirmed
the precarious state of security in the country. Polling
centres were blown up in Kunar, Khost and Kandahar,
and rocket attacks were launched against polling
centres in populated areas of Nangarhar and Kunar,
killing several civilians. Only yesterday, Afghanistan's
Interior Ministry confirmed a suicide attack that killed
Mr. Mohammad Kazim Allahyar, Deputy Governor of
Ghazni province, and five others in a direct attack on
his vehicle. These security challenges call for the
continuous strengthening of the capacity and state of
readiness of the Government as it prepares to assume
full law enforcement responsibilities in the country by
2014.

Nigeria reiterates its support for the
Government's action plan, and urges the international
community to align its resources and activities in
support of the programme and priorities contained in
the plan. The development of infrastructure should be
accorded priority, as it will stimulate employment and
help the Afghan Government to create a viable and
self-sustaining economy that is less dependent on
foreign aid. The international community has the
responsibility to support the Government's follow-
through on its renewed commitment to the dual track
of security and effective accountability to the people,
made at the Kabul Conference. The Government
should take concrete steps to ensure good governance,
tackle corruption, improve accountability, adhere to the
rule of law, and reform the justice system.

The increasing cooperation between Afghanistan
and its neighbours on cross-border crime, illicit drug
trafficking, arms smuggling and human trafficking
demonstrates the importance of the regional dimension
in confronting the challenges facing the country. In this
connection, we commend the setting-up of the high-
level Core Group to create the framework for
cooperation between the Economic Cooperation
Organization, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, the South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation and the Islamic Development Bank. We
welcome UNAMA's participation in these efforts.
In conclusion, Nigeria expresses its appreciation
to the staff and personnel of UNAMA for their
dedication, and to Special Representative De Mistura
for his commitment to the peace efforts in Afghanistan.

