The Nordic countries - Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and Denmark - welcome the most recent report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security (S/2020/946), as well as its recommendations. We commend the United Nations on efforts to enhance accountability, and commit to doing our part. Twenty years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we recommit to stepping up our efforts to ensure the full implementation of all resolutions and all pillars of the women and peace and security agenda. In that regard, we welcome the Compact on Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action, as part of the Generation Equality Forum, the Women's Peace and Humanitarian Fund's Rapid Response Window for the deployment of women to peace processes and the Commitment 2025 initiative. Inclusive peace processes are more likely to produce sustainable results responsive to a diverse set of needs. Yet the numbers in the Secretary-General report speak for themselves. While progress has been achieved in many areas, women remain underrepresented at all stages of mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and in political processes in general. Much remains to be done. I would like to mention a few concrete examples. First, women need to be part of peace talk delegations. The representation of women in dialogue and mediation efforts are key to ensuring a sustainable outcome. Secondly, peace negotiations should be informed by a gender perspective in order to ensure that the needs of the whole population are considered. Thirdly, reporting from conflict situations should include gender analysis and sex-disaggregated data. Fourthly, consultations with women's organizations should be conducted regularly. We need to link local initiatives to formal peace talks. Security Council briefings from women civil society representatives help create informed decisions. Fifthly, security assessments need to address the security of women, including conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence. Sixthly, security sector reform, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes should integrate a gender perspective to achieve inclusive political transitions. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has exacerbated conflicts and inequalities worldwide. We should not let it result in a setback for hard-won progress on women's and girls' rights. We must work to ensure that our societies emerge more resilient, equal and inclusive. The Nordic countries remain particularly concerned about the Secretary-General report's clear demonstration of a global rise in sexual and gender-based violence and the increased risk of sexual exploitation and abuse as a direct consequence of the COVID-19 crisis. The pandemic constitutes a great challenge to women's sexual and reproductive health and rights. Ensuring the fundamental rights of women and girls is key to promoting their full, equal and meaningful participation and representation. Moreover, there is a pressing urgency for creating a safe environment for women peacebuilders and human rights defenders. That is our duty as Member States. The Nordic countries were among the first to launch a national action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). National action plans remain a key tool, but if we are to ensure accountability, they must be followed up with concrete and tangible efforts to support women and girls living in conflict-affected areas. Political willand sufficient resources are needed to speed up the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The Nordic countries strongly urge all States Members of the United Nations to put women at the front and centre of their peace and security efforts in conflict prevention and humanitarian responses - from the very start of a peace dialogue to the implementation of a peace accord. We call on the United Nations to ensure gender parity on its mediation teams, and to take concrete steps towards women's full, equal and meaningful participation in all peace processes and political transitions in which it has a role, as well as in the peace processes it leads or co-leads. It is not only the right thing to do, it will also promote sustainable and lasting peace.
