Mr. Ham Sang Wook (Republic of Korea): I would
first like to congratulate Poland on having assumed the
presidency of the Security Council, and I assure you,
Mr. President, that Poland can count on the full support
and cooperation of my delegation. I also join previous
speakers in commending your initiative to convene
today's important meeting, and I thank the briefers for
their inspiring briefings.

Over the past 20-some years, we have endeavoured
to advance the protection of children in armed conflict
and have achieved some progress to date. However, we
cannot deny that there remains a significant gap between
our goals and the harsh realities that we continue to
face. It is simply appalling that, in 2018 alone, more
than 24,000 verified violations were committed against
children globally and that the number of casualties as
a result of the killing and maiming of children reached
record-high levels.

Against this disturbing backdrop, and while
aligning myself with the statement made by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, I would like
to highlight three points of particular importance in
addressing this challenge.

First, I would like to emphasize the strategic
significance of reintegrating children affected by
armed conflict. The Republic of Korea, as a member of
the Steering Committee of the Global Coalition for the
Reintegration of Former Child Soldiers, recently hosted
three consultations and side events with the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF. We place
a high priority on this issue because we believe that the
better reintegration of former child soldiers will help to
fundamentally break the vicious cycle of violence.

Child reintegration programmes must take
a community-based approach in order to avoid
stigmatization. We must convince communities of the
reasons for which children need to be both accepted and
supported by their communities, and the best way to do
so is to ensure that the communities see and enjoy the
concrete benefits that reintegration programmes bring.
Furthermore, child reintegration - with its inherent
community-based nature, long time frames and broad
range of programmes, which include education,
vocational training, health services and psychosocial
support, inter alia - is the perfect example of where
greater coherence and coordination are called for among
the peace and security, development and humanitarian
pillars of the United Nations.

Secondly, we must do more to address sexual
violence against children. Resolution 1882 (2009)
expressed deep concern about the appalling levels of
sexual violence committed against children in armed
conflicts. Ten years have now passed since the adoption
of that resolution, and it is deeply alarming that the
Secretary-General's report (S/2019/509) still documents
more than 900 verified cases of sexual violence against
children. A survivor-centred approach is of the utmost
importance, while timely and comprehensive support
to ensure non-discriminatory and multisectoral
assistance to all survivors of sexual violence, including
the clinical management of rape and the provision of
medical, psychosocial and legal services, is essential.
These were some of the points raised last month
in Seoul as the Republic of Korea hosted the first
International Conference on Action with Women and
Peace. The Conference focused on building a strong
global partnership to combat sexual violence in conflict
and benefited from the active participation of leaders
from Governments, international organizations and
civil society.

Thirdly, we must ensure accountability for all
violations committed against children. Strengthening
accountability and abolishing impunity is the key to
ending gross violations and preventing recurrence.
Those who have committed grave violations against
children must be held accountable through both
national and international justice systems, including
the International Criminal Court. At the same time,
we must support efforts aimed at strengthening State
institutions, centring on truth, reconciliation andjustice
with the use of other tools, including, among others,
monitoring and reporting mechanisms established by
the Security Council, the listing of violators in the
Secretary-General's reports and targeted sanctions to
seek accountability.

The Republic of Korea will continue to work
closely with the international community in our
collective efforts to protect children from the scourge
of armed conflict.

