Mr. Kolby (Norway): First, I would like to thank
Mr. Guehenno for his briefing, and the staff of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) for their dedicated work to
implement resolution 1244 (1999). Norway supports
Special Representative Steiner's continued efforts to
consolidate the rule of law in Kosovo. The latest arrest
of six former members of the Kosovo Liberation Army
(KLA) demonstrates that no one is above the law. We
call on Kosovo leaders to cooperate with UNMIK in
promoting the rule of law and human rights in Kosovo,
based on a zero-tolerance policy.

Norway welcomes recent statements and gestures
promoting dialogue, inter-ethnic reconciliation and
return of displaced persons, including by Prime
Minister Rexhepi. We encourage other Kosovo
Albanian leaders to follow his example and to
transform words and ideas into concrete action so that
inter-ethnic reconciliation in Kosovo can be realized in
practice.

We reiterate our support for the benchmark
approach of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. One key benchmark is the existence
of effective, representative and functioning provisional
institutions of self-government. This is one of the main
challenges in the coming months. Serb participation is
a positive step. The institutions must have a multi-
ethnic and politically neutral civil service. Only then
can they function impartially and for the benefit of all
in Kosovo.

Norway welcomes Mr. Steiner's concept paper on
principles for sustainable return of internally displaced
persons and refugees, which is another key benchmark.
Resolution 1244 (1999) confirms the right of all
internally displaced persons and refugees to return to

their homes in Kosovo. It is the responsibility of the
provisional institutions of self-government and
UNMIK to ensure that right.
Our credibility is at stake here. We need to see
results in the near future if this benchmark is to be
reached at all. Furthermore, it is urgent that conditions
be created that will convince minorities to remain in
Kosovo. Unless the trend of minorities leaving Kosovo
is reversed, it will be impossible to achieve the
sustainable return of any significant number.

Needless to say, the security environment must be
improved. But the issue of property rights too should
be addressed with increased urgency. Confusion and
unclearness regarding property ownership are core
obstacles to return. They also hamper economic
investment. Norway supports the efforts of the Housing
and Property Directorate in that regard. We welcome
the increased emphasis placed on the return of
internally displaced persons by Special Representative
Steiner, but we would like to encourage more attention
and resources for the Directorate's work in order to
increase efficiency and the processing of cases. That
would improve living conditions for thousands of
internally displaced persons currently facing difficult
conditions, unable to return to their homes.

We reiterate our support for the Special
Representative's annulment of the Kosovo Assembly's
attempts to deal with issues beyond its authority.
Norway urges the Kosovo Assembly to dedicate itself
to fulfilling the Special Representative's benchmarks
and to focus its attention on addressing tasks within its
mandate, on which progress is urgently needed.

Cooperation between Pristina, representented by
UNMIK and the provisional institutions of self-
government, and Belgrade, is vital for the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). Deputy
Prime Minister Covie has played a constructive role in
this respect. We encourage Covie and Special
Representative Steiner to work together to support
moderate elected Serb representatives in their
endeavours to work constructively within the structures
of provisional institutions of self-government.

