Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at the outset to thank Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his briefing. I welcome Mr. Mikhail Margelov,
Special Representative of the President of the Russian
Federation. We are most grateful to him for his
statement. My thanks go also to the representative of
the Sudan for his presence here today: we look forward
to his statement.

We are following closely the deployment of
contingents from troop-contributors to the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). We note that a large number of troops has
been deployed. We pay tribute to the efforts of troop-
contributing countries and the manner in which they
have worked with the Government of the Sudan.

I note also the tripartite mechanism's great
importance for the restoration of peace. It has proven
effective in removing obstacles to peace, as indicated
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/352). I
commend the tripartite mechanism for its positive
achievements, including on the situation regarding
visas for UNAMID staff.

There has been a decline in violence in Darfur, and
we hope that this trend will continue, enabling displaced
persons to return. Despite attacks on members of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, its deployment will continue. But we note that
what is needed for peacekeeping is a political operation
that enjoys the support of all parties - which is
essential for deployment. Benchmarks for the
implementation of the Mission's mandate will be
unrealistic and irrelevant until the Mission is deployed
at full strength and fully equipped, and until there has
been tangible progress on the political front, including a
ceasefire agreement and agreed modalities for ending
the fighting. The highest priority is to forge a
strengthened political process and to put pressure on the
rebels to unconditionally join the dialogue and the
negotiations.

Libya has a geographical, humanitarian and
cultural relationship with the Sudan - and in
particular with Darfur. We note the commitment
undertaken by President Muammar Al-Qadhafi and by
Libya to normalization. That is why we are working in
cooperation with Qatar, the Joint African Union-United
Nations Chief Mediator to ensure that negotiations
resume on all aspects of the crisis. The African Union
High-Level Panel on Darfur recently visited Tripoli
and met with the leaders of armed forces to discuss
modalities for the resumption of dialogue in the Sudan.

Libya understands the effect of relations between
Chad and the Sudan on the humanitarian situation in
the Sudan and in Darfur. Libya is therefore pursuing its
efforts to ease tension and ensure that dialogue can
resume with a view to the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the Dakar peace
process, leading to normalization of relations between
those two countries. On the humanitarian situation, we
welcome what the Government of the Sudan has done
to ensure that humanitarian aid reaches those that need
it, to encourage and cooperate with humanitarian
organizations and to grant visas to their staff.

With regard to the International Criminal Court,
we urge the Security Council to consider the concerns
that have been voiced by the regional organizations, in
particular the African Union, which is the principal
partner of the Government in Darfur, with a view to
continuing peace efforts, especially after the arrest
warrant issued by the Court against President
Al-Bashir. We hope that the Security Council will take
steps to remove the obstacles to the peace efforts in
order to fully and permanently resolve the issue of
Darfur.

In that regard, at its latest summit, in Sirte, the
African Union adopted a resolution, in which it
expressed its deep concern that the Security Council
had not agreed to apply article 16 of the Rome Statute.
Here, we underscore the need to take into consideration
the request by the African Union, which as the primary
regional organization knows better than any other the
best approach to the priorities for the settlement of the
Darfur issue, especially since the African Union's
commitment to settling the issue of impunity is one of
its basic tenets. The High-Level Panel on Darfur,
chaired by President Mbeki, has been set up to
investigate the human rights violations. The Panel has
visited the region three times, and we look forward to
its forthcoming report.

In May, the Group of Experts on Sudan sanctions
reported that the decision of the International Criminal
Court had encouraged certain groups and had
interrupted the dialogue or made it more difficult.

Mr. Rodolphe Adada, head of the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, in his
statement to the Security Council on 27 April, said:
"The ICC issue has dominated and polarized
Sudanese political life. It has weakened the
position of those in the Sudan who have been
working for compromise and consensus".
(S/PV.61]2, p. 2)

I do not think that that statement had a positive
effect. Let me say that the fact that certain Security
Council members did not take into account the wish of
the African Union and of the African Member States
that had signed the Rome Statute did not serve justice
but, on the contrary, had the potential to undermine the
efforts of the International Criminal Court.

There is no doubt that, after years of crisis in
Darfur, we are increasingly convinced that that dispute
cannot be settled without a comprehensive political
settlement that enjoys the support of the international
community and, above all, the Security Council, as
well as the international and regional actors. That is a
realistic precondition for restoring peace and security,
putting an end to the deprivation and the impunity and
achieving national reconciliation.

The people of Darfur are increasingly aware that
a just and lasting peace and national reconciliation and
development cannot be achieved by slogans, poverty or
an arrest warrant against the President of the Sudan,
but rather by support for peace efforts, implementation
of development projects and the strengthening of State
institutions so as to extend their administration
throughout the territory. We hope that the Security
Council will contribute to that end.

