Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me also start by
congratulating Peru on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and for convening today's open debate
on this all-important topic. I also thank the briefers for
their insightful presentations this morning.

The nexus between terrorism and transnational
organized crime is complex and varies across different
contexts. We know that criminal and terrorist outfits
have cooperated to facilitate one another's activities
despite their divergent objectives.

In our view, there are four major areas of confluence
between organized crime and terrorism. First, there is
the increasing cooperation between them, especially
for the acquisition of arms, ammunition and explosive
materials. Secondly, terrorist outfits increasingly rely
on organized crime as a financing tool. Thirdly, terrorist
groups recruit criminals, in particular marginalized
youth, to advance their goals. And. fourthly, organized

crime flourishes in areas outside Government control
and under the patronage of terrorist outfits.
Pakistan is one ofthe principal victims ofterrorism,
and, as such, its resolve to eliminating this scourge is
clear and unwavering. Proceeds from the narco-trade,
kidnapping for ransom, extortion, the smuggling of
natural resources and human trafficking are some of
the key sources of financing for terrorist organizations
in my region. Located next to the epicentre of the
world's drug problem, Pakistan also remains one of the
most affected transit States for illicit drug trafficking.
With limited resources, our law-enforcement agencies
continue to make record drug seizures every year - a
tangible manifestation of our consistent and dedicated
efforts to protect not only our own country but also the
rest of the world from this scourge.

We share the goal of the international community
to address the global drug problem through appropriate
national, bilateral, regional and international measures.
At the regional and global levels, Pakistan has
remained constructively engaged with various counter-
narcotics-related forums and initiatives. Pakistan is
an active participant in the regional programme for
Afghanistan and neighbouring countries of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). We
are cooperating with Iran and Afghanistan under the
UNODC-sponsored triangular initiative. Under the
quartet initiative, we are collaborating with Russia,
Turkmenistan and Afghanistan to combat drug
trafficking. We have strengthened cooperation with the
Central Asian Regional Information and Coordination
Centre, which is a useful forum for the coordination of
regional anti-drug efforts at the operational level.

My country believes that only through collective
regional and international efforts can we choke off the
various sources that support terrorist outfits through
organized crime. We believe that an effective strategy
to achieve those goals must take into account the
following five points.

First, in order to ensure that our responses
are evidence-based, the international community
should allocate proper resources to better understand
the correlation between terrorism financing and
transnational organized crime.

Secondly, there are instances, including in
our region, where there is a nexus linking drug
production, instability and the lack of alternative
economic opportunities. It is important to re-establish
Government control over territories used for drug
production and to promote development to provide
alternative livelihoods.

Thirdly, in dealing with the world drug problem,
it is important to focus on reducing both the supply
of and the demand for narcotic drugs through a well-
integrated, comprehensive and balanced approach.

Fourthly, effective border controls are a prerequisite
for clamping down on transnational organized crime
and terrorism.

Lastly, strategies need to be tailored to the specific
challenges presented by specific regional dynamics
and conditions. It is vital to build the capacities and
capabilities of States facing those challenges. That is
where the United Nations can play an effective role.

Pakistan will continue to play its role to sever the
vicious link between terrorism and organized crime
in our region. That is critical for our own people as
well as for our neighbourhood and, indeed, the rest of
the world.

