Mr. Mladenovic' (Yugoslavia): I would also like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his
comprehensive briefing.

Since the last consideration in the Security
Council, last month, of the situation in Kosovo and
Metohija, the autonomous province of the Yugoslav
constituent Republic of Serbia - the priority issues
have become the elections in the Province, the return of
displaced persons and the tracing of abducted and
missing persons.

The common goal of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and international actors involved in the
quest for a solution to the crisis in Kosovo and
Metohija should be a consistent implementation of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the
creation of conditions for building a multi-ethnic and
democratic Kosovo and Metohija, including self-
government and substantial autonomy with full respect
for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

Surely one of the essential steps towards the
realization of this goal is the return of displaced
persons. A fully secure environment must be created
for the return of Serbs and other non-Albanians to their
homes, rather than to some places of temporary
residence. Of course, this will take time, but it could be
done step by step. Southern Serbia is eloquent proof
that displaced persons can return if proper conditions
are created. Such conditions must be created in Kosovo
and Metohija as well. Since the entry of the Yugoslav
forces into the entire ground safety zone on 31 May
this year, more than half of the 12,000 displaced
Albanians have returned to the area.

However, more than 250,000 persons displaced
from Kosovo and Metohija now live in other parts of
Serbia and throughout Yugoslavia. Twenty-five
thousand non-Albanians left the province in 2000
alone. Under the return plan of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 2000
persons are supposed to return this year. Considering
the existing circumstances in Kosovo and Metohija,
even this modest number appears unrealistic.
The other very important and painful issue is the
fate of abducted and missing persons. We must not turn
a deaf ear to the desperate pleas of families and
relatives. We must invest every effort to trace each and
every missing person. The Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia attaches utmost important to
resolving this issue. There is no doubt that this can be
done only with the involvement of the international
community and Albanian factors. So far, I regret to say,
the latter have shown no readiness to become actively
engaged. It is of course encouraging, though, that
understanding for this issue was shown at the meeting
of the Yugoslav delegation with the North Atlantic
council and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
Secretary-General in Brussels on 18 July 2001.

The question of the participation of Serbs in the
general elections in Kosovo and Metohija on 17
November 2001 is of widespread interest. For the
international community, it is a precondition for their
inclusion in addressing the future of Kosovo and
Metohija. My delegation presented the position of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on the elections in its
statement to the Security Council on 22 June 2001. Let
me reiterate that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is
ready to support the participation of Serbs in the
elections if necessary conditions are created.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has shown
readiness to cooperate with the international
community. It called on the Serbs to register and
defined the necessary conditions so that it could call on
them to take part in the elections. These include
security guarantees to all residents of Kosovo and
Metohij a; the creation of conditions for a safe return of
all displaced persons; tracing all abducted and missing
persons; and the preparation of the elections in
cooperation with the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republic of Serbia.
Meanwhile, appropriate arrangements have been made
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe mission and the International Organization for
Migration to begin voter registration in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, implementation and the
monitoring of the elections.

Let me also point out on this occasion the need
for institutionalizing cooperation between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). This
would not only facilitate numerous practical solutions,
but would also recommit the international community
to respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as provided for by
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is ready to
build relations with the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and
UNMIK, based on partnership and mutual respect.
However, by its latest guidelines for visits by Yugoslav
Government officials and political party representatives
to Kosovo and Metohija, UNMIK has, in our opinion,
taken a step in the wrong direction. The formalities
required contain very serious restrictions which imply
relations between sovereign States. They are clearly
inappropriate with regard to visits of individuals from
the rest of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
Kosovo and Metohija, which is an integral part of its
constituent Republic of Serbia. This brings about an
absurd situation in which the Yugoslav democratic
authorities now have to meet conditions that were not
required even of the regime of Slobodan Milosevic.
These guidelines should be reconsidered, and the best
way to do this would be, we believe, through reaching
a mutual agreement.

The removal of anachronistic vestiges of the past
would greatly facilitate the progress of democracy in
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. To that end, we
hope and believe that the arms embargo imposed by
Security Council resolution 1160 (1998) and the
ground safety zone and air safety zone established by
the military technical agreement of 9 June 1999 will be
lifted and abolished soon.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will invest
every effort to improve the situation in Kosovo and
Metohija, which is now far from what was intended to
be achieved by the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). To that end, it is necessary
that, in cooperation with international actors, the
Albanian community in Kosovo and Metohija also play
an active role and avoid steps that Violate or go beyond
the bounds of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).
Taken together, these efforts would be conducive to a
multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo and Metohija, the
stabilization of Yugoslavia and, by extension, the
stabilization of the Balkans as a whole.

