President Museveni: I would like to thank
President Abdullah Gul for convening this meeting of
the Security Council on ensuring the Security
Council's effective role in maintaining international
peace and security.

The United Nations was founded as an
organization that would act to prevent conflicts
between nations, avert future wars and strengthen
cooperation among its Members. In order to ensure
prompt and effective action by the United Nations, its
Members conferred on the Security Council the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The emphasis was on
quick and strong action. It is that emphasis that makes
the theme for this meeting pertinent.

In connection with Africa, however, I want to
make two points. First, where the United Nations has
acted alone, it has made mistakes, such as in Congo in
the 1960s and in Rwanda in the 1990s. Secondly, all
the major problems that have been solved in Africa
have been regionally led, with the United Nations and
other bodies from outside Africa playing a supportive
role.
5
The first point is clear enough. It does not need
elaboration. It is enough to point out the death of
Patrice Lumumba in United Nations hands and its
tragic consequences for Congo. Coming to the second
point, it should be clear to all that all the major African
problems that have been solved have been regionally
led: the independence of Mozambique, the
independence of Zimbabwe and even majority rule in
South Africa, the defeat of Idi Amin, the defeat of
Mobutu, the addressing of the Sudan problem, the
stopping of the genocide in Rwanda, the resolution of
the problem of Burundi, and the addressing of the
problem of Somalia, the problem of Liberia and the
problem of Sierra Leone. Where the United Nations
works with the regional organizations or internal forces

within each country, the results are better and durable.

There are still several intractable conflicts around
the world, as well as new threats such as transnational
organized crime, drug trafficking, terrorism and piracy
that have to be dealt with more resolutely. The Security
Council needs to work on new ways to tackle those
challenges through a more concerted and
comprehensive approach at the global, regional and
national levels. We should avoid situations where the
United Nations is unable to act or shows indifference
in dealing with any conflict situations or threats,
because that will undermine confidence in the United
Nations.

It is also essential that the Security Council
continuously evaluate its diagnosis of conflict
situations and reflect on whether the solutions
prescribed are correct. There are cases of countries
where United Nations peacekeeping operations lasted
many years and then wound up, but had to return to
address the same concerns. That implies that the
approaches used in such countries did not address their
core problems.

We welcome the ongoing efforts to enhance the
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping by
ensuring that the mandated tasks are appropriate to the
situation on the ground. However, more attention still
needs to be paid to supporting fragile and post-conflict
countries in building the capacity of their national
institutions to effectively address security and other
challenges.

The Security Council should also take interest in
human security issues, including social and economic
development, that matter to many developing

countries. In this regard, priority should be given to
strengthening support for national ownership and
capacity development, based on priorities identified by
the national authorities. Only national actors can
address their society's needs in a way that can enhance
sustainable peace, security and prosperity.

We welcome the strengthening of the Security
Council's strategic partnership with the African Union
and with other regional and subregional organizations,
which also play an important role in the maintenance
of peace and security. The United Nations should
optimize the contribution by those organizations,
which have advantages of proximity and the capability
to mobilize and respond quickly. In the recent past, the
number of missions carried out in pursuit of peace by
such organizations has increased.

The African Union has shown its commitment to
conflict prevention, mediation and resolution in Africa,
as demonstrated by its response to conflict situations
on the continent. African ownership has been shown
through the contribution of political leadership and
troops, logistics, and financing, according to the
capacity of its member States.

However, the major challenge that inhibits the
effectiveness of African Union peacekeeping
operations, such as the African Union Mission in
Somalia, is lack of adequate financial resources. That
is one area where more support from the United
Nations and other international partners is urgently
needed.

It is imperative that the long-standing concerns
about the need to reform the Security Council be
addressed to foster its effectiveness. The Council needs
greater credibility, legitimacy and representation. It is
an injustice that the entire continent of Africa - 53
Member States, with a population of over 1 billion
people - has no permanent representation on this
Council. I am here in a seasonal capacity. The Council
should also strive to be more even-handed and
transparent in its approaches and decisions in order to
dispel the perception that on some issues under its
consideration, vested interests override fairness.

In addition, the Council should engage more with
those countries on its agenda or whose situations it is
considering, to afford them an opportunity to express
their Views and concerns.
Since the Security Council acts on behalf of the
Members States in the maintenance of international
peace and security, it is imperative that it live up to
expectations by acting promptly and effectively in
addressing the current and new threats to international
peace and security.

