Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): On behalf of my
delegation, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
holding this important meeting today. I avail myself of
this opportunity to wish the Pakistani delegation and
you personally every success in fulfilling the highly
responsible duties of the Security Council presidency.

My gratitude goes to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Harri Holkeri, for his
update on the current situation in Kosovo. I am also
pleased to see at the Council table the Foreign Minister
of Serbia and Montenegro, Mr. Vuk Draskovic, whose
remarks made an important contribution to the
comprehensive analysis of the current situation on the
ground.

Ukraine strongly condemned the outburst of
inter-ethnic violence in Kosovo last March, which
resulted in dozens of deaths and hundreds of injuries,
the demolition of property and the destruction of
religious and cultural heritage and also the outrageous,
inadmissible attacks on the representatives of
international presence, including the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and KFOR.

In the statement issued by the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Ukraine, my Government expressed its
absolute rejection of any manifestations of violence
based on political, ethnic or other forms of extremism
as an unacceptable way of resolving the existing
problems in Kosovo. It was also stated that Ukraine
strongly hoped for the continuation of the democratic
process aimed at establishing a multi-ethnic, tolerant
and democratic society in a stable Kosovo.

The latest report of the Secretary-General on
UNMIK (S/2004/348) has demonstrated that the root
causes of the widespread violence are yet to be
thoroughly analysed and addressed by the international
community. There is a long path ahead in reaching the
standards for Kosovo. In fact, today, instead of
speaking about real multi-ethnicity in the province, we
have to return to the implementation of the "agenda for
coexistence" put forward by the former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Bernard
Kouchner, some five years ago. That is the reality.

In addressing the Kosovo crisis, the international
community, with the United Nations at the forefront,
has to ensure that the process of political recovery will
be fully along the lines of the framework established
by resolution 1244 (1999) and the "standards before
status" policy. In that regard, we strongly support the
observations made in the Secretary-General's report, as
well as the Security Council's position expressed in the
statement of its President of 30 April 2004
(S/PRST/2004/l3).

As was stated by many speakers today, the
Provisional Institutions, local authorities and political
leaders should bear more responsibility in the process
of normalization. In our view, it is highly important to
restore direct dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
In that context, we welcome the readiness to restore the
dialogue expressed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia and Montenegro at this meeting.

For its part, Ukraine will spare no effort in
providing its assistance to the settlement of the
situation in Kosovo. Most recently, in response to the
United Nations request, Ukraine increased its
contribution to the UNMIK police with 10
investigators. They were deployed a week ago by the
newly created task force aimed at bringing to justice
those responsible for the crimes perpetrated during the
recent riots.

We believe that the region must continue to carry
out significant work to meet the standards set by the
international community, especially taking into account
the recent developments. Acts of intimidation and
violence must stop. Key requirements related to the
status of ethnic minorities and the return of refugees
and internally displaced persons should be fulfilled.
The situation demonstrates a lack of equality in
fundamental rights and freedoms and has to be
radically changed.

In conclusion, I want to stress that Ukraine
reaffirms its commitment to promoting peace and
security in Kosovo and expresses its support for the
work of the international presence in the region. We
look forward to further assisting UNMIK and KFOR in
their efforts to implement Security Council resolution
1244 (1999).

