Mr. Otto (Palau): First, let me start by thanking the
presidency and the Government of the United Kingdom
for convening this very important debate. We thank His
Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog for his briefing and add our
admiration and congratulations to Ms. Bouchamaoui
and the people of Tunisia. We condemn the terrorist
attacks that occurred last week in France. Lebanon and
Egypt. Our prayers and thoughts go to the families and
friends of the victims of these tragic events. We stand
in solidarity with France, Lebanon and the Russian
Federation as well as the rest of peace-loving world in
calling for and taking action to defeat the enemies of
peace, freedom and humankind.

Palau agrees with the statements made during
the framing of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1), and
that many speakers have reiterated today, to the effect
that sustainable development is not possible without
peace. In this Chamber, our challenge is to attest to the
fact that peace and security are not possible without
sustainable development. We think therefore that the
Council's mandate to maintain peace and security has
to be adjusted to the realities of the twenty-first century.
For instance, the Security Council has an obligation
to take ownership of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the fight against climate change as
part of its core working deliverables. Additionally,
ethics for sustainable development should not only be
embraced, but protected and facilitated by the Security
Council.

We believe that to achieve peace we have to reach
back and deep into the component parts of the solid
foundation required for peaceful and secure societies.
We believe in what we have often heard about the need
to win hearts and minds in order to win the war. That is
true. However, we do not need to win the hearts and minds
of our enemies, but of our own children, youth, elderly
and leaders. We can win over their hearts and minds
in favour of peace, not by imposition but by conviction
demonstrated by achieving all the Goals contained
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
including the assurance that the plight of island nations
at risk of being swallowed up by rising sea levels and
the deteriorating health of the oceans are acknowledged
as a peace and security matter in the Security Council.
For us, this is the best way for the Council to ensure
equal protection and security for everyone, with no one
being left behind. Accordingly, we demonstrate that it
is the quality rather than quantity of peacebuilding that
is the key to successful peacekeeping.

During the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, we heard many times that
the new framework would help us to move away from
business as usual. We therefore look to it to help us
accomplish the required paradigm shift from more
peacekeepers, more weapons and more logistical
concerns to resources directed at eradicating poverty,
educating youth and addressing the other core
pillars of long-lasting sustainable development and
peace. Quality peacebuilding will be achieved when
experienced peacekeepers can be deployed quickly
before a conflict worsens and when doctors, teachers,
engineers and civil servants of all kinds are deployed to
complement the work of military and police personnel,
strengthening the often weakened core elements of a
peaceful civil society that are required to repudiate
extremism, terrorism and genocide. Consequently, the
mandates arising in resolutions of the Security Council
must be clear, dynamic and, most importantly, forge
genuine and durable partnerships that hold the Council
accountable to the citizens that it serves.

I have one final thought to offer. We think that the
significant celebration of the seventieth anniversary of
the founding of the United Nations should take place in
2030, because only then will we have an indication as
to whether the commitments we made in Sendai, Addis
Ababa, New York and Paris resulted in a paradigm shift
in the way we viewed, understood and took action on
the issues of security, development and root causes of
conflict, of the actions we committed to take in the
year 2015. For instance, did we learn from the model
that shows that there had been development advances
in nations that had not had a war on their soil in the
70 years of existence of the United Nations, compared
to a lack of development in those that had suffered
conflicts? And did we take action accordingly? We
hope that, in 2030, there will be less sadness because
of terrorism and poverty and more development and

peace.

