Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I am
sorry to once again take up the Council's precious time,
but I would like to make the following brief points in
response to the second intervention by the Israeli
representative.

First, any attempt by Israel to depict its criminal
acts against our people as a reaction to acts of violence
by Palestinians is a false attempt. Suffice it for me to
refer to the continuation of the occupation for more
than 35 years and to the transfer by Israel of 400,000
settlers to that land, in grave violation of the Fourth
Geneva Convention and many Security Council
resolutions, in order to occupy the land and to prevent
the Palestinians from exercising their rights. The
occupation, its abhorrent practices and settler
colonialism are what led to the violent reaction by our
people, not the contrary.

Secondly, Israel's claims that it has mitigated the
suffering of our people are ridiculous. I need only refer
to the report of the Secretary-General on the
humanitarian situation.

Thirdly, the claim that Israel, the occupying
Power, has not targeted civilians or children is also a
lie. When an Israeli warplane drops a one-ton bomb on
a residential area of Gaza, that act constitutes a
deliberate murder of civilians. Two days ago, when an
Israeli helicopter fired a missile at a certain car in a
highly populated area in Gaza, resulting in the death of
two children, aged 14 and 15, it was a deliberate
murder of civilians. Israel, the occupying Power, has
deliberately murdered civilians through the excessive
and indiscriminate use of force.

Fourthly, the representative of Israel claims that
the Palestinian side uses its children as human shields.
That is very racist, as well as unacceptable. It reflects a
sick mentality. We hope that Israel's representatives
and leaders will overcome such thinking in the future.

Finally, we once again hope that the international
community will truly stand up against the culture of
illegal impunity by confronting the war crimes and all
other crimes committed by the leaders of Israel as part
of the official State policy of successive Israeli
Governments, particularly in the last 28 months. We
hope such a stance will be taken because it is the only
thing that could lend real credibility to the statements
of the international community on this issue.

Despite all this, we have not yet lost hope for
changing both the situation and the Israeli policy and
for reaching a just and comprehensive peace in the
region, based on two States, Palestine and Israel, living
side by side.

