Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Swedish delegation for organizing this
open debate.

Argentina has always supported conflict
resolution through dialogue and diplomacy; respect for
international law and the sovereignty, independence,
national unity and territorial integrity of States; the
rejection of the acquisition of territory by force; and
confidence in the constructive role and persuasive
power of the international community to open paths for
dialogue and to advance the negotiations. That is why
my country strongly supports all efforts to achieve peace
and stability in the Middle East, whether in relation to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict or in connection with
the situations in Syria, Yemen, Libya and Iraq.

With regard to the conflict between Israel and
Palestine, and in the light of the fact that half a century
has passed since the adoption of the historic resolution
242 (1967) and the beginning of the occupation of the
Palestinian territories, we reaffirm our support for a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace on the basis ofthe
two-State solution. Argentina participated last Sunday
in the Paris Middle East Peace Conference and firmly
supports the aspiration of its joint declaration that a
State of Israel and a State of Palestine must coexist side
by side in peace and security, on the basis of the 1967
borders and whatever the parties determine during
the negotiation process. We thank the Government of
France for this initiative.

Argentina recognizes the right of the State of Israel
to live in peace with its neighbours, within secure and
internationally recognized borders, as well as the right
of the Palestinian people to form an independent and
viable State that is recognized by all nations.

My country reiterates its concern about the
persistent and continuing growth of illegal Israeli
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories
and calls for an end to their expansion, as set out in
resolution 2334 (2016) adopted on 23 December. The
settlements are an obstacle to peace and weaken the
prospect for a two-State solution, thereby promoting
the perpetuation of an unsustainable status quo.

At the same time, Palestinian leaders must sincerely
address Israeli security concerns. Hamas and other
Palestinian groups must put an end to incitement and
attacks on Israeli civilians, as set forth in resolution
2334 (2016). The launching of rockets from the Gaza
Strip against Israel must cease immediately. My country
strongly condemns all terrorist acts and is convinced
that there is no military solution to this conflict, nor
can a solution be imposed through terrorist methods.

Argentina reaffirms the special status of Jerusalem,
in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions, and rejects any unilateral measure aimed
at changing it. My country believes that the holy city
should be a place of convergence and peace and that
the three great monotheistic religions - Judaism,
Christianity and Islam - should be guaranteed free
access to the holy places.

With regard to the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, Argentina continues to be deeply concerned
about the humanitarian situation in that country
and condemns all acts of violence, including attacks
on civilians. My country is eager to see the recent
initiatives to stop the violence in Syria and launch a
political process give way to a new phase that will
end years of conflict and disunity. In that regard, we
welcome the ceasefire and the adoption of resolution
2336 (2016), which we hope will be implemented in
good faith by all parties, as well as resolutions 2254
(2015) and 2268 (2016).

Over the past five years, Argentina has affirmed in
all discussions on Syria that the solution to the conflict
can only be a political one and not military, much less
a terrorist one, as has been acknowledged in resolution
2254 (2015). That is why, just one week before the
meeting of the representative of the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic with the representatives of
the opposition to be held in Astana, we hope that the
agreements reached there will contribute to the success
of the official negotiations to be held in the framework
of the Geneva process, under the auspices of the United
Nations, next month. We hope that all countries with
influence over the parties will continue to act in
concert to achieve an early ceasefire, ensure access
to humanitarian assistance and continue the political
process in accordance with the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex).

Peace in the Middle East is only possible through
dialogue and negotiation that respect the parameters
recognized by the international community, namely, the
two-State solution, based on relevant United Nations
resolutions, agreements signed between the parties,
the road map of the Quartet, the Arab Peace Initiative,
a mutually acceptable solution to the situation of
Jerusalem and a fair resolution of the refugee issue.

In order to respond to the call of Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres to make 2017 into a year for peace,
the international community should spare no effort to
put an end to the various conflicts in the Middle East.

