Mr. Chlebo (Slovakia): I wish to begin by
congratulating the Netherlands, and you personally, Sir,
on your excellent conduct of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I would like also to
thank your predecessor, the representative of the Republic
of Namibia, for his effective leadership of the Security
Council during the month of August.

Slovakia welcomes the initiative of the Netherlands
to convene this important meeting on Africa in a timely
manner, and considers it to be a very promising step
towards a final solution of the pending problems of
Africa.

 

Slovakia warmly welcomes the Secretary-Generals
recent report on progress in promoting durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa. We also appreciate the
briefing held last week by Mr. Frederick Chiluba, President
of the Republic of Zambia, on the situation in Africa, and
all other activities which have taken place in order to help
Africa seek peace and development.

There is no doubt that in recent years the continent of
Africa has made significant progress on its way to stability
and prosperity. Despite certain achievements, however, at
the threshold of the new millennium, Africa still remains
afflicted and threatened by a great number of conflicts and
tensions. Without an appropriate approach, those tensions
can quickly be turned into new, devastating conflicts.

Timely responses to and peaceful resolutions of
disputes are essential for promoting durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa. It is clear that an active
and functional partnership between Africa and the
international community is one of the key priorities for
preventing and resolving conflicts and for helping Africa
create an environment for the economic growth of its
countries. The continued and increased assistance of the
international community is also important for building and
enhancing African peacekeeping capacity to handle crises.
However, this cannot be a substitute for the responsibility
of Africa itself. Africa must show the political will to seek
political rather than military responses to problems and
commit itself to the principles of good governance with
strict respect for human rights and the rule of law. In this
respect, we have welcomed the determination of African
leaders to promote democracy and the rule of law, as was
recently stated at the thirty-fifth summit of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) in Algiers. Only in an environment
of good governance can countries ensure their stability and
prosperity.

Regional arrangements have already become an
integral part of the common effort of the international
community for maintaining peace and security in Africa.
Slovakia welcomes and fully supports increasing
cooperation and coordination between the United Nations
and Africa with regard to peacekeeping. Peacekeeping
operations still continue to play an indispensable role in
resolving ongoing conflicts. We should recognize the
important role that the African regional and subregional
organizations - such as the OAU, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Southern African Development Community (SADC) -
have played in addressing particular disputes and in
carrying out peacekeeping missions in several African
countries. We should provide them with the necessary
financial and material resources.

In this regard, Slovakia commends the activities of
ECOWAS and, in particular, of the President of Togo
leading to the signing of the Lome Peace Agreement,
which has given new hope to the people of Sierra Leone.
We also greatly appreciate the diplomatic and mediation
efforts of the President of Zambia, which facilitated the
signing of the Ceasefire Agreement in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which has helped create positive
conditions for a restoration of peace in the Great Lakes
region.

No doubt the peace process is not complete, and the
cooperation and the assistance of the international
community cannot stop after a restoration of peace.
Durable results - lasting peace and development -
cannot be achieved or maintained without adequate
follow-up. A clear and smooth transition from
peacekeeping operations to post-conflict peace-building is
required. All factors needed for reconciliation,
reconstruction and the creation of conditions for economic
growth should be addressed and strengthened in order to
prevent a resumption of the conflict. A valuable example,
in my view, has been set by Mozambique, not only in
resolving its internal conflict but also in its determination
to fight one of the most widespread diseases of conflicts
on this continent, anti-personnel landmines.

Since its establishment as an independent State in
January 1993, Slovakia has participated in a number of
United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa, as well
as in other parts of the world. To date, nearly 3,000
Slovak peacekeepers have served under the United
Nations flag in peacekeeping missions. On the continent
of Africa, Slovakia has been actively involved in the
United Nations Missions in Angola, Rwanda, the Uganda-
Rwanda border region, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
Furthermore, Slovakia is ready to contribute an
engineering unit of 150 personnel for mine clearance
activities in the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara and has also recently
expressed its readiness to dispatch Slovak peacekeepers to
a possible United Nations mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea.
Speaking in terms of the number of troops per capita,
Slovakia is among the leading troop-contributing
countries.

Moreover, in order to improve Africa's capacity for
conflict prevention and resolution, Slovakia stands ready
to contribute to this effort and to offer facilities at its

 

Training Centre for Peacekeeping Operations, in particular
providing training for engineering units.

We recognize the problem of anti-personnel mines as
a great burden to post-conflict rehabilitation and the
promotion of sustainable development in afflicted regions.
The commitment of Slovakia to the resolution of this issue
is demonstrated not only by its ratification of the Ottawa
Convention this year but also by its active participation in
demining activities in peacekeeping operations. Slovakia is
prepared to continue providing its skills, techniques and
equipment in this regard.

Specific situations require the application of specific
measures, including sanctions imposed by the Security
Council. The imposition of sanctions can be used as a
measure of enforcement, but it should rather be used as a
measure of prevention. We share the View that better
targeting of sanctions is needed in order to ensure that they
will achieve their purpose with greater impact on political
leaders and decision makers.

In this regard, special attention should be paid to arms
embargoes which can be a key instruments in the
prevention of the flow of illicit arms and related materiel
into zones of conflict or tension in Africa. Therefore, the
United Nations and the international community must take
all measures available to enforce effective implementation
of a Security Council arms embargo, inter alia, through the
identification of the sources of arms flows.

A bitter example of the violation of an arms embargo
is seen in Angola. In that country the United Nations
peacekeeping operation has failed, and the effort of the
international community has also been brought to naught
because of continued supply of weapons to UNITA.

We are concerned that the sanctions of the Security
Council are mostly violated by non-African countries, some
of which even want to be recognized as contributors to
international peace and security. Slovakia firmly adheres to
all of the Security Council's decisions, including those on
sanctions. As a future Chairman of the Wassenaar
Arrangement for the control of the export of dual-use
materials and technologies and conventional weapons,
Slovakia would like to contribute to the effective work of
the Arrangement and thus strengthen international and
regional stability.

We recognize the importance of building and
enhancing a close relationship with African countries. We
fully support the intention of the European Union (EU) to
hold a summit with African countries next year, and we
align ourselves with the positions of the EU which will be
presented by the representative of Finland later in this
debate.

Slovakia appreciates traditionally good relations and
mutual cooperation with African countries. Entering the
new millennium, we will continue enhancing our
partnership with those countries in order to help Africa
build its future. Slovakia stands ready to contribute to any
efforts of the international community to respond
positively and constructively to Africa's needs and to
promote peace, sustainable development, human rights
and good governance on this beautiful continent. For that
noble task, we must identify proper means and sufficient
resources without delay.

