Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): I too would like,
on behalf of my delegation and on my own account, to
thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, for his important
briefing. I reiterate Italy's full support for the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and for the work of
the Prosecutor. Italy appreciates the difficult
circumstances in which the Prosecutor is conducting
this investigation and wishes to renew its strong
confidence in him and in the Court. Italy believes that
full support for him by the Security Council should
emerge from today's debate.

More than three years have passed since the
adoption of resolution 1593 (2005). On that occasion
the Council decided to send a strong signal that peace
and justice must be pursued hand in hand. Today we
are being told once again that appalling crimes against
civilians, including heinous violence against women,
continue to be committed in Darfur in a climate of
impunity. And we are being told that Sudanese
institutions are still not cooperating with the
International Criminal Court, while worrisome
allegations are increasingly being made concerning the
continuing involvement of the Sudanese Government
in facilitating the activities of the Janjaweed militias.
The need for a more effective approach to the conflict
in Darfur, encompassing the humanitarian, security,
political and rule-of-law dimensions, is today more
urgent than ever in order to restore and maintain a
lasting peace. There is no doubt that bringing to justice
those responsible for serious and continued violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights law
cannot be avoided, in order to contribute to peace in
Darfur and throughout the country.

Italy welcomes the action undertaken by the
Prosecutor with regard to the attacks against the
African Union peacekeeping mission at Haskanita in
2007. The Rome Statue is clear in qualifying that type
of crime as a war crime. At the same time, we strongly
condemn all attacks against the civilian population,
non-governmental organizations and humanitarian
organizations, as described in the Prosecutor's report.

Resolution 1593 (2005) must be fully
implemented. I should like to recall that in its
paragraph 2 it requires that

"the Government of Sudan and all other parties to
the conflict in Darfur, shall cooperate fully with
and provide any necessary assistance to the Court
and the Prosecutor pursuant to this resolution".

We are concerned by the reports of continued
lack of cooperation, to which I have referred, and by
the fact that the two arrest warrants that have been
issued have not yet been executed. The European
Union has issued many clear statements calling on the
Government of the Sudan to cooperate unconditionally
with the ICC and to surrender the two individuals for
whom it has issued arrest warrants. It may also be
appropriate to recall that the Government of the Sudan
and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur are under
a specific obligation to comply with Security Council
resolutions. In that regard, we believe that the Security
Council should carefully and promptly consider the
issue of the possible adoption of individual sanctions
with respect to those against whom arrest warrants
have been issued.

Italy encourages the ongoing dialogue and
diplomatic efforts deployed to date by the ICC, the
African Union and the League of Arab States, as cited
in the report. Fighting impunity is an important priority
for the international community, but that principle,
which is at the core of the Rome Statute of the ICC,
has yet to be translated into consistent practice. The
Court is entitled to intervene only when national
authorities are unwilling or unable to genuinely
prosecute. All States are under the primary obligation
to prevent or to punish offences committed in their
territories.

It is still possible for the Government of the

Sudan, in the context of Darfur, to prove that it can

prosecute and punish those who have committed

crimes, at all levels, in its national courts. Justice,
however, can no longer be postponed.

