Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for
his briefing.

Following the recent successful presidential
elections, President Keita has started a new term
of office. He has promised to continue to actively
implement the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali, thereby injecting new momentum into the
peace process. China expresses its appreciation in
that connection.

However, at the same time, the security situation
in north and central Mali remains grim with rampant
terrorist activities inside the country and in the
neighbouring region posing a serious threat to the peace
process. The international community should, on the
basis of respect for the sovereignty and leadership of
Mali, continue to support the peace process and provide
support to peace and the development of the country.

First, we must continue to help the parties in the
implementation of the peace agreement and moving
the political process forward. The political solution is
the only way out. In that connection, China hopes that
the signatories of the peace agreement will continue to
demonstrate political will, facilitate the implementation
of the agreement and work together to achieve national
development and reconstruction.

Secondly, we must continue to support the
Government's capacity-building in governance and
security. The Malian Government bears the primary
responsibility for maintaining peace and stability
in the country. At the request of the Government,
the international community should continue to
support and assist the Government in its security
and counter-terrorism capacity-building and enhance
the Government's ability to respond to security
threats independently.

Thirdly, we must support regional and subregional
organizations in playing a mediation and coordinating
role, as the peace and security of the country are closely
linked with the overall security situation in the region.
Therefore, it is necessary to take a comprehensive
approach and to respond to terrorist activities inside
the country and in the neighbouring regions through
regional cooperation.

China welcomes the formation of the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel to independently
fight security threats, including terrorism, in the
region. That is an important initiative on the part of
the African countries to achieve strength through unity
and to maintain peace and stability in Africa and in
the world at large. China commends the preparatory
work done by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
in order to support the Joint Force and hopes that, once
the conditions are ripe, MINUSMA will be able to take
effective actions to backstop the Joint Forces as soon
as possible.

MINUSMA and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Mali have played an important
role in maintaining peace and stability in the country
and in the implementation of the peace agreement.
China expresses its appreciation in that connection, and
hopes that MINUSMA will continue to communicate
and coordinate with the Government in order to help
the latter in the implementation of the peace agreement
and in enhancing its security capacity-building.

At the same time, the Council and the Secretariat
must pay attention to the issue of the safety and
security of the Mission's personnel. We hope that the
secretariat of MINUSMA will take effective actions in
areas relating to the Mission's equipment and training,
campsite planning, security and protection material and
equipment, medical ability, and information-gathering
and -sharing in order to strengthen the safety and
security of the Mission's personnel. China supports
the peace process in Mali. Chinese peacekeepers
are actively engaged in the Mission's peacekeeping
operations and have made their contribution to stability
in the country. China is ready to continue to play a
constructive roll towards the achievement of peace,
stability and development in the country and in Africa
at large.

