Mr. Fowler (Canada): I join others, Mr. President, in
expressing pleasure at seeing you in the Chair again. I
thank you deeply for your interest in the subjects we have
been discussing over the last couple of days.

Canada is pleased to note that the Secretary-General's
newly appointed Special Representative, Kamel Morjane,
has recently arrived in Kinshasa and has taken up his vitally
important duties there. We continue to be concerned by the
major ceasefire violations by all sides in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Such violations suggest to us that
the security conditions required for the deployment of
United Nations military observers do not yet exist. We
would appreciate the Secretariat's views on how, in the
immediate term, short of deploying additional personnel to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
can further assist in the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement in the face of continuing fighting.

In the last few weeks, there have been two ground-
breaking reports produced by the Secretary-General, one of
course on Srebrenica a few weeks ago, the other only
yesterday on Rwanda. I would very much agree with
Peter van Walsum that both are very much relevant to the
discussion we are having today and, indeed, to the
discussion we had yesterday. Canada's Romeo Dallaire
called desperately from Kigali for Council support in
Rwanda to allow him to stop the genocide, and none
came. Canadian troops were in the Srebrenica valley for
a year before the Dutch troops replaced them, and as
Deputy Minister of Defence, I had the nightmare of
"What happened to the Dutch?" every day that our troops
were in that situation. There are lessons here for us to
absorb, and we had better begin coming to terms with
those lessons. These are relevant issues, and we must
consider them carefully.

Canada joins others in welcoming the Organization
of African Unity's appointment of former President
Masire as facilitator for the inter-Congolese dialogue. We
join Council colleagues in urging all parties to commit
themselves to this dialogue so that the process of
reconciliation can begin in earnest. There can be no doubt
that the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
will not be resolved in the absence of a meaningful
political dialogue among all Congolese. However, the
Security Council should be prepared to further support the
Ceasefire Agreement once the parties demonstrate a
willingness to abide by their ceasefire commitments.
Progress in these two areas - effective internal dialogue
and effective ceasefire - will of course be mutually
reinforcing.

As the fighting continues, the humanitarian crisis in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo deepens. It is
critical that the parties respect their ceasefire agreements
and ensure the safe and unhindered access of
humanitarian agencies to all areas of the country. Many
areas of the country remain utterly inaccessible to
humanitarian personnel due to the prevailing conditions of
insecurity. All parties to the conflict have an obligation -
an immediate obligation - to ensure the safety, security
and freedom of movement of humanitarian personnel.
They must ensure that safe and unhindered access to all
affected populations is provided.

