Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking Belgium for convening this open debate on transitional justice. I would also like to thank the briefers. I welcome the presence of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Niger, Spain and Guatemala and the Deputy Foreign Minister of Estonia. Indonesia aligns itself with the statement to be made by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. Countries emerging from conflict are often confronted with numerous challenges in building and sustaining peace, including the provision of justice for victims of conflict and the promotion of reconciliation. Addressing those complex issues, while not easy, is a key requisite to achieving a durable and prosperous peace. In that context, allow me to share the following three pertinent points. First, transitional justice processes should be forward-looking. They are not only about addressing past grievances; crucially, such processes must also lay the foundation for reconciliation and rebuild trust in society while avoiding repetition. Therefore, a forward- looking approach will help countries move towards sustainable peace and development. Transitional justice processes should become part and parcel of broader efforts to build and sustain peace. Given that each country has its own particular context, needs and capacities, there is no one-size-fits-all strategy. A nationally determined comprehensive approach is required for transitional justice to be successful. Secondly, transitional justice must be nationally owned and inclusive. All elements of society must be extensively consulted and involved in the design and implementation of a transnational justice process in order to ensure a sense of national ownership, which is essential for the long-term effectiveness of transitional justice. Women must play a central role in that process, and their voices should be heard carefully. Indonesia is a strong advocate of women's robust role along the entire peace process continuum. As part of that commitment, Indonesia is currently working on the establishment of a regional network of women negotiators and mediators. We will continue to amplify the call for greater participation of women in peace processes. Thirdly, comprehensive reform is_ essential. Countries in transition often face capacity challenges in the political, legal, security and socioeconomic sectors. To address those issues, countries need to seek solutions beyond institutional reform. While we recognize the importance of supporting countries in building their capacities in effective rule-of-law, governance and related areas, it is also crucial to build their economic resilience to the recurrence of conflict. Among its initiatives, Indonesia organized an_ international workshop on crops for peace last year, which provided a platform for sharing best-practices on agriculture-based economic development in post-conflict countries. At the global level, Indonesia also continues to contribute to United Nations peacekeeping operations with a view to ensuring coherence in the support to nationally driven transitional justice processes. In conclusion, while everyone must contribute, the Security Council should play a greater role in effectively supporting countries in transition to build and sustain peace. Indonesia reiterates that justice, reconciliation and economic development should be pursued hand in hand. The various activities surrounding transitional justice should pave the way to well-being and prosperity, with the long-term goal of building a durable peace, putting a human approach at the forefront while protecting humankind and providing hope for future generations.
