Mr. Badji (spoke in French): Since I had the
opportunity a few days ago to address the Council, I
wish first to extend to you, Mr. President, once again
my appreciation for the exemplary and efficient way in
which you are presiding over the work of the Council,
and then to thank all Council members for having
given me the opportunity to take part, in my capacity
as Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, in this
important discussion of the situation in Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.

The Council is meeting to consider important
developments that have taken place in the region.
Recently, while the attention of the international
community was focused on the results of the
Palestinian and Israeli elections, the Israeli
Government energetically continued its activities in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, that undermine the prospects of one day
establishing a viable, contiguous and independent
Palestinian State. The Committee is much concerned
by recent statements of members of the Israeli
Government concerning the so-called Convergence
Plan, which would mean that Israel would unilaterally
define its permanent borders. This plan, among other
things, provides that the major settlement blocs in the
West Bank and in the Jordan Valley would be
integrated into Israel, in addition to Israel's retaining
control over some settlements in the West Bank. The
Committee takes the view that the peace and security
to which both Israelis and Palestinians aspire cannot be
achieved by unilateral measures or measures that are
not compatible with the peace process in the Middle
East.

Settlement activities are still a cause for great
concern. Approximately 12,000 Israelis have
established themselves in the West Bank settlements in
2005, while apparently 9,000 have been evacuated
from the Gaza Strip and the north of the West Bank,
under the disengagement plan. The total number of
Israeli settlers in the West Bank, without counting East
Jerusalem, was close to 250,000 in 2005. The number
of houses built has grown, as have solicitations of bids
for new housing, in violation of the road map, which
requires a freezing of all settlement activities,
including natural expansion.

The most worrisome of Israel's settlement plans
is the one called Plan El, which seeks to link East
Jerusalem with the largest West Bank settlement,
Maale Adumim, by building approximately 3,500
dwellings in the zone between them. If that project is
completed, the city will be effectively cut off from the
rest of the West Bank, at the risk of crushing the
Palestinians' aspirations to establish the capital of their
future State in East Jerusalem.

Moreover, the Committee has closely followed
the Israeli strategy in the Jordan Valley. According to a
report issued in October 2005 by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Valley is
becoming increasingly inaccessible to Palestinians
living in the larger West Bank, unless they hold an
identity card indicating an address in the north of the
Valley. The most affected are those who have lived in
the area for many years but whose identity card may
not have the required address. Those who own property
in the area but live elsewhere can no longer go there
without authorization.

At the same time, the building of the separation
wall continues, in violation of the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice. Last month the
Israeli Defense Forces announced the commencement
of the building of the wall's southern section in the
West Bank. The Committee has constantly reiterated
that building the wall complicates the lives of
Palestinians in the areas in question and is very
harmful to them. Unfortunately, the register of damage
requested by the General Assembly in resolution
ES/10-15 has still not been established.

To further complicate matters, the humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories, which
is already catastrophic, is deteriorating even further.
The constant closures hinder the transport of basic
foodstuffs, medical supplies and humanitarian relief to
the areas that need them most. The economy, the
security services and the public institutions, which are
fragile, need sustained support. The Committee calls
on the international donor community to increase its
assistance to the Palestinian people in these
particularly trying times.

The Committee wishes to reiterate its long-held
position that the United Nations, including the Security
Council, must continue to shoulder its permanent
responsibility with regard to all aspects of the question
of Palestine until it is settled satisfactorily, in
accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions and with respect for international
legitimacy, and until the Palestinian people can
exercise their inalienable rights. The Committee has
also stressed the key role of the Security Council in the
re-establishment of peace.

The Committee, for its part, will continue to lend

its political support to the Palestinian people until there
is full realization of their inalienable right to self-
determination without external interference, their right
to independence and national sovereignty and their
right to return to their homes and the properties from
which they were displaced and uprooted.

That is why we will support any international
action aimed at creating an independent Palestinian
State by peaceful means. The Committee will work,
first and foremost, with the President of the Palestinian
Authority. It will also work with the legitimate
representatives of the Palestinian people who respect
the principles of non-violence and the Israeli-
Palestinian agreements concluded previously.

A settlement negotiated between the parties will
give birth to an independent, democratic and viable
Palestinian State, living side by side in peace and
security with Israel and the other neighbouring
countries. Such a settlement - based on the principles
set out at the Madrid Conference, the principle of land
for peace, Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), the agreements
concluded previously by the parties, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the acceptance of Israel as a neighbour,
living in peace and security within the framework of a
comprehensive settlement - will put an end to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the occupation that has
lasted since 1967.

