Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome Mr. Abdurahman Ibrahim, First Deputy Prime
Minister of Somalia, and his delegation, as well as
Ambassador Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union. We listened very
carefully to their briefings. We once again appreciate
the valuable information provided by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ahmedou
Ould Abdallah. We acknowledge his commitment and
that of his office to carrying out their arduous task.

We are concerned that, in spite of the efforts of
the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia,
assisted by the international community, the security
situation in that country continues to be highly volatile.
We commend the efforts of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and the commitment of Uganda
and Burundi to deterring attacks by armed groups and
achieving basic levels of stability in key sites around
the country. We are certain that support for the
Transitional Federal Government in comprehensively
reforming the security sector is the only viable way of
ensuring the stability that Somalia and its people so
urgently need.

We commend the work of the Joint Security
Committee on devising a development strategy for the
security sector. We also acknowledge the progress
made in the training of military and police personnel.
Moreover, we agree with the joint security sector
assessment that reforming the sector should be based
on a firm political pillar and include the promotion of
good governance, transparency and accountability.

In that regard, we believe that the agreement
between the Transitional Federal Government and the
Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a political faction that was
signed under the auspices of the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia has set an important
precedent for dialogue among all factions and armed
groups in the context of the Djibouti Agreement. The
Agreement and the conclusion of Somalia's
constitution-making process are essential steps towards
consolidating and legitimizing the Government.

We believe that the meeting of the Contact Group
held in Cairo in April and the high-level Istanbul
Conference on Somalia's reconstruction and
development, which is to be held from 21 to 22 May,
will contribute to efforts to draft an international
community strategy for Somalia that is more coherent
and coordinated and led by the United Nations.

In that regard, we reiterate our support for the
incremental approach to the deployment of the United
Nations presence in Mogadishu. We commend the
efforts of all the Organization's agencies involved in
that regard. We trust that efforts in the political and
security sectors will produce the results necessary to
achieve greater progress.

With regard to the issue of combating piracy and
armed robbery, we acknowledge the efforts of the
European Union, NATO, Combined Task Force 151
and the international presence. In coordination with the
Transitional Federal Government, they are confronting
these threats to the economy and security of the region.
We believe that generating coast guard capacity in
Somalia and the countries of the region should
continue to be an essential goal, without ignoring the
clear need and strategic value of prioritizing efforts on
the ground to tackle the root causes of this
phenomenon. In that regard, the dialogue focused on
greater cooperation and cooperation among officials of
the various Somali regions is a great step forward.

With regard to the recent adoption of resolution
1918 (2010), we look forward to the Security Council's
consideration of options with regard to possible justice
mechanisms with respect to piracy. My delegation
believes that the international community should
endeavour to prioritize capacity-building for
international judicial systems so that they can
investigate and try perpetrators of piracy in Somalia.
We also believe that, as an essential tool for combating
piracy, the strengthening of national capacities should
take priority over the establishment of international
tribunals.

We join others in condemning attacks against
AMISOM. and the humanitarian workers of United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations.
Such attacks have led to a reduction in assistance

efforts and impede the access of vulnerable groups to
basic needs and the nutrition needed to survive. Given
the serious insecurity we see on the ground and its
regrettable impact on the civilian population, we
reiterate our commitment to full respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights. We
call on the parties to immediately cease attacks, avoid
situations that indiscriminately affect the civilian
population, and allow access to and the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.

In addition, we are especially concerned about
reports of increased recruitment and use of child
soldiers by armed groups in Somalia. We urge all
parties to free all child soldiers in their ranks and to
ensure that they return to their home communities. We
also commend all the efforts of the Federal Transitional
Government to address this alarming recruitment
situation.

In the context of the sanctions Committee on
Somalia and Eritrea, my delegation reiterates its belief
that, used coherently and incrementally, arms embargos
and targeted sanctions regimens are valuable tools that
can benefit the peace process as a whole. In that
regard, we are pleased to note the willingness
demonstrated by the Transitional Federal Government,
the World Food Programme and the United Nations
country team in Somalia to look into aspects pertaining
to their functions referred to in the annual report of the
Committee's Monitoring Group (S/2010/91). Both the
Committee and the Monitoring Group are fully
prepared to cooperate with these investigations and
interested in their conclusions.

In the context of this cooperation, I recently led a
visit to the Horn of Africa in my capacity of Chairman
of the sanctions Committee, as recommended by that
Committee. The purpose of the visit was to disseminate
information about the sanctions regime, to facilitate the
work of the Committee's Monitoring Group, and to
address specific issues related to the arms embargo and
sanctions targeted against entities and individuals,
inviting all involved Governments to cooperate with
the Committee and the Security Council.

In the next few weeks, I will be presenting a
report to the Committee on my visit to the region,
which will be included in the report I submit every four
months to the Security Council. I can state now that the
visit enabled us to establish positive and constructive
dialogue with each of the regional actors, in
accordance with the Committee's mandate, as well as
to observe the outstanding work that the United
Nations is carrying out in the field in the face of the
major challenge that Somalia poses for the
international community.

