Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): In accordance with
paragraph 3 (a) (iv) of resolution 1591 (2005), I have
the honour to brief the Security Council on the work of
the Sudan Sanctions Committee, covering the period
from 25 July to 7 December 2017. I am pleased that
this briefing is being provided in an open format,
which further enhances the transparency of the work of
the Committee.

During this reporting period, the Committee
discussed the first report of the Panel of Experts
on the Sudan and took follow-up action on all of
the recommendations contained in the report. The
Committee also amended one entry on its sanctions list
and received one quarterly update from the Panel of
Experts. In addition, for the first time, the Committee
held a joint meeting with the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya, and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015), concerning South Sudan.

On 8 August, the Panel submitted to the Committee
its first report pursuant to paragraph 2 of resolution
2340 (2017). The Panel reported that no significant
progress had been made in the Darfur peace process in
its various tracks. The main sticking point was that the
expectations of the Darfuri rebel groups exceeded the
concessions that the Government was ready to make.

The Panel also gave a detailed account ofthe armed
incursions into Darfur by Darfuri armed groups from
Libya and South Sudan in May this year. It was noted
that the rebels suffered heavy losses, in terms of both
equipment and personnel. A significant amount of
military equipment and vehicles were destroyed or
seized by the security forces. There were reports of
violations of international humanitarian law during
clashes between Government security forces and
Darfuri armed groups.

The Panel also observed that the Government of the
Sudan continued to transfer military aircraft into Darfur
without prior approval from the Committee. The Panel
expressed concern about the ongoing disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, which
had failed to disarm militias.

The Panel highlighted significant participation by
Darfuri armed elements as mercenaries in the conflicts
in Libya and South Sudan.

On the Government's cooperation with the Panel,
the Panel acknowledged the positive cooperation of the
Government during its missions to the Sudan, while
noting that the finance expert continued to be denied
a Visa.

On 8 September, the Committee met to hear
a presentation by the Panel on its first report and to
discuss the Panel's recommendations. The Coordinator
of the Panel attended the meeting in person, while two
experts participated via video-teleconference. Several
Committee members commended the Panel for the
high quality of the report and welcomed increased
cooperation between the Government of the Sudan
and the Panel. Several Committee members underlined
that the overall situation in Darfur had improved in a
significant way. A press release was issued following
the Committee's meeting.

Turning to the five recommendations that the Panel
addressed to the Committee, the Committee agreed to
the proposed follow-up action on the recommendations.
As a follow-up to recommendation 1, the Committee
tasked the Panel with drafting an Implementation
Assistance Notice for the preparation of end-user
documentation to ensure the proper implementation of
paragraph 10 of resolution 1945 (2010).

In follow-up to recommendations 2 and 3, the
Committee sent a note verbale on 16 October
encouraging those Member States that had not yet done
so to submit an implementation report, with a particular
focus on obstacles in implementing the sanctions
measures. To date, however, the Committee has not yet
received any implementation report in response to its
call, and was informed on 18 October by the Permanent
Mission of South Sudan that the Government of South
Sudan was unable to implement the sanctions measures
due to the current civil war.

Following up on recommendations 4 and 5, concerning
the cooperation of the Sudan and other Member States
with the Panel, the Committee sent letters on 16 October
encouraging the Sudan and a Member State to expedite
responses to the Panel's request for information. The
Committee sent another letter on 6 November urging
the Government of the Sudan to facilitate the fulfilment
of the Panel's mandate in the best possible environment,
including by providing multiple-entry visas and issuing
Darfur travel permits for experts in a timely manner.
In the letter, the Committee also reiterated its urgent
appeal to the Government of the Sudan to reconsider its
position on the issuance ofa visa to the finance expert.

On 26 September, the Committee received a
letter from the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts
recommending that the Committee considerupdating the
list entry of Musa Hilal Abdalla Alnsiem. Accordingly,
on 17 October, the Committee approved the proposed
amendments to the list entry. A corresponding press
release and note verbale to all Member States were
issued on the same day.

On 18 October, the Committee received the second
quarterly update from the Panel. In the update, the
Panel briefly reported on its weapons inspection
visit that took place from 30 July to 4 August at the
invitation of the Government of the Sudan. The Panel
further reported on the continued stalemate in the
peace process. Progress in the national disarmament
campaign had come to a standstill when border guards
led by Musa Hilal refused to disarm and be integrated
into the Rapid Support Forces. While noting the positive
cooperation of the Government of the Sudan, the Panel
reiterated its concern that the finance expert remained
unable to access the Sudan and that internal procedures
for obtaining Darfur travel permits resulted in delays to
the Panel's deployment to Darfur.

In my previous briefing to the Security Council, on
24 July, I informed the Council that I planned to convene
joint informal consultations with the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011),
concerning Libya, and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015), concerning South
Sudan, as follow-up to my visit to the Sudan in May.
Accordingly, on 10 November, the Committee held its
first-ever joint informal consultations with those two
Committees to discuss the spread of Darfuri armed
groups into Libya and South Sudan and a common
approach to addressing the issue. The Panels of Experts
assisting the three Committees also participated and
reported that Darfuri armed groups had spread beyond
the Sudan's borders to Libya and South Sudan, where
they were engaged in arms trafficking and mercenary
and other illicit activities. The Panels also informed
that the armed groups' activities were intertwined
with the respective challenges faced by those States.
Meeting participants appreciated the holding of the
joint informal consultations. They also emphasized the
importance of advancing the political processes in the
three countries and of supporting institutional structures
in the three countries. Participants furthermore noted
that the cross-border threats posed by Darfuri armed
groups attested to the importance of synergies between
the Committees, the Panels of Experts and the United
Nations field missions on the ground. A joint press
release containing a brief summary of the discussion
was issued following the meeting.

On 27 November, the Committee received the final
report of the Panel of Experts pursuant to resolution
2340 (2017). The Committee will meet this month
to hear a presentation by the Panel of Experts and to
discuss the Panel's recommendations contained in
the report.

Lastly, I intend to touch upon my personal
reflections in my briefing as outgoing Chair to the
Council scheduled for 8 December.

