Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): In my capacity as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, I have the
honour to brief the Council, together with Ms. Fang
Liu, Secretary General of the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO), on the outcomes of the
Committee's special meeting on terrorist threats to
civil aviation.

The special meeting was held at Headquarters on
7 July, as requested by the Council in resolution 2309
(2016). It is clear that the global and interconnected
nature of the international civil aviation industry
exposes States Members of all regions to potential
terrorist attacks. Attacks against international civil
aviation cause substantial loss of life, economic
damage and disruption. There is a growing awareness
of the global terrorist threat to civil aviation. However,
we must work together urgently to further strengthen
Member States' implementation of the obligations and
commitments aimed at addressing the threat. In doing
so, we must work together to assist those States that
lack the capacity to do so effectively.

Resolution 2309 (2016), adopted in September last
year, outlines a number of priority steps to be taken by
Member States to strengthen their implementation of
ICAO's security-related Standards and Recommended
Practices (SARPs). Like the resolution, ICAO's new
global aviation security plan also calls on States
to strengthen coordination and cooperation among
relevant national departments and agencies. I welcome
the security plan. I also welcome the current initiative
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) and ICAO to enter into a formal
cooperation agreement aimed at further harmonizing
and strengthening their long-standing partnership.

ICAO, of course, plays a central role in developing
and monitoring international aviation security
standards. CTED plays a central role in supporting
and implementing the policy decisions of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the Council in
assisting them to define the international counter-
terrorism agenda and assessing States' efforts to
prevent and counter terrorism, including in relation
to civil aviation. It does so notably through the
assessment visits conducted to Member States on the
Committee's behalf, through its analyses and through
its identification of gaps, challenges, trends and good
practices. Whenever possible, ICAO takes part in the
Committee's country visits, while playing a vital role
in the evaluation of aviation-security measures. The
visits and the resulting recommendations made to the
Committee are thereby in full compliance with ICAO's
work and audits.

As the Committee's assessments and analyses make
clear, many States lack the capacities and resources
required to implement effective measures to strengthen
civil aviation security. In a global environment marked
by a number of new and emerging terrorist threats and
rapid technological change, we must encourage and
support all Member States to continue strengthening
implementation of good aviation practices, in particular
those set forth in paragraph 6 of resolution 2309 (2016).
Those practices include enhancing screening and
security checks, ensuring appropriate resources and
effective quality controls, and promoting an effective
security culture.

It cannot be stressed enough that gaps in basic
aviation-security measures result in vulnerabilities that
can easily be exploited and circumvented by terrorists.
New, updated and revised guidance materials developed
by ICAO should be fully used, and threat and risk
assessment methodologies should be regularly updated
and amended. Member States are often not sufficiently
engaged in dialogue with all the relevant actors
involved in the implementation of aviation-security
measures. Many fail to perceive the need to adopt a
risk-based approach and apply a common methodology
to assess the risk. In that regard, Member States can
avail themselves of the risk context statement provided
by ICAO.

However, there remains a need to strengthen
mechanisms for the sharing of threat information at the
international and national levels, including by frontline
aviation security staff, who often lack access to critical
information or the knowledge and expertise required to
handle and act on such information. Many States also
lack access to the relevant databases, including those of
INTERPOL and the sanctions lists of the Monitoring
Group of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities.

Moreover, as CTED's assessment and analysis
work reveals, only 57 States have introduced an
advance passenger information (API) system. The low
level of API implementation represents a major security
gap. Resolution 2178 (2014), adopted in 2014, requires
Member States to ensure that airlines operating in
their territories provide an API in order to detect the
departure from their territories, or attempted entry
into or transit through their territories, of individuals
designated by the ISIL (Da'esh) and Al-Qaida sanctions
committees. I should note that CTED is involved in the
project of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre
to help Member States establish API systems. The
project includes regional workshops, capacity-building
consultations and the development of a national API
implementation road map.

A further major concern is the lack of protection
in landside airport areas. Unlike security-restricted
areas, landside areas are accessible to the public and
often managed by a broad range of agencies. Particular
challenges in that regard are the actions of lone
gunmen, as with the Fort Lauderdale attack of January
2017; mass-casualty explosive devices, as with the
2016 attacks carried out in Brussels and Istanbul; and
attacks involving improvised explosive devices (IEDs)
carried by passengers. The use of information and
communications technologies for malicious purposes
and the potential vulnerability of aircraft and airport
information technology systems also require our
urgent attention.

Allow me to make a few brief proposals for further
action by the Council and the Committee aimed at
addressing the terrorist threat to civil aviation.

The Council and the CTC should intensify their
efforts to raise awareness of and promote the SARPs
and the guidance material developed by ICAO. They
should urge States to make the relevant national
agencies aware of those tools, including by ensuring
the provision of appropriate training for all relevant
actors, in particular the frontline staff responsible for
implementing security controls. I would note in that
regard that the CTC recently reviewed the updated
Technical Guide to the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1373 (2009) and other relevant
resolutions so as to reflect the provisions of recently
adopted resolutions, including resolution 2309 (2016),
as well as the tools and instruments developed by
ICAO. The Guide is intended as a comprehensive
reference tool to help States assess the progress of their
implementation efforts.

The Council and the CTC should incorporate the
relevant Council resolutions into the civil aviation
security framework. For example, States should be
encouraged to take into consideration the provisions
of Council resolution 2341 (2017) on protecting
critical infrastructure from terrorist attacks, and
incorporate them into their national civil aviation
security programmes. There is also a need to increase
understanding of that growing threat.

The Council and the CTC should promote the
establishment of risk-management processes at all
airports, including risk assessment, the implementation
of the relevant mitigation measures and efforts to
ensure that such measures are effectively implemented
by security personnel. The Council and the CTC should
urge States to enhance the protection of airport landside
areas. The new ICAO standards and guidance material
covering the protection of landside areas should be
taken into consideration.

States should be urged to address the use of
information and communications technologies
for malicious purposes, as well as the use of
sophisticated IEDs. The Council and the CTC should
urge States and industry actors to regard aviation
security audits as an opportunity to identify best
practices, as well as capacity-building and technical
assistance needs. States should be urged to strengthen
their capacity to identify low- and high-risk passengers,
while taking into account the need to facilitate travel.

Especially urgent, in that regard, is the introduction
and effective implementation of both Advance
Passenger Information systems and Passenger Name
Record systems, as a means to identify terrorists and
foreign terrorist fighters. The Council and the CTC
should encourage States to step up their efforts to
populate INTERPOL databases, including by ensuring
connectivity to and the active use of, and expanded access
to its I-24/7 global police communications system.

In conclusion, I encourage the Council and the
CTC to continue to address aviation security-related
issues, including by promoting the implementation of
resolution 2309 (2016) by member States. This topic
will continue to be considered by the Committee,
including through regular briefings provided by CTED
and ICAO. I also urge the Council and the Committee to
continue to support closer cooperation between ICAO
and the Committee. The CTC and CTED will continue
to enhance their cooperation in that area with the Office
of Counter-Terrorism. It is my hope that the Office will
fully utilize the assessment, analysis and expertise of
the Committee and CTED in this area, including within
the framework of technical assistance facilitation.
