Mr. Donoghue (Ireland): At the outset, I would
like to warmly commend the Jordanian presidency of
the Council for its initiative in proposing that issues
relating to reconciliation should be the focus of today's
open debate.

I align myself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.

Over the century that we are marking today, the
scourge of war was all too visible in many parts of
the world and in many forms. How to eliminate that
scourge and to build lasting peace is one of the great
challenges facing our Organization. The United Nations
has a vital role to play in helping societies damaged by
conflict to rebuild and regenerate themselves. Through
its peacebuilding interventions, it can help to transform
a fragile peace into something more deep-rooted
and lasting. It can lay the foundations, as few other
organizations can, for permanent peace.

At the heart of that endeavour is the support the
United Nations can provide for reconciliation between
the communities of a divided society in the aftermath
of conflict. It can help communities to bind up the
wounds of conflict and to move, howsoever slowly and
hesitantly, towards peaceful coexistence. The damage
done to relationships at all levels by years of war and
suffering is, of course, immense. It can take generations
to overcome. There are legacies of profound mistrust.
There are issues between communities in conflict that
touch on deep sensitivities of identity and allegiance.
Even if violence has ended, a lengthy healing process
is needed before the rival communities can reach the
level of confidence in each other that is required for a
shared future.

On the island of Ireland, we have seen this at first
hand. Fifteen years ago, a comprehensive political
framework for the settlement of the Northern Ireland
problem was agreed in a negotiation process which
that the Irish and British Governments and the political
representatives of Northern Ireland's communities. The
achievement, the so-called Good Friday Agreement,
transformed relations within Northern Ireland, between
North and South, and between Ireland and the United
Kingdom. It has brought lasting political stability
to Northern Ireland and an unprecedented level of
cooperation and interaction between the two parts of
Ireland.

At the grass-roots level, however, a significant
challenge remains in terms of achieving lasting
reconciliation between the two main traditions in
Northern Ireland. Much painstaking effort has been
devoted on all sides to that process. While significant
progress has been made, a number of divisive issues
remain. Those include issues such as the flying of flags
linked to the respective communities or how contentious
parades should be handled. Intensive efforts were made
recently by a respected United States third party to
broker an agreement between the communities on how
those issues should be addressed.

Over the years, the Irish and British Governments
have worked closely together on practical steps that
might help the different traditions in Northern Ireland
to deal with the past and to transcend the legacy of
bitterness and misunderstanding. I salute here important
initiatives taken by the British Government, such as
the apology given by Prime Minister Cameron for
the events of Bloody Sunday, to which the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom referred earlier
in this meeting. Much valuable work is also under way
at the community level to foster reconciliation and to
increase mutual respect and acceptance of diversity.

At the international level, the United Nations is
promoting similar objectives through a wide range of
instruments available to it in dealing with the aftermath
of conflict. Those include support for transitional
justice and the rule of law, for political dialogue and
mediation, for truth-telling processes, for reparations,
for institutional reform, and for the role of women in
the renewal and rebuilding of societies emerging from
conflict. In such situations, the United Nations has
the potential to deliver profound benefits, defusing
tensions between communities at the local level
through concrete actions that it supports and by thereby
easing and accelerating the essential work of national
reconciliation.

Reconciliation work assumes different forms in
different contexts, whether at the national or community
levels. There can be multiple benefits, furthermore,
from individual steps taken. For example, the creation
ofa post-conflict system ofjustice can, on the one hand,
serve accountability purposes in relation to egregious
crimes committed during the conflict phase, while on
the other it can help to restore the trust of individual
citizens and to reconcile them to the new State.

Peacebuilding, with reconciliation at its core,
is probably most effective if it is double-facing - a
process through which a society moves from a divided
past to a shared future. While reconciliation needs
to be context-specific and respond to the particular
nature or dynamic of each transition or conflict, a more
concerted effort is required to glean and share lessons
and best practices from different conflict settings. Work
also needs to be done on drawing together the various
dimensions of reconciliation - including development,
peacebuilding, human rights, security, the rule of law
and governance - into a more integrated approach
in which those various pillars would complement and
reinforce each other.

To conclude, my delegation believes that this area
of United Nations activity has not always received the
attention it deserves. The actions being taken by the
United Nations under various headings to promote
reconciliation in post-conflict societies merit our full
support. The Organization is making a vital contribution
to the creation of "a truer, irreversible peace", as the
concept paper circulated by the Jordanian presidency
(S/2014/30, annex) puts it. There is much potential
for developing that contribution, and Ireland looks
forward to further reflection on the subject with other
interested delegations. In that context, we wish to share
the lessons we have learned from the Northern Ireland
peace process, in the light of the continuing challenge
of achieving lasting reconciliation among the differing
traditions there, and also to draw on other examples of
best practices from around the globe.

