Mr. Minton (United States): We would like to
extend a very warm welcome to the High
Representative and thank him for his report. We would
also like to welcome to the Council for the first time
the new Ambassador of Tunisia, Ambassador Mejdoub.
Welcome, Sir.

We have in the situation before us today, as often
is the case in this area of the world, a mixture of
positive developments and ongoing challenges. At the
State level and in the Federation we have a coalition of
moderate non-nationalist parties, which has expressed
its commitment to the international community's
priorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. And yet at the
same time, this majority is extremely fragile. It will not
be easy to achieve the important steps that are needed
for making progress in refugee returns, the
consolidation of State institutions and economic
reform. This is a big job and it will take time.
Likewise, while there is a non-ideological
government of experts in the Republika Srpska, no one
doubts the continuing influence of the Bosniac Party of
Democratic Action (SDA) and other nationalist parties
in the Republic. And sadly, the nationalist Croatian
Democratic Union (HDZ) party continues to pursue an
obstructionist path that, we are confident, is merely the
last gasp of an obsolete and defeated faction. We
applaud the resolute action that the High
Representative has taken to deal with those leaders
who attempt to reverse progress by clinging to such
nationalism.

I have reviewed some of these details because my
delegation believes that the High Representative must
monitor the situation closely and take strong and
concerted action when necessary. We do not disagree
with the High Representative's concept of ownership,
but my Government has made very clear its continuing
belief that the international community has an
important role to play in pushing for progress when it
grinds to a halt. It is Ambassador Petritsch, the High
Representative, who leads the international
community's efforts in this regard.

Another important point is that we are
encouraged by the positive news on refugee returns,
but there is still important legislative action that must
be taken to push this process further.

We would also like to note our deep concern
about the special agreement between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republika Srpska. As
the statement you will read, Mr. President, at the end of
this meeting makes clear, it is important that the High
Representative monitor the final details of this
agreement to ensure that it does not undermine the
sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina or violate the
Dayton Peace Agreement in any way.

Finally, my delegation would have liked a
specific call in the presidential statement for the
adoption and the implementation of a permanent
election law as soon as possible. This is the most useful
and appropriate response to the irresponsible action of
the HDZ, and we urge all of Bosnia's duly elected
representatives to make it a priority in the coming six
months.

