Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this briefing. I also thank my colleague the Permanent
Representative of Poland for her detailed account
of the activities of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005),
concerning the Sudan. I commend her dynamic way of
leading the work of the Committee.

In broad strokes, we can say that the situation in
Darfur is following a positive trend but still requires
our attention. We are concerned about the violence
observed during recent demonstrations throughout the
country. We deplore that such violence led to death and
call on the authorities to exercise restraint. We are also
concerned about the possible impact of the political
situation in the Sudan on the Darfur peace process. We
call on all parties to join the peace process.

The briefing we just heard reminds us that, even
as we reflect on a strategy for the withdrawal of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, the suffering of the population is unfortunately
not over. Conflict-related sexual violence continues
to affect women and girls in particular. We are deeply
concerned about their lack of access to legal remedies.
We call on the Government of the Sudan to strengthen
its national capacity for legal, medical and psychosocial
support for victims of sexual violence. In that regard,
we support the work of Special Representative Patten
and look forward to continuing to work with her and,
especially, listening to her within the framework of
the meetings of the Sanctions Committees. Belgium
supports making sexual violence a separate designation
criterion, which means that the experts working
for Sanctions Committees must be trained in the
area. We also see the value of similar collaboration
with the Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict.

There are other elements in the report of the Panel
ofExperts that alarm us. One is the continuing presence
of armed groups outside the Sudan. These combatants
offer their services to the highest bidder and are highly
mobile, which poses a threat to the entire region,
including the Sudan itself. Another is the fact that
weapons originating in Darfur are in circulation in the
region. Even ifit is possible that the weapons-collection
campaign organized by the Darfur authorities has led
some combatants to resell their surplus, the efforts to
curb this traffic must continue. The arms embargo on
Darfur is one ofthe more useful measures in that regard.

Lastly, we would like to acknowledge the valuable
work of the Panel of Experts, which fills out the view
that the members of the Council have of the situation
on the ground with detailed and verifiable information
and in-depth investigations. Its task is extremely
important, and in order to ensure that the Council
receives the best information possible, it is crucial to
preserve its independence. We call on all parties, in the
Sudan and elsewhere, to cooperate in good faith with
the experts and enable them to conduct their mission
without interference.

