Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the excellent
way in which Mali has conducted the work of the
Security Council during the month of December. You
have presented us with a programme of work that took
into account the various interests of the Council in the
area of the maintenance of international peace and
security. The relevance of the issues that you submitted
for discussion in the Council should be highlighted,
especially since my delegation was able, as a result, to
affirm once again the necessity for the Council to give
as much attention as possible to situations of tension
and conflict in their regional and subregional contexts
and to ensure greater interaction between the Council
and the subregional actors in the search for solutions to
the problems that arise.

The interdependence of the situations in the West
African region and the role played by the Economic
Community of West African States, particularly by
President Alpha Oumar Konare, properly illustrates the
way the Council should continue to act in order to
ensure that it heeds the views of the subregional
mechanisms in the framework of Chapter VIII of the
Charter.

This wrap-up meeting also gives my delegation
the opportunity to share some preliminary impressions
following our term in the Council. It is not a question
of taking stock or of producing any kind of evaluation
of the work of the Council during the two past years.
We wish simply to say that it has been enriching to see
how the delegations of all the members of the Council
have worked together since January 2000.

It is heartening to note that the conflicts in Africa
have been addressed by the Council and that a
sustained and sincere effort has tirelessly been made by
all the members to alleviate as much as possible the
political, economic and social ills of the continent. It is
nevertheless important that the Council's commitment
to Africa be more prominent and sustained. It would
perhaps be appropriate for the Council to embark from
time to time on an evaluation of its own action with
respect to African conflicts that persist or that are
becoming increasingly complicated, such as those in
the Great Lakes region, Angola, Sierra Leone, Liberia
and of course Somalia, in order to face up to the real
problems and explore new avenues that might be more
effective for the resolution of these conflicts.

If the Council is sometimes prompt and effective
in its management of certain conflicts or tensions, this
is, unfortunately, not the case for numerous other
situations whose urgency requires special attention and
a firm and resolute commitment from all States
members of the Council. My delegation's conviction
that the concept of international peace and security is
indivisible and should be applicable to all crisis
situations, without distinction or proportioning, leaves
no doubt as to the mandatory obligation for the Council
to treat fairly and with the same promptness everything
that is likely to threaten peace and security in the world
and breach international law, the foundations of
international law and the principles and objectives of
the Charter.

I would like to dwell for a moment on the
situation in the Middle East, and in particular the
question of Palestine, to which Tunisia, both in its
national capacity and as a country that represents the
Arab world in the Security Council during its mandate,
attaches the greatest importance. In this regard, I would
like to reaffirm that my country remains firmly
convinced that the Security Council has full and
complete jurisdiction with respect to the maintenance
of international peace and security in the region. The
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories fits
perfectly within the framework of the Council's
prerogatives, because this is a situation of occupation
that is fraught with serious and systematic violations of
international law and international humanitarian law.

Today, we feel duty-bound to note that the
Security Council has been unable to play its due role
over the past few years, particularly over the past 15
months marked by continued escalation during which
the Council has been unable to act, with the exception,
of course, of the adoption of resolution 1322 (2000) in
October 2000. The role of the Council is neither
exclusive nor contradictory to that played by other
international actors, which we encourage to continue in
their work. On the contrary, the Council's role is
complementary. The Council, which is the ultimate
guarantor of international peace and security, must
become more directly and more urgently involved in
the situation in the Middle East. That is a region whose
special sensitivity we know well and in which the
Palestinian people and Arab public opinion, while
frustrated, do not despair of one day being able to
consign to the past a certain readiness to associate the
United Nations with practising a policy of double
standards.

We firmly believe that the Council can also
define unified criteria and a harmonized policy
concerning the imposition of sanctions regimes. We
hope that resolution 1382 (2001) will clarify many
shadow areas of resolution 1284 (1999) and will thus
facilitate a breakthrough towards unblocking the
situation in Iraq. That will make it possible to lift the
sanctions that continue to affect the civilian population
of Iraq and pave the way for the resolution of
outstanding issues, including humanitarian ones.

The question of sanctions in general has been the
focus of continuous interest, as well as the subject of
controversy within the Council. Imposing sanctions is
indeed a heavy international responsibility. That is why
we have always believed it necessary to establish a
transparent mechanism to monitor the calculated and
collateral effects of any sanctions regime in order to
ensure that this instrument is not perceived as being
solely punitive in nature. We must somehow learn how
to loosen sanctions in due course when a State or party
targeted fulfils its obligations under the relevant
Council resolutions. That was the case with Ethiopia,
Eritrea and Sudan, and should also be the case with
Iraq and Libya.

We have not yet been able to reach consensus on
the document to be adopted at the end of the lengthy
discussions of the Council's Working Group on
sanctions. We believe nonetheless that the exercise
should be pursued.

Many improvements have been made to the
Security Council's working methods. This is an
evolving process that should enjoy the attention not
only of non-member States of the Council that wish to
see the organ more responsive to their grievances,
particularly in matters of transparency, interaction and
openness, but also and above all of the elected and
permanent States members of the Council, which are
best able to change the Council's practices from within.

I need hardly note in that context that the more all
the members of the Council interact with one another,
the more effective the results of the Council's work
will be. To that end, transparency, which is sometimes
lacking within the Council itself, must characterize
relations between permanent and non-permanent
members. At stake, of course, is the credibility and
effectiveness of the Council. However, the reform of
the Council, which was begun in 1993 but remains
unfinished, is necessary and urgent. Within this organ
and outside it, we must relaunch the thinking process
and there is no reason why, by 2003 - after 10 years
of hard work - we cannot reach a consensus.

The system is 55 years old and has not changed
since the end of the Second World War. No
international system has withstood so many storms
over the past 30, 20 or 10 years. We must not wait for
some serious crisis to impose a transformation on us. In
order to revive the spirit of Hammarskjold and to
justify the faith of Kofi Annan, we must complete the
reform of the Security Council.

During their presidency of the Council, many
delegations around this table have initiated thematic
debates that have made it possible to exchange views
on and to expand the scope of application of the
concept of international peace and security. The
questions of prevention, refugees, civilians, children
and women in times of conflict and exit strategies have
all been debated with interest. Tunisia has proposed
discussion of the issue of peace-building in its
political, social and economic dimensions and of the
absolute need for the international community to tackle
the deep-rooted causes of conflict, such as poverty.
Brainstorming on these various topics should serve the
Council as a reference point for its approach to the
questions it considers. The fact that many States non-
members of the Council take part in this in-depth
reflection is an asset from which the Council should
draw the full benefit.

These are some preliminary thoughts on certain
aspects that we wished to highlight in the course of this
wrap-up meeting. Of course, Tunisia will remain active
and deeply, fervently and selflessly involved in the
service ofjust causes.

My delegation has the pleasant duty of thanking
all the members of the Security Council for their help,
understanding and spirit of comradeship and
collegiality throughout the past 24 months. It also
hopes that it has discharged its duty of being a worthy
representative of Africa and the Arab world throughout
its term.

