Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank you, Madam President, for having
convened this debate and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for introducing
the latest quarterly report (S/2015/303). The report
describes the progress made with respect to the
9 February resumption of the high-level dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, which was facilitated
by the European Union, but pending issues remain and
progress thereon is slow or even nonexistent. We must
not overlook them. Here I refer to the rule of law, the
voluntary return of displaced persons and the issue of
disappeared persons.

As the Special Representative pointed out, this
debate is taking place at a time when recent, very serious
incidents in the region, although isolated, recall the
need to make progress towards stability. In that context,
once again we see clearly the importance of the role
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999). More specifically, we commend the role
of UNMIK in the promotion, by means of discreet but
indispensable actions, of the necessary progress in the
area of reconciliation among communities.

As I said in my statement to the Council on
6 February (see S/PV.7377), we are, unfortunately,
not in a position yet to speak of a total reconciliation
or any satisfactory integration among communities.
There has been much progress in this area, but much
remains to be done. We therefore call on all actors,
especially those that have institutional responsibilities,
to take responsible actions aimed at furthering progress
towards reconciliation, which remains elusive. It is
therefore particularly important that we comply with
pending agreements, which will help to establish a
joint association of municipalities in the north, in
keeping with the 19 April 2013, in the framework of
the Pristina-Belgrade dialogue. This is a key issue with
respect to continued progress in the process that began
in Brussels, which cannot be further delayed.

I am grateful to Mr. Dacie, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and to Mr. Hashim Thaci for their presence and their
respective briefings. Their regular participation in
these debates, which I believe should be held quarterly,
is a reflection of the positive political dynamic initiated
by the Brussels dialogue and ofthe serious commitment
made by Belgrade and Pristina. Spain commends this
openness and constructive attitude, and we encourage
both parties to continue to implement the agreement.
We welcome the February agreement between Belgrade
and Pristina relating to the reintegration of the various
judicial bodies on Kosovo territory. This must continue
to be pursued in the framework of justice and the rule
of law.

Here Spain would recall the commitment made by
the authorities in Pristina with respect to the exchange
of letters of April 2014 with respect to the allegations
contained in the Marty report of December 2010, which
are being investigated by the Special Investigative Task
Force. We call on Pristina to quickly take the remaining
steps to ensure that a specialist court is set up to look
into these allegations.

In closing, as I said here in February, Spain
constructively supports - as long as our principled
position is respected - any effort to facilitate this
direct dialogue promoted by the High Representative.
However, it is vital that this dialogue be translated into
concrete results that redound to the benefit of the entire
population. That would be a final justification and
rationale for this process.

