Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation was unable to
support resolution 2448 (2018), proposed by our French
colleagues to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic. We abstained not
because we do not support the Mission or disagree with
anything to do with it. On the contrary, we are grateful
for its activities and the dedication of its peacekeepers.
The reason is the manner in which the work on the text
was done, especially in the final stages, and it leads
us to wonder once again about the true reasons for the
behaviour of the authors of the resolution, who, unlike
us, are apparently continuing to play a zero-sum game
in Africa. Furthermore, behind all of this we get a
glimpse of an attitude that has persisted for decades to
the independence that African countries have achieved
through their struggles for national liberation and that
treats their lands like some kind of patrimony or their
own preserve in a vicious cycle where metropolis meets
colony.

Throughout all the rounds of expert consultations,
we asked that our concerns be heard and that the text
reflect a number of points of principle, aimed chiefly
at increasing the transparency of the interactions with
Bangui's international partners, something that Western
delegations are constantly calling for, and a recognition
of the important role of regional actors in the process of

achieving a settlement in the Central African Republic.
Once again, unfortunately, our desire for mutually
respectful work in the Council was repudiated. Our
arguments during the work on the resolution were
ignored. Moreover, we detect in the resolution's content
the penholders' clear overstepping of their authority to
assert a national agenda or reflect the priorities of their
closest partners. There was basically no effort to seek
compromises or reach a consensus. We were offered
what were termed compromise solutions that took no
account of our legitimate demands, and we were told
that this was as far as the penholders could go, it was
their maximum. What I want to know is who decides
what the maximum is. Their maximum is not even our
minimum. Practically speaking, we were faced with
a fact and, not for the first time, were told to take it
or leave it, to go along with the situation as presented
in the name of preserving the unity of the Security
Council.

It is not the first time that we have encountered this
in the Council or said that it is time that this culture
of discourse, or rather the lack thereof, must come to
an end. The way the draft was agreed on once again
emphasized how essential it is that we change the
current system of penholdership for various items on
the Security Council's agenda, which has been usurped
by the Western troika.

The authors ofthe documentflatlyrefusedtotake into
account a number of our principled political concerns.
The result was that it did not reflect the important
concept welcoming peace initiatives that align with and
contribute to achieving the African Initiative for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
Nor did we hear any convincing or clear reasons why
the French delegation was categorically opposed to our
incidentally very generalized proposed wording. But
we certainly do remember that on 14 November, when
consensus on a draft resolution was not reached, it was
immediately taken off the table at the request of one
delegation. For some reason we did not see Paris take a
similarly careful approach to our position.

The suggestion that the meeting in Khartoum that
for the first time in a long time brought the leaders
of the Central African Republic opposition groups
together around the same negotiation table was not
aligned with the African Initiative is totally wrong. We
heard the same kind of excuses in 2015 when France
prevented similar efforts to achieve peace by rejecting
the Nairobi agreement between the main opposition
groups headed by Francois Bozize and Michel Djotodia
on the invented pretext that it was not in line with the
previous agreements. Since then we have all seen that
the security situation in the Central African Republic
is deteriorating, the socioeconomic situation is getting
worse and the human suffering is continuing. In that
connection, we would specifically like to point out that
we have taken note of the French delegation's promise
to reflect the importance of the Khartoum process
in future Security Council documents. We will be
watching attentively to see that promise fulfilled.

Another subject not reflected in the resolution was
the major contribution that has been made to training
the Central African armed forces by the Russian
instructors who are in the Central African Republic at
the invitation of its leaders and are working to improve
the armed forces' real battle readiness. Instead, the
penholders bent over backwards to puff up the role of
the European Union Military Training Mission in the
Central African Republic, which as the Europeans
themselves admit is focused on human rights training
for the military, which is not exactly going to help it
ensure security and control throughout the country.

In our View, what is extremely revealing is the
evolving story of the approval in the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) of the
second batch of Russian weapons sent free of charge to
the Central African Republic in response to Bangui's
official request. There is supposed to be a consensus on
the importance of strengthening the national security
sector, and we have responded to all of the questions.
But we are now being told that the Central African
Republic does not have the proper storage facilities.
And yet for a subsequent delivery of 1,400 submachine

guns from the French - which on top of that are
not from their own stores but seized from smugglers
in murky circumstances - storage facilities were

suddenly found. Where is the logic in that? Or is it
another infamous example of double standards? As this
shows, guided by their own narrow self-interests, the
countries of the West are putting obstacles in the way
of rebuilding battle-ready forces in the Central African
Republic and restoring the Government's legitimate
authority throughout the country, despite all their
assertions to the contrary.

I will have to disappoint those who are getting
ready to blame Russia for all of the world's deadly sins.
Incidentally, we were surprised to learn from the BBC
today - Council members can find it on the Internet
themselves - about a statement by United States
National Security Adviser John Bolton on Russia and
China's role in Africa. The same claims that he made
about our countries could just as well be made about
the United States. In fact, that was what the reporter
describing the situation was saying. It can be found on
the BBC's website.

The fact is that the international community's
unSited support for stabilizing the Central African
Republic has not vanished, and our understanding
of the importance of extending the mandate of the
peacekeeping mission in that country is still there. But
we cannot accept it when in the guise of so-called good
intentions with regard to consolidating support for
Bangui, in practice the resolution's penholders plant the
idea about the exceptional nature of their own efforts.

We hope that reason will ultimately prevail in the
interests of the people of the Central African Republic.
Russia will continue its active and peaceful work
to stabilize the situation and establish peace in the
Central African Republic, and we are ready to engage
in respectful, constructive collaboration with anyone so
inclined. There is room for everyone who wants to help
the Central African Republic.

