Mr. Mahmood (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
congratulating Germany on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July and for organizing this open debate on children
and armed conflict. 1 also thank the Foreign Minister of
Germany for presiding over this important meeting.
And I welcome the presence and statements of
Ministers here today as clear testimony to the issue's
importance to all of us.

Allow me also to express my country's sincere
thanks to the Secretary-General, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, and
the Executive Director of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake,
for their detailed briefings this morning.

My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for
his tenth report on the issue, as contained in document
S/2011/250. We believe that his recommendations
merit careful consideration and subsequent
implementation and compliance by Member States and
parties to armed conflict.

We commend the Security Council for its
continued efforts to end violations against children in
armed conflict. These include the Secretary-General's
naming-and-shaming list, the establishment of a
monitoring and reporting mechanism, action plans, the
creation of a Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict through resolution 1612
(2005), the application of sanctions and referrals to the
International Criminal Court.

Those initiatives have yielded significant and
tangible successes. As reflected in the Secretary-
General's report, last year, too, several listed parties to
armed conflict signed agreements to adopt action plans
to end their recruitment or use of child soldiers. The
United Nations system-wide response to this issue is
also laudable. In that connection, I take this
opportunity to thank UNICEF for its leadership role in
the monitoring and reporting mechanism. The Special
Representative and her team deserve our particular
praise for their dedicated efforts.

While addressing this matter, we must focus a bit
more on the supply side of the issue. The use of
children by non-State armed groups does not take place
in a vacuum. Conditions that might make children in
those settings vulnerable to recruitment include
poverty, discrimination, inequality, exclusion,
hopelessness and desperate situations. They also
include a culture of political violence, tensions over
issues of religion and identity and a history of the use
of child soldiers, all of which combine to create a
situation where conflict is possible and where children
can be used or abused by armed groups. Success in
ending children's involvement in armed conflict
therefore depends largely on addressing the root causes
of motivation as well as desperation and on building
societies where children's rights and dignity and the
hope for a better future for all children are upheld.

Needless to say, there is still a long way to go.
While progress has been made through action plans to
release child soldiers in several situations of concern,
the overall situation of children in armed conflict
remains grave. There are 61 entities on the lists
contained in the annexes to the Secretary-General's
report, 16 of which have been listed for at least five
years. Some kind of criteria should be contemplated to
enforce full compliance by parties listed in the
annexes, particularly persistent violators, with time-
bound action plans. However, a cautious approach is
necessary to ensure that such enforcement in no way
risks harming the very vulnerable group that we are
addressing here, namely, children.

The issue of child casualties in the course of
military operations needs to be appropriately
addressed. In line with paragraph 220 of the Secretary-
General's report, we hope that all parties in situations
of armed conflict will adhere to their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law.

Apart from what I have referred to, in many
armed conflicts grave violations are committed against
children including, in particular the recruitment and
use of children, the killing and maiming of children,
rape and other sexual violence against children, the
abduction of children, attacks on schools and hospitals
and the denial of humanitarian access to children by
parties to armed conflict, in contravention of applicable
international law. In that regard, I particularly urge the
concerned parties to protect educational and health
institutions and related personnel from such attacks.
We also welcome the adoption today of resolution 1998
(2011) in this connection.

It has been more than nine years since the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict entered into force. Bangladesh signed and
ratified the Optional Protocol on 9 September 2000.
However, we note with sadness that a total of 50
Member States are still not party to it. We would like to
urge those States to become parties to the Protocol.
Children are the future of our world and they bear the
torch of the culture of peace. It is our solemn duty to
protect their physical safety and their right to live on
planet Earth with their minds free of fear and filled
with hopes and dreams.

