I thank the President of the Security Council for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the measures being taken to address the enormous challenges posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic to our peacekeeping operations and to the countries where they are deployed. I am pleased to join Under- Secretary-General DiCarlo and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock in briefing the Council today. Through an integrated effort that brings together all of the relevant United Nations entities, we continue to support our peacekeeping operations as they pursue the four interlinked objectives first set out by the Secretary-General in April: supporting national authorities, protecting United Nations personnel, mitigating the spread of the virus and assisting in the protection of vulnerable communities, and ensuring operational continuity in the implementation of their mandates. Countries where peacekeeping operations are deployed suffer from a combination of weak health and governance structures and a lack of the resources required to effectively combat the pandemic. In these environments, the spread of COVID-19 can lead not only to exacerbated socioeconomic tensions. Its effects can also undermine governance and local institutions, slow down or derail fragile political processes, worsen already volatile security situations and contribute to a recurrence of intercommunal conflict. The overall effect can be to further destabilize the countries where our missions are deployed and erode peace gains. The situation is further complicated by the fact that the pandemic has given rise to hate speech, incitement to violence and harmful misinformation targeting, both the local population and foreign nationals, including United Nations personnel. While responses to COVID-19 have been consensus-driven in some countries, they have been met with criticism in others, resulting in heightened political tensions in the areas of operation of some peacekeeping missions. Addressing the impact of COVID-19 has further burdened Governments already under considerable pressure to deliver on complex political processes, such as transition and reconciliation. For example, in South Sudan, the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan slowed down considerably, due in part to an increased focus on COVID-19-related challenges. The South Sudanese parties have been deadlocked for over three months over the state allocation and appointment of state governors and administration and have yet to reconstitute the Parliament. These combined effects of the pandemic can, in turn, negatively affect mandate implementation. Helping to prevent and contain the spread of the virus where peacekeeping operations are deployed is therefore not only a moral imperative, but also a political priority, as well as an operational requirement. To this end, a number of measures have been put in place. These measures have contributed to preventing and containing the spread among field personnel within relatively low levels, with much of it concentrated within contained locations. As of today, 9 September, across all field missions, which number over 100,000 personnel, a total of 1,049 cumulative cases have been recorded, with 609 recovered, 440 active cases and 18 deaths. The protection of the health, safety and security of peacekeeping personnel, and ensuring that they are not a vector for contagion, are of paramount importance. With uniformed personnel constituting the vast majority of deployments in peacekeeping operations, and also forming important units deployed to certain special political missions, particular attention was paid early on to their movements in and out of host countries. Following a temporary suspension, the rotations and repatriations of uniformed personnel have resumed and are planned and conducted in close coordination with both the police- and troop-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs) concerned, on the one hand, and the authorities of the host countries, on the other hand. TCCs and PCCs are required to comply with stringent conditions, including predeployment training on COVID-19 and a 14-day quarantine in their home countries, adherence to the mission's quarantine regulations upon deployment, physical distancing and the use of personal protective equipment to mitigate the spread of virus. Ensuring that these preventive measures are rigorously and fully implemented is of crucial importance. Allow me to take this opportunity to credit all of the TCCs and PCCs for their understanding and cooperation in these challenging circumstances, and to express our appreciation for the support they continue to provide to United Nations peacekeeping. We have also made progress in the provision of treatment and care, including in the area of medical evacuation (MEDEVAC), thanks to the partnerships fostered with generous Member States. Medical treatment and testing facilities and MEDEVAC options have been strengthened within the United Nations System-Wide Medical Evacuation Task Force, under the auspices of the Department of Operational Support (DOS). All missions have been provided with a risk-mitigation plan for COVID-19, and outbreak-response teams have been established in several operations. The Headquarters Field Coordination Group for COVID-19, which brings together the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, DOS and the Department of Peace Operations is working closely with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon as they respond to outbreak clusters in their missions. Remote working arrangements are in place, and psychosocial and other support are provided to staff, as needed. Peacekeeping operations continue to find innovative and proactive ways to implement their mandates under these challenging conditions. In that regard, I will focus on certain aspects of the mandates of our operations, namely, supporting political processes and protecting civilians. Our missions have maintained political engagement and community outreach through virtual platforms and undertaken public diplomacy initiatives to encourage political unity, respect for human rights and in response to inter-ethnic incidents. By adapting their work to the new reality, they have ensured the continuation of these efforts in line with their respective mandates. And we have in fact seen some positive results. The Juba talks on the Sudan, where the peace negotiations moved to a virtual format at the beginning of April, further complicating discussions taking place on parallel tracks, have led to the recent agreement between the transitional authorities and participating armed groups. In the Central African Republic, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic has continued to carry out its mandate since the advent of the pandemic, while fully respecting the Government's COVID-19 directives and considering the wide-ranging implications of the public health emergency. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO has supported the Congolese authorities in developing procedures and policies to manage the implementation of COVID-19 response measures. As the COVID-19 crisis abates in certain parts of the world, missions see opportunities to achieve more. In Cyprus, for example, the closing of crossing points between the two communities in February and March as well as quarantine requirements introduced by both sides effectively restricted movement between the north and south of the island. With the gradual easing of restrictions and following a leaders' joint decision in May, both sides have been working on the reopening of crossing points for certain categories of individuals and within certain health restrictions. Overall, peacekeeping operations continued to prevent and respond to threats to civilians, which have unfortunately not decreased in the past six months despite the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. This is particularly the case in Mali, the Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, in operational terms, the pandemic has affected the footprint of our missions and, to a certain degree, their capacity to perform patrols or monitoring activities, including by limiting their contact with local communities. As a result of the pandemic, United Nations peacekeeping missions have been approaching their protection-of-civilian activities primarily through the lens of doing no harm and prioritizing the need to prevent the virus from spreading among the local populations. Reductions in mission capacities have also affected the effectiveness of situational awareness tools, such as the use of air assets for intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance. In the areas of security sector reform (SSR) and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, various missions continue preparatory work and offer assistance to relevant national stakeholders in developing policies, even if physical meetings and activities are not possible. Nonetheless, prioritized activities are often being brought forward, as is the case in the SSR field in MONUSCO, through remote engagement with national actors and bilateral partners. The integrated effort by the Secretariat in support of our peacekeeping operations is complemented by strengthened synergies with the United Nations country teams and sister organizations, including the World Bank. This cooperation in support of national authorities deepens our common understanding of the impact of COVID-19 and informs the sequencing and prioritization of recovery initiatives, thereby ensuring that the response is adapted to the pandemic's impact on peace processes. Our efforts are also closely coordinated with our partner organizations on the ground, including the African Union and the European Union. We have been able to hold our regular meetings virtually, including, inter alia, those related to peace negotiations in South Sudan and the implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. The role of women peacekeepers is key to addressing the challenges to mandate implementation posed by COVID-19. As the Council has recognized in its recently adopted resolution 2538 (2020), on women in peacekeeping, women peacekeepers contribute to ensuring the greater credibility of United Nations efforts with local communities, including through more effective community engagement and protection responses. Women's contribution in these areas is particularly valuable when addressing the impact of COVID-19 in the communities where our peacekeepers serve. As part of the response to the pandemic, we have utilized the comprehensive performance assessment system to aid several missions in planning, tracking and showing the impact of their efforts aimed at helping to prevent the spread of COVID-19 in their areas of operations. This has strengthened their capacity both to support host countries' efforts and to ensure continuing delivery of mandated activities. The COVID-19 pandemic has undoubtedly had a significant impact on the conduct of our peacekeeping operations. It has created operational challenges, requiring us to adjust the deployment of uniformed personnel, put in place remote working arrangements and provide a range of additional services to staff in the field. It has complicated our efforts aimed at supporting national authorities and other actors, requiring us to adapt the modalities of our engagement for advancing political and peace processes. It has required us to recalibrate our protection-of- civilian and other activities in support of the populations we serve, while ensuring that these critical activities continue. I wish to thank, in particular, Under-Secretary-General Khare and the entire staff of the Department of Operational Support, as well as colleagues in the Headquarters Field Support Group, alongside the leadership and peacekeeping personnel in all of our missions, for their collective effort in responding to the challenges posed by COVID-19. With the guidance and support of Headquarters, and with the unified and consistent backing of the Security Council, our peacekeeping operations have quickly and effectively put in place a range of measures that have ensured operational continuity and ongoing mandate implementation across all of our operations. The Security Council's ongoing support will be indispensable as we continue to address the challenges posed by the pandemic.
