Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
your presence here in presiding over today's open
debate, Madam President, and we thank Mr. Mladenov
for his comprehensive briefing.

Peru has been following the situation in Palestine
with deep concern. The rigidity of the positions and
the absence of dialogue between the parties, along
with the continuing eruptions of violence, make for
a highly volatile environment with unpredictable
consequences, including ongoing acts of terrorism. We
deeply deplore the fact that we continue to see fatalities,
many of them children, as a result of the situation,
and a marked deterioration in security conditions for
millions of Palestinians and Israelis. We emphasize
the importance of ending the violence and holding the
parties accountable for the numerous serious violations
of international law and international humanitarian
law. Impunity exacerbates the conflict and helps to
normalize a disregard for human rights.

In the current circumstances, a solution based
on two States with internationally recognized and
secure borders, negotiated directly by the parties
themselves, on a basis of existing resolutions and
agreements, is the only viable pathway consistent with
international law. We therefore consider it vital to end
the actions that undermine the necessary trust. That
means in particular the harmful practices of building
settlements, demolishing houses and evicting people in
the Palestinian territories that have been occupied since
1967, which undermine the possibilities for a two-State
solution and are contrary to the Council's provisions
in resolution 2334 (2016). These illegal practices must
cease. We also consider it imperative to reject hate
speech, anti-Semitism and discrimination in all its
forms. It is the responsibility of the leaders of both
parties to demonstrate concrete signs of moderation and
a commitment to peace. In that regard, we emphasize
how important it is that the Council show that it is
capable of a minimal degree of consensus and can
speak out when the situation on the ground warrants it,
in accordance with international law and the Charter of
the United Nations.

Peru has been dismayed to see the growing
deterioration of living conditions in the occupied
Palestinian territory and how that contributes to
higher levels of radicalization and extremism among
its population. We are particularly alarmed at the
worsening humanitarian situation in Gaza. We believe
that providing basic goods and services in this
area, as well as ending the confinement of millions
of Palestinians, should be priority issues for the
international community.

In that regard, we deem it indispensable to make
progress on the intra-Palestinian reconciliation process,
making it possible for the legitimate Palestinian
Authority to resume effective control of Gaza. This
would alleviate the humanitarian situation and lay the
foundations for a resumption of dialogue with Israel.

We thus underscore the work of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East. It is important to endow it with stable
and predictable financing and to allow for the normal
functioning of its offices in East Jerusalem, in line with
the existing legal framework.

Bringing an end to the deterioration in the political
and humanitarian conditions underlying the question
of Palestine is a complex but urgent undertaking. The
risk of further escalation in the Middle East must be
addressed by the Council as a serious threat to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

