Mr. Cooreman (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's debate.
I would like to congratulate you on your country's
presidency of the Security Council.

Much has been said about the maintenance of
peace and the complexity of the multidimensional
challenges to international peace and security. It is
our view that those challenges must now be addressed
with a comprehensive and integrated approach. In that
regard, I wish to focus my statement on the issue of
environmental security.

The environment is one of the fundamental
dimensions of sustainable development and should
be part and parcel of our comprehensive approach to
security. Desertification, the melting of the ice-caps,
sea-level rise, the decline in forest cover and arable
land and the increasing scarcity of water resources
have disturbing and immediate effects on societies
in the areas affected. Such environmental changes
force people to migrate, fuel tension and spark violent
conflicts, with repercussions that transcend the borders
of the countries and regions concerned. It is therefore
vital that upsets in the climate and in ecosystems be
analysed and assessed in a security context that allows
the Security Council to play its role in promoting
sustainable solutions to contain the potential sources
of conflict.

To facilitate that endeavour, Belgium favours the
appointment a special representative for environmental
security, whose work will enable the Security Council
to act in a timely manner. In addition, the current
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
could report on the threats to environmental security
linked to their respective mandates so that they can be
discussed by the Council and other competent agencies
of the United Nations. The appointment of the special
representative could be an integral part of the broader
reform of the peace and security pillar. We welcome the
adoption today of resolution General Assembly 72/ 199,
which supports the vision of the Secretary-General, and
we eagerly await concrete proposals.

Belgium will continue to take an active part in the
discussions and will attempt to firmly anchor the global
approach in the peace and security pillar of the United
Nations and in our national policies. Belgium already
attaches priority to the financing of the general budget
of the agencies of the United Nations, by giving them
the means to implement the gloval approach.

In the broader context, Belgium is working on the
humanitarian-development nexus, some aspects of
which can have an impact on environmental security.
Several flexible humanitarian funds financed by
Belgium have enabled contributions when natural
disasters occur. That was the case following the
recent hurricanes that affected the Caribbean region.
In addition, Belgium has also adopted a new, flexible
approach in transition contexts that seeks to create
bridges between humanitarian aid and development
activities, with a View to addressing the causes of
vulnerability and to strengthen the resilience of
populations. In 2018, support will be provided in thaat
framework to Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in the Lake Chad region.

Given the complex challenges to international
peace and security, Belgium promotes a comprehensive
approach, both nationally and internationally. We know
that our credibility will depend on our ability to turn
our dreams into action.

