Ms. Banks (New Zealand): New Zealand has
observed with deep concern the escalation in hostilities
in the Middle East, involving the occupied Palestinian
territory, Israel and Lebanon. We condemn the loss of
innocent civilian lives and the destruction of vital
civilian infrastructure. We strongly urge all sides to
pull back from violence, observe international law and
allow international facilitators and mediators a chance
to put a peace process together.

We condemn the killing and detention of Israeli
soldiers by the military wing of Hamas and by
Hizbollah. The soldiers must be released immediately,

and unharmed. Hizbollah must stop its rocket attacks
on Israel, which have taken civilian lives. States with
influence over Hamas and Hizbollah must act for
restraint, in the interests of the wider international
community. The message to Hamas and Hizbollah must
be that confrontation and violence are destroying the
prospects for a peace settlement in the Middle East.

At the same time, we cannot accept that Israel has
reacted with due proportionality or caution. Its attacks
on the occupied Palestinian territories and on Lebanon,
targeting militants and infrastructure, have also
destroyed housing and caused hundreds of casualties,
most of them civilians. It is causing further suffering
through the denial of the basic necessities of life and
through forced displacement that is affecting hundreds
of thousands of people. Israel must heed the many calls
to restrain itself and allow full and immediate access to
relief efforts. It must release officials of the Palestinian
Authority whom it has detained.

The Secretary-General is to be commended for
his efforts to bring about an immediate ceasefire and to
begin the process of negotiating and implementing a
solution to the crisis. He will need the full and active
support of the Security Council to achieve that
objective. New Zealand supports the thrust of his
proposals and urges the Security Council to give them
active and positive consideration.

There has been an ongoing failure to address and
resolve the root causes of the conflict in the Middle
East. The extremist message, which we deplore, has
resonated where injustice, deprivation, fear and
hopelessness reign. That philosophy is very dangerous
for the Middle East region and the rest of the world. A
ceasefire in Lebanon and the resolution of the
immediate causes of the conflict must be followed by
negotiations for a comprehensive peace in the region, if
such crises are to be avoided in the future.

