Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would like to thank the
Assistant Secretary-General, Ms. Bintou Keita, and the
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission configuration,
Ambassador Mauro Vieira, for their very informative
and comprehensive briefings.

I am heartened to hear about the positive
developments in Guinea-Bissau, as reflected in
the Secretary-General's report (S/20l9/664). Much
progress has been made on the political front in
Guinea-Bissau, including the holding of legislative
elections and the appointment of the Prime Minister.
In addition, the general security situation in Guinea-
Bissau remains relatively stable. We hope that this
conducive environment can be maintained, particularly
ahead ofthe upcoming presidential elections, scheduled
to take place in two months. I would like to reiterate
three pertinent points.

First, the presidential election planned for
November this year is crucial. All Bissau-Guinean
stakeholders must contribute positively towards
enabling the completion of the electoral cycle in a
peaceful and timely manner. It is important to note,
however, that this is merely one step that should pave
the way to surmounting the task ahead. The political
will demonstrated by all parties thus far needs to be
maintained in implementing key reforms, including
revision of the Constitution, the electoral law and the
law on political parties. These are prerequisite for
Guinea-Bissau to be able to devote its attention to
ensuring long-term stability and development for the
benefit of its people.

This brings me to my second point- socioeconomic
development. As Prime Minister Aristides Gomes has
said, the Government must focus on improving the
socioeconomic situation and the implementation of the
Terra Ranka plan. As the name Terra Ranka suggests,
we hope that the strategic development plan will
give the entire Bissau-Guinean population a chance
to start afresh. We commend the partners that have
pledged to support the plan, and call on the international
community to continue supporting Guinea-Bissau,
not only in its economic development but also in
tackling various challenges, including the promotion
of human rights and the fight against transnational
organized crime.

Thirdly, Indonesia supports and commends the
work of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and the
implementation of its mandated priorities. Having
been present in the country since 2010, the mission
has carried out important tasks, including fostering
dialogue and reconciliation, strengthening democratic
institutions and enhancing State capacity.

It is therefore necessary to ensure a seamless
transition to the United Nations country team and other
partners upon the expiry of its mandate in 2020. We
welcome the establishment of the transition task force
and reiterate the importance of national ownership in
the transition process. We also commend the role of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund, as well as regional and subregional organizations,
such as the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel, the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States, in supporting
various programmes, projects and initiatives in
Guinea-Bissau. We hope that they can continue to
play their crucial roles, particularly after the closure
of UNIOGBIS.

Lastly, we look forward to the holding of the
presidential election and the implementation of key
reforms for the long-term stability and development of
Guinea-Bissau.

