Mr. Salam (Lebanon): As we renew the mandate
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) today, it is important not to forget that the
current enhanced mission of UNIFIL came on the heels
of the Israeli war on Lebanon in 2006, which killed
1,125 Lebanese civilians and displaced hundreds of
thousands, not to mention those civilians who have
since been mutilated by the cluster bombs that Israel
dropped in the last 48 hours of its aggression. In fact,
the criminal fallout of Israel's 2006 aggression
continues to unfold. During the past four months,
"seven incidents involving unexploded ordnance from
the 2006 conflict occurred, resulting in injury to six
civilians and one deminer", as stated in paragraph 43
of the Secretary-General's most recent report
(S/2010/352) on the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006).

Israel claims to be committed to the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1701
(2006). Yet, as stated by the Secretary-General in
paragraph 56 of his July report, Israeli warplanes

"continue to violate resolution 1701 (2006) and
Lebanese sovereignty on an almost daily basis
through overflights of Lebanese territory. These
overflights create a tense situation and have the
potential to trigger an incident that could rapidly
escalate".

Furthermore, Israel continues to blatantly and
repeatedly violate Lebanese sovereignty on land and at
sea, where it unilaterally established a line of buoys
infringing on Lebanese territorial waters, in addition to
its "navy units dropping depth charges and firing flares
along the buoy line", as stated in paragraph 26 of the
Secretary-General's latest report. Is this how Israel
intends to be fully committed to the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006)?

Four years after the Security Council adopted that
resolution, calling on Israel to withdraw its troops from
all Lebanese territory, the Israeli armed forces, as noted
in paragraph 8 of the Secretary-General's report,
continue their "occupation of the northern part of
Ghajar village and an adjacent area of land north of the
Blue Line, in violation of resolution 1701 (2006)". Is it
by continuing to defy the Secretary-General's clear

request to withdraw from northern Ghajar that Israel
respects resolution 1701 (2006)?

Moreover, Israel continues to occupy the Shab'a
farms in the Kafr Shuba hills, refusing a solution even
on an interim basis, as previously proposed by the
Lebanese Government. And it is impossible not to
mention the more than 150 Israeli spies arrested in
Lebanon during the past year, let alone those who fled
to Israel before the Lebanese security forces were able
to apprehend them. Do they not constitute a violation
of Lebanese sovereignty, safety and security, respect
for which is enshrined in resolution 1701 (2006)?

And what about the barrage of bellicose threats
levelled against my country and its people by Israeli
officials, promising them more death and destruction.
For Israeli Defence Minister Ehud Barak, it has
become "legitimate to hit any target that belongs to the
Lebanese State", as he stated in his 26 July interview
with The Washington Post. Allow me also to remind
the Council that on 7 August 2009 that same Israeli
Minister declared, ahead of the renewal of UNIFIL's
mandate last year, that "Israel did not strike at
Lebanon's infrastructure hard enough" during the
summer war of 2006. Is this how Israel promises to
respect resolution 1701 (2006)?

As for the events at the beginning of July,
Lebanon has deplored them and it reiterates its respect
for UNIFIL's freedom of movement, as defined by its
mandate and rules of engagement. Lebanon also
considers the border incident of 3 August, which took
place in a contested area along the Blue Line, as a
grave one from which lessons should indeed be drawn.
As asserted by the report shared by UNIFIL with the
parties, the incident underscored the importance of
marking the Blue Line and respecting it. That is what
Lebanon has always been calling for.

Furthermore, the report calls on the parties to
refrain from any provocation. Lebanon fully endorses
that cardinal recommendation. Is there, however, any
greater provocation than the more than 6,000 daily,
deliberate and brazen Israeli violations of Lebanese
sovereignty perpetrated since 2006, which have been
documented and reported in numerous letters addressed
to the Council by my Mission, as well as in the
Secretary-General's reports? Moreover, that incident
underlines how imperative it is to strengthen
coordination with UNIFIL, in order to prevent similar
events from occurring in the future. In this regard,
Lebanon and its armed forces look forward to
enhancing their coordination and cooperation with
UNIFIL during its renewed mandate.

Allow me once more to thank you, Mr. President,
and all members of the Council for renewing UNIFIL'S
mandate for another year.
10-49885

