Mr. Lucas (Angola): Mr. President, we thank you
for convening this meeting on the situation in
Bougainville. We extend our thanks to Assistant
Secretary-General Danilo Tiirk for his briefing on the
recent developments on the island. We share his
analysis and conclusions.

We cannot but express satisfaction for the
progress achieved in the peace process, the completion
of stage II of the weapons disposal, the issuing of
legislation enacted by the government and increasing
cooperation between the authorities of Papua New
Guinea and Bougainville leaders. Such a spirit of
commitment and trust between the parties has been
translated into consultations that the parties have
maintained since February, after the signing of the
memorandum of understanding establishing a
mechanism for consultations on all aspects of the
granting of Bougainville's autonomy.
We deem very encouraging the recent
developments, namely, the agreements reached by the
Interim Joint Supervisory Body on outstanding issues
of the Bougainville peace agreement. We are aware of
the importance of drafting the constitution for an
autonomous Bougainville government in the
framework of Papua New Guinea and other priorities
set by the government in order to consolidate the gains
obtained so far in Bougainville.

The completion of the weapons disposal process,
the provision of security and maintenance of public
order under the rule of law, the delegation of powers
and functions to the authorities of Bougainville and the
building of political and civil authority as foundations
of peace are, in our view, some of the most critical
elements for the implementation of the Bougainville
peace agreement. The commitment of the parties to
fully implement the provisions of the agreement and
their awareness that it lays the achievement of peace in
the hands of the men and women of Bougainville and
of Papua New Guinea are sources of hope that a
sustained peaceful solution to the Bougainville issue is
possible.

My delegation appreciates very positively the
work of the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB) in providing ongoing support
to the peace process. Australia, New Zealand, Fiji and
Vanuatu, by their participation in the Bougainville
Transition Team, have also played an outstanding role
in the stabilization of the situation. We welcome,
therefore, the efforts by relevant United Nations
agencies and the international community of donors
towards restoring and consolidating peace in
Bougainville.

To conclude, we would like to stress the view of
the country's leadership on the important role UNPOB
is expected to play in the transitional period leading up
to the holding of elections in Bougainville for the
autonomous government of the island. My delegation
supports the recommendation of the Secretary-General
for the establishment of a new United Nations observer
mission in Bougainville with a view to ensuring United
Nations assistance and mediation until the conclusion
of the peace process with the establishment of an
autonomous government in Bougainville.

