Mr. Begec (Turkey): We thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate.

Turkey aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I
now would like to add the following remarks in my
national capacity.

Since the 2015 review processes on the United
Nations peace operations and peacebuilding
architecture, there have been renewed efforts to
strengthen the Organization's capacity to respond to
international crises in a more effective way. Turkey
will continue to support these efforts. Turkey values
and contributes to the peaceful settlement of disputes at
the regional and international levels. We see great merit
and necessity in making political solutions a priority
for both conflict prevention and resolution. We also
play an active role in international peacekeeping under
both the blue banner of the United Nations and the
umbrella of different international security institutions.
We consider mediation to be a key tool that is worthy
of greater investment and that should be more widely
utilized in order to bring a peaceful political end to
conflicts, as well as to address the root causes thereof.

We agree that there is a need for a more coherent
and integrated strategy that will ultimately enable
the United Nations to be more effective at conflict
prevention. Mediation should play a central role in this
strategy, in line with the Secretary-General's surge
in peace diplomacy initiative. Turkey, as a friend of
sustaining peace, adheres to the overarching objective
of the United Nations towards genuine peace, which
can only be accomplished through a strong sense of
ownership by its Member States. In fact, "sustaining
peace" encompasses a wide array of activities and
different stages, which the United Nations is already
engaged in regarding ongoing conflict prevention
and management initiatives. Sustainable development
goals, the protection and the promotion of human
rights and the rule of law are among those pathways
where collective endeavours can pave the way towards
sustaining peace.

The real potential of sustaining peace lies with the
comprehensive approach, coherence and coordination
among relevant actors, as well as acting as one. In order
to increase the effectiveness of efforts to sustain peace,
the United Nations should develop more integrated
missions on the ground that are able to build capacity
for the host nations and to develop partnerships with
relevant regional and international organizations.

The United Nations peacebuilding architecture,
with its broader scope, should play a more active
role in conflict prevention. Turkey is pleased to see
the Peacebuilding Commission taking on many files
in addition to its traditional configurations with a
particular focus on prevention, and we will continue
to support the Commission through its voluntary
contributions to the Peacebuilding Fund.

On the other hand, the United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as well as special political missions, are
perhaps the most influential assets currently available
in the field. We acknowledge that peacekeeping
operations have been continuously evolving as a
result of the changing character and dimensions of
the challenges and the threats on the ground. We also
acknowledge that there are growing needs for these
missions for peacebuilding purposes - in particular
when it comes to mission transitions.

Finally, we concur that the United Nations should
be able to respond to all current challenges and deliver
with respect to the increasing demands. That, however,
should start with crafting clear and unambiguous
mandates. Those mandates should be, in the first place,
achievable and in full conformity with the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.
