Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Mr. President, my
delegation thanks you for convening this important
meeting. We would also like to welcome the Chairman
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Foreign Minister of Ghana, and the
Executive Secretary of ECOWAS. We thank them for
their very comprehensive and good briefings. We
commend them for their strong leadership of
ECOWAS, which has been an important factor in
efforts to stabilize the subregion. ECOWAS has truly
developed into an important partner in the region and
for the United Nations.

An important lesson learned in the past decade is
that conflict management increasingly must take place
in a regional context. We hope that there are important

lessons to be learned from the measures taken in West
Africa for other subregional conflicts, such as those in
the Horn of Africa and the Great Lakes region. Cross-
border issues such as refugees, mercenaries, small-
arms trafficking and child soldiers are not the cause of
conflicts but their symptoms, which in turn exacerbate
the conflict. Neighbouring countries, even if they are
not drawn into the conflict itself, suffer from it
considerably.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/200)
highlights the need for a fundamental change in the
political approach in the subregion, that is, more
democratic participation instead of authoritarianism, an
end to impunity and an end to the use of violence as a
political means. We support that view. There are
encouraging signs of a new thinking in the region and
in Africa as a whole, be it through the New Partnership
for Africa's Development (NEPAD), through the
development of African security structures or through
increased regional cooperation, as in the framework of
ECOWAS.

We are willing to contribute nationally, and in
particular through the European Union (EU), to support
these promising approaches. The EU has chosen a
regional policy and a development approach to the
region and considers ECOWAS as a natural partner in
this endeavour. The approach must be multifaceted; in
addition to strengthening African peacekeeping and
crisis management capabilities, it will be necessary to
invest more in crisis prevention and early warning. It is
in that spirit that Germany is supporting the Kofi
Annan International Peacekeeping Centre in Ghana.

I would like to focus on three of the
recommendations of the report.

The first pertains to cooperation among United
Nations missions in the region. We strongly support
closer cooperation among United Nations missions in
West Africa, which is starting to bear fruit. Hopefully,
it will lead to synergistic effects and to greater cost-
efficiency. A near doubling of peacekeeping troops
within just one year places a significant additional
burden on Member States. We must not lose sight of
this development or of this aspect.

The recommendations in the report about cross-
border operations of the United Nations peacekeeping
missions in West Africa, including the ability for "hot
pursuit", are interesting ideas in this regard. A
discussion on this important issue should begin as soon
as possible. We are willing to consider incorporating
such an approach in future mandates or in the
adjustment of existing mandates, based on proposals by
the Secretariat, taking into account the legal challenges
that cross-border operations present. It is also clear that
such cross-border activities will always require close
consultation with the Governments in the region.

My second remark pertains to the curbing of
illegal trafficking of arms. While countries in the
region have to intensify efforts to curb illegal weapons
flow to the region, the exporters of arms have to
address their responsibilities as well. We therefore
support stricter national controls of arms exports and
increased transparency in this area. This includes
compliance with arms embargoes imposed by the
Security Council as well as regional embargoes. We
believe that the Governments of small-arms exporting
countries should require their companies to better mark
these weapons.

The ECOWAS Moratorium on small arms and
light weapons remains the main platform for
coordinated efforts to combat proliferation of such
weapons in the subregion. I fully agree with what has
been said by the Foreign Minister of Ghana: small
weapons are the real weapons of mass destruction
because they kill more people than large weapons of
mass destruction. Germany recognizes the important
work done so far and calls on all countries concerned
to further strengthen and implement the Moratorium.
ECOWAS member States should extend the
Moratorium, which is due to expire in October 2004,
and transform it into a legally binding instrument.

In its resolution 1467 (2003), the Security
Council called upon ECOWAS member States to
consider the establishment of a regional register of
small arms and light weapons. As a first step, member
States might focus on records of light weapons, with a
view to expanding the register to small arms at a later
stage.

My last remark pertains to what is called "naming
and shaming". It is our firm belief that by publicly
identifying those who recruit children or mercenaries
or who violate arms embargoes, "naming and shaming"
can be a powerful tool in achieving compliance with
embargoes and relevant Security Council resolutions.
The Secretary-General's report indicates that this can
be difficult in individual cases. However, it should not
stop the Security Council from continuing to use this
instrument - of course, with the necessary caution -
and to develop it further. We are aware that such a
policy has to be based on strong evidence, which
existing expert panels, for example, can provide if they
are well staffed and well equipped for the task.

In conclusion, we welcome the fact that the
Security Council has agreed to incorporate in its
presidential statement important operative
recommendations from the report. This will focus
further attention on cross-border issues in West Africa
as a part of a comprehensive approach to the problems
of the subregion for which continuing close
cooperation between the United Nations and ECOWAS
will be increasingly important.

