Mr. Kim Sook (Republic ofKorea): On behalfofthe
Chair of the Security Council Committees established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), on
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, 1373
(2001), on counter-terrorism, and 1540 (2004) on the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
by non-State actors, I have the honour to update the
Council on the continuing cooperation among the three
Committees and their respective Groups of Experts, as
requested by the Council in its resolutions 2083 (2012),
1963 (2010), 1977 (2011) and earlier resolutions.

Terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and
the risk of WMD proliferation among non-State actors
continue to pose a serious threat to international peace
and security. In dealing with that grave threat, the
Security Council has emphasizedthe importance ofclose
and effective cooperation and coordination among the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). An important consideration in
that regard is that effective counter-terrorism measures
and respect for human rights be complementary and
mutually reinforcing.

Since the last update provided to the Security
Council (see S/PV.6862), the three Committees
continued to cooperate on outreach activities
conducted within their respective mandates, enhanced
their cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations, conducted joint training
programmes, increased the exchange of information,
participated injoint meetings and engaged in reciprocal
representation, as appropriate.

With respect to the challenges posed by the
exploitation of technological advances by terrorists and
non-State actors, including the use of the Internet as
an effective communication channel, together with the
rapid development in nuclear, chemical and biological
technology, which increases the potential for intangible
transfers, the Committees' Groups of Experts can also
support States that seek assistance in building national
capacities to deal with those challenges.

I am pleased to report in more detail on the areas in
which cooperation has been increased.

With regard to outreach and country visits,
coordinated outreach activities and country visits are
important tools for the three Committees in facilitating
the implementation of their respective mandates. Since
November 2012, all three Groups of Experts were
represented at more than a dozen workshops and other
outreach events, and more meetings were attended by at
least two ofthe groups. For example, aregional workshop
for member States of the West African Economic and
Monetary Union, organized by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) with the
Intergovernmental Action Group against Money
Laundering in West Africa and with the participation
of the Monitoring Team, was held in Dakar from
11 to 13 December 2012. Designed for member States
of the West African Economic and Monetary Union,
the workshop provided an opportunity for participants
to discuss the legislative, institutional and operational
challenges their respective countries are facing and
to identify practical solutions, promote coordination
among domestic institutions involved in assets-
freezing, promote enhanced international and regional
cooperation with a view to ensuring swift responses to
foreign requests for assets-freezing, and enhance their
capacities through the exchange of experiences with
international and regional experts.
From 13 to 15 March, CTED organized an event in
Rabat, Kingdom of Morocco, with the participation of
the Monitoring Team, on the issue of cooperation on
border control in the Sahel and the Maghreb. During
the three-day event, representatives of 11 States and
21 international, regional and subregional organizations
discussed how to enhance the capacities of States to
take border-control actions. In all, the Monitoring Team
has participated in 21 joint country visits with CTED.

I turn now to the subject of cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations.
The three Experts groups are all entities of the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF). In this
regard, the CTITF continues to provide a platform for
enhanced cooperation by the three Experts groups, not
only among themselves, but also with over 30 United
Nations organizations, agencies and programmes
concerned with various aspects of counter-terrorism.

The Monitoring Team and CTED have also
continued their leading roles in their respective
CTITF working groups. The 1540 Committee Group
of Experts participated in the Working Group on
Border Management related to Counter-Terrorism and
the Working Group on Preventing and Responding to
Weapons of Mass Destruction Attacks.

The three Committees have close cooperation on
issues related to anti-money laundering and combating
terrorism financing. One example ofthis cooperation is
that, for the past three years, CTED and the Monitoring
Team have worked together on the CTITF project on
preventing terrorist financing abuse through non-profit
organizations. This global initiative, which was
launched at a ministerial meeting in London in January
2011 and involved five regional workshops, concluded
on 7 March with a briefing to all member States. While
CTED took the lead in organizing the initiative, the
Monitoring Team experts were able to provide the
initiative with concrete examples of the vulnerability of
non-profit organizations to terrorist financing from the
perspective of resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
and through their own work.

The three Committees, through their respective
experts, also coordinated their work in the margins
of and at meetings of the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF) plenary and working groups. A particularly
important aspect of their cooperation in the period
under review was their contribution to the agreement on
the new FATF standards and assessment methodology.
The joint attendance in the FATF plenary, such as in
February this year, and working group meetings helped
ensure that there is a unified and coordinated message
in the framework of their respective mandates.

Both the 1267 Monitoring Team and the 1540 experts
participated in the Counter-Terrorism Committee's
special meeting on 20 November 2012 with Member
States and international, regional and subregional
organizations in New York to discuss measures
required to prevent and suppress terrorist financing.
Participants exchanged their respective experiences and
challenges and suggested possible measures to address
the prevention and suppression of terrorism financing,
highlighting in particular the importance and value
of international cooperation, joint capacity-building
initiatives, and targeted technical assistance delivery.

With respect to training, a key way in which the
three Committees cooperate is in staff training, which
reduces costs, maximizes the number ofexperts trained,
and facilitates staff development. CTED organized a
training session on the new FATF standards from 17 to
19 December 2012 and the experts from the Monitoring
Team and the 1540 Group of Experts participated. This
process offers an opportunity for visiting experts and
officials to meet all three Groups at once and allows the
experts to explore areas of potential joint cooperation
with the visiting representatives.

The exchange of information among the Experts
groups continues to be carried out on a regular basis.
CTED regularly shares with the other two groups the
monthly reports submitted by its Executive Director
to the CTC. In a new step, the three Experts groups
have shared their respective working calendars of
events and discussed ways of improving the efficiency
of country visits and training opportunities with a
view to improving value for money. The experts of
the 1540 Committee prepare information notes on the
Committee's outreach events and post them on the
Committee's website for the purpose of transparency
and information sharing.

As forjoint meetings and reciprocal representation,
the three Experts groups continue to hold joint meetings
where appropriate, whether involving the heads of each
team or the expert teams, in order to prepare for relevant
outreach activities and to exchange information on
particular themes or activities in specific regions or
countries. In addition, the CTC extends invitations
to the other two Experts groups when arranging
briefings by visiting officials of intergovernmental
organizations or when organizing thematic briefings of
mutual interest. On 7 February, both the 1540 Group
of Experts and the Monitoring Team participated, at
the invitation of the CTC, in a briefing by Mr. Aleksey
Kuzyura, Head of the Working Group of the Meeting
of Heads of Special Services, Security Agencies and
Law-Enforcement Organizations of Foreign States of
the Russian Federation.

I turn now to future additional steps. The work
of the three Committees, when considered together,
present opportunities for further synergies which, when
fully exploited, would result in a multiplier effect for
the delivery of results. It should be possible to achieve
these improved results while maintaining respect for
the independence of the respective Experts groups and
their mandates.

On the basis ofcurrent coordination and cooperation,
each of the three Committee's staff and Experts groups
are committed to furtherjoint cooperation in a number
of areas. These include, but are not limited to having
regular meetings between the three Committees at
the Committee level and/or between chair countries;
increasing engagement in on-site visits to States, at
their invitation, to facilitate the implementation of
each of the resolutions; coordinating on a common
regional approach to engage with Member States with
geographical and political similarities; coordinating
on key thematic areas that are of interest to all the
Committees in order to benefit from information- and
experience-sharing and effective practices; enhancing
coordination in implementing projects within the
CTITF framework, in particular through the various
thematic working groups; coordinating on approaches
to donor States and assistance providers and joint
evaluation of outcomes; considering developing joint
assistance packages for States, at their request, and
where appropriate; and enhancing joint interaction,
particularly with non-reporting States, in fulfilling their
reporting obligations under relevant resolutions. The
1540 Committee should consider sharing its summary
reports on outreach events with the other Committees.

This concludes my joint statement to the Security
Council. I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Chair of the 1540 Committee.

I take this opportunity to give an overview of the
main developments in the work of the 1540 Committee
since our last joint meeting on 14 November 2012 (see S/PV.6862). At the outset, I should like to inform the
Council that the Committee's Group of Experts is now
at its full complement ofnine, as envisaged in resolution

2055 (2012).

On 27 December 2012, the 1540 Committee
transmitted to the Security Council the review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) for 2012.
Building on the status and experience of implementation,
the Committee set out a list of tasks in the "Looking
ahead" section of this review. I am pleased to report
that good progress has been made in fulfilling these
tasks. We will soon transmit to the Council our twelfth
programme of work, which is now under discussion
within the Committee. I believe that the programme
of work will optimize the efficiency of the Committee,
map out specific priorities to promote the full
implementation ofresolution 1540 (2004), and set up the
guidance for the work of the Committee over the next
12 months. Guided by the principles of transparency,
equal treatment, cooperation and consistency in its
approach, the Committee has continued to focus its
attention on raising global awareness of resolution
1540 (2004) and facilitating assistance to States in
strengthening national capabilities to implement its
requirements and lay the foundation for improved
mechanisms for sharing effective practices for national
implementation and promoting collaboration with other
international organizations.

Resolution 1977 (2011) calls upon all States that
have not yet presented a first report to submit such a
report to the Committee without delay. There appears to
be a better understanding of the challenges of national
implementation and the development of tailored
strategies to facilitate assistance for overcoming
challenges, and assistance that also supports the
implementation of relevant international obligations
and national security and development priorities. In
that regard, the Committee has developed an approach
to the 24 non-reporting States in an effort to achieve
universal reporting, if possible, by the end of 2014,
which will be the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004).

In accordance with its mandate, the Committee
continued to further facilitate "matchmaking" between
assistance requests and offers. Since the previous
briefing, the Committee received an additional official
request for assistance from the Central American
Integration System (SICA) secretariat on 15 January,
which requested funding for the continuation of the
SICA 1540 programme of work, including the position
of the 1540 regional coordinator within the SICA
secretariat to assist SICA member States. In accordance
with the established procedures, the Committee has
passed on the request to those States and international,
regional and subregional organizations that have
offered to provide assistance for their consideration,
and first responses have been received. The Group of
Experts is now working on identifying and analysing
assistance needs and continuing consultations with
officials from States, in facilitating existing and new
assistance requests.

Paragraph 8 of resolution 1977 (2011) encourages
all States to prepare on a voluntary basis national
implementation action plans, with the assistance of
the 1540 Committee, as appropriate, mapping out
their priorities and plans for implementing the key
provisions of resolution 1540 (2004), and to submit
those plans to the 1540 Committee. We are pleased to
report that, since our previous briefing, Kyrgyzstan
has submitted its national implementation action plan
to the Committee. We note that Kyrgyzstan's plan also
contains a request for technical and financial assistance
for the implementation of the specific measures of the
plan. A good example is the national implementation
action plan drafting session held in April with
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina's ministries
and agencies. According to the information received by
the Committee, a number of other States, supported by
the Group of Experts, are in the process of updating or
preparing their initial national action plans.

Paragraph 11 of resolution 1977 (2011) encourages
the 1540 Committee to actively engage in dialogue with
States on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
including through visits to States at their invitation.
From 17 to 19 April, I personally led a visit to Trinidad
and Tobago, accompanied by the members of the Group
of Experts. During the visit, I had an opportunity to
hear first hand from the acting Prime Minister and
Foreign Minister of Trinidad and Tobago of their
efforts to implement resolution 1540 (2004). The
discussions demonstrated the high level of commitment
and determination by the Government of Trinidad and
Tobago towards the full and effective implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). That was the first visit to a State
of the Latin American and Caribbean region, and the
first one to be led by the Chair of the 1540 Committee.
Since the previous briefing, the 1540 Committee has
also received invitations to carry out similar visits from
Grenada, Mozambique and the Republic of Moldova.

In accordance with resolution 1977 (2011) and
within its mandate, the 1540 Committee has continued
to engage in various outreach activities to serve
its objectives. Since 14 November 2012, the 1540
Committee and its experts participated in 33 outreach
events organized by various international, regional and
subregional organizations in collaboration with various
Governments and, in many cases, with the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs.

From a thematic point of view, those outreach
events promoted the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) through direct action with States by Committee
members and the Group of Experts to help enhance
their national implementation arrangements. In
addition, visits were conducted specifically to review
particular issues such as export and border controls,
nuclear security, biosecurity, industry outreach and
proliferation financing. In the spirit of transparency
required by resolution 1977 (2011), information about
those outreach events is posted on the 1540 Committee
website. While some of those activities have been
conducted directly with States, we have found regional
organizations particularly helpful as key players in
the facilitation and the successful conduct of those
events. For example, to further cooperation between
the Committee and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), I will take part in the
meeting of the OSCE Forum for Security Cooperation
to be held in Vienna on 15 May.

Paragraphs 14 and 18 of resolution 1977 (2011)
call upon the relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations to designate and provide the
1540 Committee with a point of contact or coordinator
for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
for assistance. I would like to note that, since the
prevous briefing, Gabon, the Republic of the Congo,
the United States of America, the Republic of Korea
and Austria have either submitted or updated their
point-of-contact information. For intergovernmental
organizations, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime has revised its point-of-contact information,
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons has designated its point of contact. That will
further facilitate cooperation with the Committee to
implement the resolution.

On February 27, the Committee sent out letters
requesting all Member States to submit information on
their 1540 implementation status, as well as on points of
contact. Such a living network of contacts could serve
to improve communication and interaction with and
among States. I would take this opportunity to request
the cooperation of all Member States in that regard.

The Committee also continued its interaction
in that area with academic institutions, civil society
and representatives of industry, as appropriate. Let
me note that, in February, I had a meeting with
Ms. Mireille Ballesrazzi, President of the INTERPOL
Executive Committee, to discuss future cooperation.
INTERPOL indicated that the 1540 obligations could
be incorporated into its law enforcement capacity-
building programmes. INTERPOL will also join the
list of potential assistance providers in that regard.

Transparency is an essential principle guiding the
work and activities of the Committee. In accordance
with resolution 1977 (2011), the Committee continued
to institute transparency measures and activities,
including by making the fullest possible use of
its website. The Committee's working group on
transparency and media outreach is currently discussing
the future media strategy of the Committee, including
with regard to the upcoming tenth anniversary of the
resolution. From 22 to 24 April, the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia organized a workshop in New York, focused on
the League of Arab States, on the theme "Preventing
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors: the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) in the Arab World". The event was a good
example of a State's promotion of awareness of the
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004) and of the
practical implementation of the resolution's provisions
within the region. It was one of a series that also
included training for customs officials in collaboration
with the World Customs Organization.

I would like to conclude by reiterating my
commitment to the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). As we celebrate its tenth anniversary next
year, we will work at full throttle to fully consolidate
universal political will towards the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors.
At the same time, the Committee will continue to
address all aspects of the resolution in order to leave
no stone unturned. In that regard, we particularly look
forward to closer and more practical cooperation with
the Committees, and to hearing new ideas to improve
our joint efforts to counter the scourge of terrorism. For
our part, we believe that closer cooperation among us
is vital and that, in particular, we should make every
effort to support one another's outreach activities, as
consistent with our respective mandates.

