Mr. Naber (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): We thank
you, Sir, for having convened this debate today and
congratulate you on your presidency of the Security
Council for this month. Allow me to begin by thanking
His Excellency the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Martin Kobler; the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region, Mrs. Mary Robinson; and His Excellency the
Minister of Defence of Angola and representative of
the Chair of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, Mr. Joao Goncalves Lourenco, for their
very valuable briefings.

My delegation has taken due note of the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2014/450), which describes
the most recent developments concerning the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). My
delegation would like to pay tribute to MONUSCO's
achievements in ensuring stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including the overall
improvement of the security situation as compared
to last year, in particular in terms of the defeat of the
Mouvement du 23 mars.

At the same time, we would like to express our
concern regarding the threat that armed groups
continue to pose to civilians, in particular in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Indeed, the Allied
Democratic Forces continue to be a threat in North
Kivu through their targeting of United Nations staff
and facilities. That is in addition to the threat posed
by the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda
(FDLR) and the tenuous security situation in southern
and central Katanga.

Here, we welcome the new configuration of
MONUSCO, which has helped stem the threat to
civilians through coordination with humanitarian
agencies and the promotion of prevention and early-
warning mechanisms.

Furthermore, the military situation has improved
overall with respect to the Congolese armed forces.

We also welcome efforts to support reconciliation.
We should support MONUSCO in its disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration efforts, in particular
with respect to the FDLR.

As there have been reports of certain Government
officials being involved in acts of violence and
large-scale violations, we call upon MONUSCO to
undertake investigations regarding those allegations
and to continue its efforts to promote the protection
of civilians and facilitate dialogue while focusing on
prevention through military and civilian cooperation
and the strengthening of efforts to combat impunity, so
that perpetrators of human rights violations are held to
account.

The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region continues to play a key role in supporting the
peace and stability process of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in particular and of the region in general.
In that regard, we pay tribute to Mrs. Mary Robinson's
efforts to build confidence and to promote cooperation
among the States of the region, as well as to strengthen
peace. In that context, my delegation calls for the
increased effectiveness of the revised International
Security and Stabilization Support Strategy.

