Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated

with the European Union - Bulgaria, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, the Czech Republic,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - the

associated countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, and the
European Free Trade Association country belonging to
the European Economic Area Liechtenstein align
themselves with this statement.

I want to begin by thanking Ms. Carol Bellamy,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF), and Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, for their important statements this
morning. We wish also to thank Alhaji Babah Sawaneh
for having, on behalf of the tens of thousands of
children who continue to experience the same tragic
tale, given the Council an account of a state of affairs
that we are firmly determined to combat.

We should like to thank the Secretary-General for
his very detailed and thorough report, the
recommendations of which should enable us to tackle
the problem of children and armed conflict head-on.
The Secretary-General's report is also a reminder to us
of the tragic situation of children in armed conflict and
of the long way still to go to protect them from conflict
and its devastating consequences, direct and indirect.
Reading the report, we are struck by the number and
the variety of ways in which children are involved in
armed conflict: millions of children are the first
innocent victims of conflicts that destroy their future
and, at the same time, the future of their countries.

The Secretary-General's recommendations are
rightly addressed to a number of actors. It is indeed the
international community as a whole that bears
responsibility for their implementation. In this
connection, we welcome the commitment shown by the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu. We
reiterate our support for their work and for that of the
United Nations Children's Fund, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. Finally, we wish to stress that in
addition to these efforts, it is the Member States that
individually bear the responsibility for implementing
the agreed standards in this matter.

We are pleased that the Security Council is seized
of this matter, for that signals unequivocal recognition
that the protection to which children are entitled,
particularly under the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, is an essential factor in building peace and
lasting security. The European Union calls on the
Member States to implement Security Council
resolutions 1314 (2000) and 1261 (1999), on children
and armed conflict, and welcomes the adoption of a
new draft resolution by the Council. This draft
resolution, whose scope of action is greater than that of
its predecessors, in which the means envisaged are also
more ambitious, confirms the strong commitment of
the international community to this matter.

Since this complex issue is to be discussed in
depth at the special session of the General Assembly on
children to be held in May next year, I should like here
to expand on the aspects directly relating to the
responsibilities of the Council.

First, we welcome the special child-related
provisions that the Security Council has included in a
number of its recent resolutions, particularly resolution
1355 (2001), renewing the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), which contains a
specific paragraph on child protection. It is indeed vital
that these considerations be taken into account, first in
dialogues for peace and the ensuing peace agreements
and then in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and peace-building
programmes where appropriate. We are thinking
particularly of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes for child combatants and of
the right of child refugees and internally displaced
children to assistance and protection. It is also worth
repeating that humanitarian personnel must have full,
safe and unhindered access to children affected by
armed conflict.

We warmly welcome the fact that child protection
advisers and child-focused human rights officers are,
where appropriate, to be part of the personnel of
peacekeeping operations. This additional expertise will
make for a deeper appreciation of the problems and,
not least, enable us to adapt our action to the particular
needs of each operation. In this context, we wish to
recall that the special needs of girls must receive
special attention.

Generally speaking, it is Vital that all civilians
and all military and police forces involved in
peacekeeping operations receive training in children's
rights, child protection and international humanitarian
law.

But to be truly effective, we must also become
involved in conflict prevention measures aimed
particularly at children. In that regard, there is an
urgent need to put a stop to the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflicts, in Violation of international
law, including the obligations imposed by the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Allow me to remind the Council that that Protocol
prohibits the participation of children under the age of
18 in armed conflicts. We look forward to its entry into
force next February. I would also mention the Rome
Statute, which makes it a war crime to recruit children
under the age of 15.

As the Secretary-General's report stresses, the
Security Council regularly deals with issues that
directly or indirectly involve children: child soldiers,
the question of small arms, HIV/AIDS and
peacekeeping operations, the illicit exploitation of
natural resources and conflict prevention. Wherever
necessary, the approach to all these problems must
include a "child" dimension.

In conclusion, I wish to say that no peace can be
lasting unless children are involved in its
consolidation. The special session of the General
Assembly on children is crucial in this respect. It
represents a unique opportunity for all of us to pool our
efforts to define a global strategy to promote and
protect the rights of the child. Peace is without doubt
the most precious possession that we can offer them,
and this requires our unconditional voluntary
commitment.

