Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
France for its initiative in convening this meeting, and
I welcome Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius, who is
presiding over the meeting. My thanks also go to Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees Antonio Guterres for
their briefings. I have also listened very carefully to
the statements by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Jordan and Turkey, the Minister for Social Affairs of
Lebanon and the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Iraq.

The persistent tensions encompassing Syria have
not only caused huge casualties but have also seriously
damaged the infrastructure and people's lives in Syria.
With the economy in serious decline, food, drinking
water, medical facilities and housing are in short
supply. The number of internally displaced persons and
refugees continues to increase. About 2.5 million people
are in dire need of humanitarian relief. Neighbouring
countries, such as Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey,
are sheltering a large number ofrefugees, and as a result
they face mounting economic and social pressures.

China is gravely concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Syria. We hope that the Syrian Government
will continue to cooperate with the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. We appreciate
the efforts of the United Nations and its specialized
agencies, the International Committee of the Red
Cross and other humanitarian relief agencies inside
and outside Syria that are carrying out their work
under very difficult conditions. We also appreciate
the important contribution of Syria's neighbours in
properly resettling refugees.

The Chinese Government has always supported the
United Nations and other international organizations
in their efforts to alleviate humanitarian situations on
the ground. We have provided emergency humanitarian
assistance to the Syrian people and are prepared to
provide more emergency supplies to relevant countries
in the near term in order to improve the humanitarian
situation for the Syrian refugees on their territories.

Concerning the emergency measures to be taken by
the international community to ease the humanitarian
situation in Syria, I wish to stress the following three
points.
First, efforts to ease the humanitarian situation in
Syria must be guided by the humanitarian principles
of neutrality, impartiality and respect for Syria's
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity. The politicization of humanitarian issues must
be avoided. Humanitarian relief efforts should never
be militarized. We should especially guard against
and oppose any act of interference in Syria's internal
affairs or military intervention under the pretext of
humanitarianism. Only with the trust and support of the
Syrian people can our actions be successful.

Secondly, the United Nations should play a leading
role in coordinating international humanitarian
relief efforts for Syria. China calls on all parties in
Syria to observe relevant international law and to
maintain cooperation with the United Nations and
other humanitarian relief agencies, so as to ensure the
timely delivery and distribution of supplies. Given the
considerable financial shortfall in the international
humanitarian relief for Syria, China calls on relevant
countries to fully honour their assistance pledges in a
timely manner.

Thirdly, the humanitarian situation in Syria must
be addressed with an eye to dealing with both the
symptoms and the root causes. The failure on the part
of all parties in Syria to deliver on their commitment to
a ceasefire and a cessation of the violence has caused
the situation to worsen. Mr. Annan's six-point plan and
the Action Group's Geneva communique have not been
implemented, although they reflect the consensus of
the international community. The top priority now is
to halt all forms of terrorism and violence in Syria as
soon as possible. Any encouragement of or conniving
to prolong continued military action will only lead to
more bloodshed, increased civilian causalities and a
deterioration of the humanitarian crisis in Syria. An
immediate ceasefire and end to the violence is the only
way out, followed by a transitional political process led
by the Syrian people themselves.

China's position on the Syrian issue is consistent
and responsible. We support a political settlement of the
issue in accordance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the basic norms
governing international relations. The implementation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions, Mr. Annan's
six-point plan and the final communique of the Action
Group for Syria should continue. The Syrian issue
should be resolved through a political process led by
the Syrian people.

China opposes any externally imposed solution
aimed at forcing a regime change. We welcome
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi's appointment as the new Joint
Special Envoy of the United Nations and the League of
Arab States on Syria and we will, as always, support
and cooperate with him in his political good offices.

We stand ready to work with the international
community on joint and sustained efforts aimed at a
peaceful, fair and appropriate solution of the Syrian
issue.

