Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for inviting me to participate in this open debate on a
topic that the Security Council has been discussing for
quite some time, although the importance of which has
not diminished.

Argentina has historically maintained a position of
principle in favour of resolving disputes through peaceful
means, respect for international law, sovereignty,
independence, national unity and territorial integrity
of States, rejection of the acquisition of territories by
the strength, confidence in the constructive role and the
persuasive power of the international community to pave
the way towards peaceful, just and definitive solutions.

Argentina decisively supports all efforts aimed
at achieving peace and stability in the Middle
East. The constructive role of all parties, including
regional actors and major Powers, is decisive in
moving towards a settlement of differences through
negotiations. Argentina also calls for unilateral actions
and provocations to be avoided, and we condemn all
incitement to violence.

Argentina wishes to reaffirm its resolute support
for a peaceful, definitive and comprehensive solution to
the Palestinian question based on the two-State solution,
with the 1967 borders, as the parties determined in the
negotiation process, and as established in the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, the road map and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Argentina reaffirms its support for the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
and for an independent and viable State, recognized by
all nations; as well as the right of the State of Israel
to live in peace with its neighbours, within secure and
internationally recognized borders.

Likewise, Argentina reiterates its concern about
the persistent and continued growth of illegal Israeli
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories and
urges the cessation of their expansion, as established in
Council resolution 2334 (2017) adopted on 23 December
2016. The international community as a whole has been
very clear: the settlements are contrary to international
law, hamper peace, weaken the prospect of two States
living in peace and security, and thereby promote the
perpetuation of an unsustainable status quo.

Moreover, attacks against Israeli citizens are
unacceptable and must cease immediately. Argentina
strongly condemns all terrorist acts and, just as it is
convinced that there is no military solution to this
conflict, neither is there a solution that utilizes terrorist
methods. It is necessary for Palestinian leaders to
address Israeli security concerns in earnest.

Argentina notes with concern the ongoing excessive
use of force by Israel in the attacks and alleged attacks
carried out by Palestinians and in clashes with them, as
well as in violent settler actions.

Argentina also reiterates its firm support for the
work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and stresses
that the funds for its adequate functioning must not be
put at risk.

Argentina reaffirms the special status ofJerusalem,
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and of the Security Council and, in
that regard, rejects any unilateral attempt to modify it.
Argentina believes that the Holy City must be a place of
encounter and peace, and that free access to sacred sites
must be guaranteed to Jews, Muslims and Christians.
Any attempt to deny or relativize the historical link and
the deep significance of those places for the three great
monotheistic religions is completely unacceptable and
does not contribute to the goal of finding a solution to
the conflict.

With regard to the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, Argentina supports a political solution
through dialogue and diplomacy, in accordance with
international law and in a manner that upholds the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of the Syrian Arab Republic. Therefore, Argentina
attaches special importance to the Geneva talks and
expresses its firm support for the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura.
Argentina also recognizes the positive effect of the
Astana agreements and other ceasefire agreements,
such as that agreed among the United States, the
Russian Federation and Jordan in July 2017. Argentina
emphasizes the importance for all actors to respect
those agreements.

Our country condemns terrorism in all its forms
and expresses its strongest rejection of the terrorist
actions of the organization calling itself the Islamic
State, as well as the Al-Nusra Front.

Likewise, we condemn the use of chemical weapons
in any situation, under any circumstance and by any
actor. We firmly believe that all those responsible for its
use must be brought to justice. In that regard, Argentina
has supported from the outset the impartial and
technical work of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism. Moreover,
Argentina urges that an impartial investigation of the
facts be continued.

In conclusion, peace in the Middle East will be
possible only through more diplomacy and negotiation.
The Council should spare no effort in urging parties to
act accordingly, always using the parameters recognized
by the international community as a reference point,
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations.

