The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Afghanistan, Australia,
Bangladesh, Benin, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Egypt,
Finland, Guatemala, Honduras, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Myanmar, Nepal, New
Zealand, Norway, Slovenia, South Africa, Sri Lanka
and Uganda in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict;
Ms. Ann M. Veneman, Executive Director of the
United Nations Children's Fund; and Mr. Gabriel Oling
Olang, representative of Save the Children.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
following documents: S/2006/826, containing the
2

report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict; S/2006/662, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict in
the Sudan; 8/2006/835, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict in
Cote d'Ivoire; and S/2006/851 and S/2006/851/Corr.1,
containing the report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict in Burundi.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General
and invite him to take the floor.


