Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I would like to
congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council. I also thank you
and the other speakers for drawing attention to the
scourge ofillicit trade in small arms and light weapons,
which takes a heavy human toll in death and suffering,
especially among women and children, while derailing
development and destabilizing societies.

In addition, small arms and light weapons sustain
conflicts, exacerbate armed violence and aid terrorists
and armed groups and national organized crime
networks engaged in trafficking human beings, drugs
and precious national resources. As a member-observer
of the African Union, Kazakhstan notes with great
concern the adverse consequences of illicit small arms
and light weapons transfers on innocent civilians. We
are ready to share best practices with countries of the
African continent in implementing the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects. It is only through effective vigilance with
regard to these small but deadly weapons that we can
reduce human insecurity and provide for humanitarian
access and the safety of humanitarian personnel. The
havoc caused by the misuse of small arms and light
weapons destroys the social fabric of communities
and creates flows of refugees and internally displaced
persons, thereby pushing families into poverty and
increasing the risk of disease and shortages of food and
water.

My country stands for conflict prevention, post-
conflict recovery, reconstruction and development for
war-torn countries in the transformative post-2015
phase. The protection of civilians is also of the utmost
significance.

Kazakhstan is also committed to the stability of
Afghanistan, our neighbouring country, following the
withdrawal of the International Security Assistance
Force after 14 years. With a View to preventing the
smuggling of arms and narcotic drugs, we pioneered
the establishment of the Islamic Organization for
Food Security within the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC) and established the headquarters of
that body in our capital city of Astana.

The recent proposal to host in Almaty the
new United Nations regional hub would promote
sustainable development, humanitarian assistance,
disaster-risk reduction and building resilience. The
hub would oversee the successful implementation
of arms embargoes and regional small arms-related
instruments, while strictly adhering to United Nations
sanctions, arms embargoes and other measures. That
cross-national effort demands well-coordinated United
Nations system-wide coherence, in close collaboration
with international and regional organizations, together
with academia, the media and civil society.

Furthermore, close collaboration between the work
of the Security Council and the Programme of Action
on Small Arms and Light Weapons at the international,
regional and national levels is of vital importance. The
scope of the Arms Trade Treaty, which entered into
force last December, encompasses small arms and
light weapons and contributes to our effectiveness in
increasing transparency with regard to transfers of
small arms and light weapons.

We also support the enhanced integration of small
arms-related challenges in the mandates of United
Nations peace operations, with trained personnel for
demilitarization, demobilization and rehabilitation
work, especially among child soldiers.

In our capacity as Chair of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), in 2010,
and of the OIC during 2010 and 2011 - as well as
through our ongoing activities with the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia,
the Collective Security Treaty Organization and others
organizations - Kazakhstan is working relentlessly
to prevent the proliferation and circulation of such
illegal weapons. My country provides information
on a regular basis to the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms and in connection with the OSCE
Document on Small Arms and Light Weapons, both
of which contribute to keeping the world safe. My
country and its neighbours have enacted strict national
legislation on exports control and the manufacture,
supply and transfer of small arms and light weapons.
Our Government has been increasingly successful in
uncovering crimes, as a result of which thousands of
small arms have been taken out of illegal circulation.

In conclusion, Kazakhstan stands ready to join in
the multilateral efforts to prevent the devastation of
human life caused by the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons.

