The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Afghanistan, Australia, Austria,
Canada, Germany, Iceland, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Italy, Kazakhstan, New Zealand, Norway,
Pakistan and the Republic of Korea, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhddi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Tom Koenigs,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Koenigs to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/ 145, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Tom Koenigs, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
I now give him the floor.


