Archbishop Migliore (Holy See): My delegation
welcomes the convening of this open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. The Security
Council has been dealing with this topic for more than
10 years, yet civilian security during conflict is
becoming more and more critical, if not at times
dramatic, as we have witnessed in these past months,
weeks and days in the Gaza Strip, Iraq, Darfur and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, to name just a few.

The year 2009 marks the sixtieth anniversary of
the Geneva Conventions. Inasmuch as the protection of
civilians stems from the norms set out in these
Conventions and subsequent Protocols, my delegation
trusts that this new year will also provide the occasion
for an assessment of the parties' commitment to
ensuring protection of civilians through greater respect
for the rules of international humanitarian law.

The 2003 update of the aide-memoire to the
lO-point platform on the protection of civilians is an
important tool for clarifying responsibilities, enhancing
cooperation, facilitating implementation and further
strengthening coordination within the United Nations
system, and remains today more than ever an
indispensable road map for bringing protection to
civilians entrapped in armed conflicts.

The overwhelming mistreatment of civilians in
too many parts of the world does not seem to be just a
side effect of war. We continue to see civilians
deliberately targeted as a means for achieving political
or military gains. In the past few days, we have
witnessed a practical failure on every side to respect
the distinction between civilians and military targets. It
is sadly clear that political and military designs
supersede basic respect for the dignity and rights of
persons and communities when methods or armaments
are used without taking all reasonable measures to
avoid civilians, when women and children are used as
shields for combatants, when humanitarian access is
denied in the Gaza Strip, when people are displaced
and villages destroyed in Darfur, and when we see
sexual violence devastating the lives of women and
children in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In such a context, the protection of civilians not
only requires a renewed commitment to humanitarian
law, but also demands first and foremost good political
will and action.

The protection of civilians must be based on the
widespread, responsible exercise of leadership. That
requires leaders to exercise the right to defend their
own citizens or the right to self-determination by
resorting only to legitimate means, and it requires them
to fully recognize their responsibility to the
international community and to respect the right of
other States and communities to exist and coexist in
peace.

The broad spectrum of mechanisms that the
United Nations is putting in place to ensure the
protection of civilians will be successful if, at the very
least, it is able to foster a culture of responsible
exercise of leadership among its Members and if it
holds them, and every party to a conflict, accountable
with respect to that sense of responsibility towards
individuals and communities.

The increasing burden of war-related casualties
and consequences imposed on civilians results also
from the massive production and increasing
sophistication of armaments and from continued
innovation in that area. The ever-higher quality and
ever-greater availability of small arms and light
weapons, as well as anti-personnel mines and cluster
munitions, tragically make the killing of human beings
that much easier and more efficient. In that context, my
delegation fully supports and encourages the objectives
of the recent General Assembly resolution 63/240,
entitled "Towards an arms trade treaty: establishing
common international standards for the import, export
and transfer of conventional arms", which defines the
first important step towards a legally binding
instrument on the arms trade and arms transfers.
Likewise, my delegation welcomes the adoption of the
Convention on Cluster Munitions and encourages
countries to ratify that treaty as a matter of priority and
as a sign of their commitment to addressing the issue
of civilian casualties.

