Mr. Lucas (Angola): The Angolan delegation
is very honoured to take part in this meeting of the
Security Council and to have cast its vote on the
historic resolution 2231 (2015), which represents the
triumph of multilateralism, negotiation and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. The agreement that the Council
has just endorsed is clear evidence that, however
complex or difficult it might be, negotiated solutions
can be achieved for any political problem if the parties
show political will and a commitment to seek peaceful
solutions and to avoid recourse to military means.

The present agreement has an additional and
special virtue, since, for many years, diplomacy has
been defeated in all Middle East disputes. The United
States, China, France, Germany, the United Kingdom,
the Russian Federation, the European Union and the
Islamic Republic of Iran deserve all of our praise for
being able to reach such an outstanding achievement
by concluding the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action as a contribution to the building of confidence
in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear
programme. We hope that implementation of the Plan
of Action will produce the best possible results, that
the national Parliaments of the signatory States will
give their endorsement to the agreement, that the
International Atomic Energy Agency will assume its
essential and independent role in verifying compliance
with the Safeguards Agreement and that the sanctions
imposed on Iran will be lifted in accordance with the
provisions of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.

It was our expectation - or, if preferred, our
wishful thinking - that the very difficult and
thoughtful negotiating process would allow for the
highest possible degree of understanding of each
other's views and expectations, thus making possible
the building of mutual confidence and triggering a
game change, namely, an innovative factor that might
create a new dynamic for the whole region. However,
in the current environment in the Middle East, the
closing - or the opening - of the distracting Iranian
nuclear programme, after such a long and complex
negotiating process between the main world Powers,
the permanent members of the Security Council and an
influential regional Power, is a limited outcome. Now
we want more. The people of the region deserve more.
And the agreements so far reached should be followed
by other outstanding initiatives that address very
serious regional issues.

It is our view that the permanent members of
the Council should deploy further efforts by taking
advantage of the negotiating dynamics opened up by
the Iranian nuclear programme, so as to reach out to
regional Powers and countries of the region to address
and resolve proxy wars and serious crisis situations
affecting the region, namely, the fight against the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, the Syrian war,
the conflict in Yemen, the Palestinian issue and the
establishment of a political framework to repair the
rift between Sunni and Shiite majority countries in the
Middle East.

In our view, beyond the non-proliferation and arms
control issues, the establishment of new dynamics in
the entire Middle East region would be the greatest
accomplishment and most valuable legacy ofthe process
to which we are giving a boost today by adopting this
landmark resolution.

