Mr. Aboulgheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I have every
confidence in your skill and wisdom as you conduct
and steer the deliberations of the Council on this
important subject, and I express the hope that the
Security Council will carry out its role as set out in the
Charter and in the manner that the international
community desires in order to maintain security in the
occupied Palestinian territories.

The essence of the crisis, whose horrific
destructive effects the occupied Palestinian territories
have been experiencing for more than five months, lies
in one main issue: the Israeli occupation of the
Palestinian territories, which is basically the detonator
of all the bloody events that the world has been
witnessing, events that have continued unabated since
last September.

Israel can portray the issue in many guises. It can
mix facts and point the finger of blame in all directions
in order to come up with a single conclusion, according
to which the occupied people, the people whose land is
occupied, are equated with the occupying Power, which
imposes on the occupied people a stifling siege aimed
at starving them and bringing them to their knees.
Despite all these rationalizations and misleading facts,
the Council must not stray from the underlying reason
behind the events. That is the reality of the Israeli
occupation of the Palestinian territory.

The facts tell us that the living conditions of the
Palestinian people have not improved and will not
improve, and that they will not enjoy stability until
they are rid of the occupation in all its manifestations
and forms.

Since the meeting of the Security Council to
consider this issue on 22 November last year, there
have been a number of successive political
developments, not the least notable of which was the
change of Government in Israel. Unfortunately, none of
these developments have had the effect that some had
hoped for in terms of reducing the scope, level and size
of the military power and repression used by Israel
against the Palestinian people. We can actually say that
Israel has escalated its brutal treatment of the
Palestinian people qualitatively since the new
Government took office. This Government has chosen
to implement a "suffocating siege" policy in the
occupied territory, replacing what it called a "breathing
siege" policy, which was said to have been in effect
until a few days ago. We find these terms and
descriptions not only disturbing but also, unfortunately,
ludicrous.

For the information of the Council, such a siege
of the occupied Palestinian territory means the
transformation of every Palestinian city and village,
including those under autonomous Palestinian control,
into a large prison for its residents, a prison they are
not allowed either to enter or leave. It also means the
complete disruption of life and the strangulation of the
Palestinians, who, I must say, deal with the whole
situation with an uncommon bravery that earns the
admiration of their Arab brethren and of free peoples
throughout the world.

There is siege and closure, confiscation of land
and demolition of homes, shelling of government and
education facilities, and an organized policy to
assassinate civilians without any regard for the norms
of human rights observed throughout the world and
without recourse to any judicial authority. Israeli
civilian settlers, protected by a powerful military force,
do whatever they wish in the Palestinian territory,
attacking, stealing the Palestinians' water and burning
their crops, all the while being defended by the Israeli
army, which then proceeds to uproot trees that had
existed for decades before Israel's establishment, using
all the might of weaponry at its disposal to subjugate
the Palestinians to Israel's will. It is the power of
occupation.

All this activity transpires under one pretext
Israel never ceases to repeat, presuming that it justifies
all its actions: the pretext of security. I do not believe
that this is anything more than an insult to our
intelligence and to all that this Council stands for in
terms of embodying the principles of law and human
rights. Is it not strange that we are still listening to
these pretexts after 10 years of negotiations without
Israel being able to extend to the Palestinian people the
only real concession required of it, which is to
withdraw from their land, a land that it occupied by
force in 1967?

Genuine security is a legitimate claim for all the
peoples of the region. Nobody denies the right of any
people to enjoy security. However, security cannot be
obtained at the expense of one's own neighbours, and
one cannot clamour for security while simultaneously
killing the neighbours' children, demolishing their
homes, strangling them and starving them. There is no
logic to this, nor any justice.

Yesterday, 14 March, amid the current tense
situation and bloody events, the report of the human
rights inquiry commission established pursuant to
Commission on Human Rights resolution S-S/l of
19 October 2000, on human rights violations in the
occupied territories, was issued (E/CN.4/2001/121).
The report contains a detailed account of the tragic
situation of the Palestinian people living under the
repression of occupation. It outlines a set of important
recommendations and conclusions. We urge the
Council to examine them and to consider carrying them
out. Perhaps the most important of these
recommendations is contained in chapter X, part II of
the report, and I quote from paragraph 11 of chapter X,
part II:

(spoke in English)

"An adequate and effective international
presence needs to be established to monitor and
regularly report on compliance by all parties with
human rights and humanitarian law standards in
order to ensure full protection of the human rights
of the people of the occupied territories. Such an
international mechanism should be established
immediately and constituted in such a manner as
to reflect a sense of urgency about protecting the
human rights of the Palestinian people."

(spoke in Arabic)

The conditions in the occupied territories have
deteriorated to an extent that compels the Council to
intervene, with all the authority that it has under the
Charter, to put an end to the arrogance of power with
which the occupation force handles the Palestinians in
the Palestinian territories. Given this, the Council must
consider, without procrastination or delay, establishing
and deploying the international monitoring force
requested by the international community, the
Palestinians and the Arab side several months ago.

We are aware that some countries are encouraging
the parties to resume negotiations. We have no
argument with that, but it is only fair and just that
when the Council asks for the resumption of
negotiations, they must be based on all previous
negotiations and not start in a vacuum. They should
have as a clear objective the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) within a defined and acceptable time frame.
We heard it reported that Israel said in this
Chamber yesterday that it had committed itself to the
principle of land for peace and that it had given land to
some Arab parties and was able to get only a cold
peace in return. Everybody knows who is the subject of
this contention. Egypt's answer to this is clear and
unequivocal: the land that Egypt regained by wars,
followed by negotiations, is Egyptian territory that was
occupied by Israel. Peace among the two countries now
is a peace governed by signed agreements, and nobody
can doubt the extent to which Egypt is committed to
these agreements, out of its sense of international
responsibility. However, the temperature of the peace
between two neighbouring peoples is based on the
desire and will of these two peoples. It is only natural
and logical that the Egyptian people would interact
with the question of their Arab brethren whose land is
occupied, and with the plight of the brotherly
Palestinian people in particular.

When the Israeli approach to dealing with its
neighbours is changed, when a real hand of peace is
extended to them and when the Palestinian people have
been liberated from Israeli occupation, only then can
we open up and deal with the question of how warm or
cold this peace is. At present, such talk is mere
rhetoric. We can only describe this rhetoric as empty; it
cannot change the facts on the ground.

Peace is everyone's objective. However, in the
case of the Palestinian people the achievement of peace
must be accomplished by Israel's respect for that
people's rights to independence and to a dignified free
life.

Before I end this intervention, I should like to
direct my words to Ambassador Yehuda Lancry, the
Ambassador of Israel.

(spoke in English)

Ambassador Yehuda Lancry, Ambassador of
Israel, the problem again is the occupation. Today, I
watched the BBC World at 7 o'clock in the morning.
There were hundreds of Palestinians, women and
children. They were in Ramallah. They were trying to
demonstrate in a very peaceful manner. The response
was bullets. The Israeli army was firing and shooting at
civilians, those who were not even carrying rocks or
stones. You will have peace with the Palestinians, but
you will have that peace when you recognize that they
are not inferiors, that their blood is as sacred as Jewish
blood. You stop shooting at them. Your people are
killing them and they count for nothing. The
Palestinians are human beings and they are the equals
of the Israelis.

