Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
join other colleagues in thanking President Benjamin
Mkapa, Chair of the Secretary-General's Panel on the
Referenda in the Sudan, and Mr. Menkerios, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Sudan, for their informative briefings and, more
important, for the commendable work they have been
doing.
It is a matter of great satisfaction that the
referendum in Southern Sudan was completed
successfully and peacefully over a one-week period. A
very large number of eligible voters are reported to
have cast their ballots. By all accounts, the turnover
was well above the required threshold. The Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission and the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS), as well as
other international and regional organizations that
partnered with the South Sudanese authorities, deserve
our highest appreciation for the conduct of the
referendum. That it was conducted peacefully and
without violence is all the more remarkable.

The successful conduct of the referendum was an
important element in the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement reached between the
Sudanese parties. The commitment of these parties,
expressed at the highest levels, to respecting the
outcome of the referendum is equally praiseworthy. We
commend this commitment and hope that the same
spirit of cooperation and commitment will be shown by
the parties to resolve the post-referendum issues that
remain to be agreed upon.

While the referendum was held without violence,
we witnessed during the course of the week a high and
worrying level of violence in the Abyei region, which
led to the loss of lives. This is cause for concern. We
urge the leaders of the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka
communities to show restraint and faithfully implement
the agreement mediated by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. We commend Ambassador
Menkerios and UNMIS for their role in facilitating this
agreement.

The violence witnessed last week in Abyei should
remind us of the need to remain vigilant with regard to
the situation on the ground, which remains fragile. We
hope that the parties will cease their support for proxy
forces and seek to resolve all issues through
negotiation and dialogue.

The situation in Darfur also remains cause for
concern. The problem there requires dialogue with the
participation of all groups - not only those armed
groups but civil society at large. We therefore urge all
parties to return to the negotiating table and reach an
agreement expeditiously.

