The Secretary-General: I am very pleased that
the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Louise
Arbour, is with us today to present the report of the
International Commission of Inquiry on Darfur. I will
leave it to her to give a full description of the report's
findings and recommendations. But let me stress that
this report is one of the most important documents in
the recent history of the United Nations. It makes
chilling reading, and it is a call to urgent action.
The Commission has established that many
people in Darfur have been the victims of atrocities
perpetrated on a very large scale for which the
Government of the Sudan and the Janjaweed are
responsible - including war crimes and, very likely,
crimes against humanity. The Commission has also
found credible evidence that rebel forces are
responsible for serious violations, which may amount
to war crimes.

The Commission strongly recommends that the
Security Council immediately refer the situation of
Darfur to the International Criminal Court, to ensure
that those responsible for these heinous crimes are held
to account. It is vital that these crimes not be left
unpunished.

But the call to urgent action does not stop there.
Even as the Commission was conducting its inquiry,
and since then, attacks on villages, the killing of
civilians, rape, pillaging and forced displacement have
continued in Darfur.

As others have said before me, while the United
Nations may not be able to take humanity to heaven, it
must act to save humanity from hell. This report
demonstrates, beyond all doubt, that the past two years
have been little short of hell on earth for our fellow
human beings in Darfur. And despite the attention the
Council has paid to this crisis, that hell continues
today.

The international community, led by the Council,
must immediately find a way to halt the killing and
protect the vulnerable. The full range of options should
be on the table - including targeted sanctions,
stronger peacekeeping efforts, new measures to protect
civilians and increased pressure on both sides for a
lasting political solution.

I will do my part to help develop such a strategy.
But the power and the responsibility to do something
about this grave crisis are in your hands. Once again, I
call on the Council to act urgently to stop further death
and suffering in Darfur, and to do justice for those
whom we are already too late to save.

