The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

Allow me to express my sincere gratitude to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his very comprehensive briefing to
the Council on the report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2017/640). Egypt
reiterates its full support to him in fulfilling his
mandate, and we welcome the key role of the United
Nations during the reporting period in helping Kosovo
to build its institutions.

We also welcome Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, and Ambassador Vlora Citaku, and I thank
them for their statements.

Political, economic and security developments in
Kosovo have a direct impact on peace and stability
in the region. Egypt, bearing this in mind, welcomes
the fact that success of Kosovo institutions in holding
the planned legislative elections and calls on political
actors to overcome without delay their differences
and to form a new Government, so that they can take
on the challenges facing them, push forward with the
reform agenda and build on the advances made in the
economic and security fields and in the establishment
of the rule of law, as reflected in the reporting period.
These include accelerating economic growth, reducing
unemployment and improving the investment climate
in Kosovo.

We express our concern regarding the references
in the report to the various serious challenges facing
the Pristina-Belgrade dialogue. Egypt believes that the
high-level dialogue between the two parties, facilitated
by the European Union, is the most appropriate forum
for the peaceful resolution of all pending matters, and
we urge Pristina and Belgrade to resume this dialogue.
Here we welcome the informal meeting held between
Presidents Vueie and Thaci in July in Brussels and
the statement by both Presidents on the importance of
the implementation of the agreements already reached
without further delay.

We also express our concern with regard to the
increase in the level of hatred and nationalist and
ethnic sentiments, and we urge both sides to refrain
from inflammatory rhetoric, which only fuels internal
tensions and divisions. We call on both sides to show
the greatest possible restraint and to avoid taking any
unilateral measures or steps that could fuel tensions.

We call on the various parties in Kosovo to follow
the path of dialogue and understanding and to strive
to deal with all issues in the framework of existing
State institutions.

In conclusion, and given the importance that we
attach to consolidating peace and stability in the region,
we wish to once again reaffirm the importance of the
efforts of the international community aimed at helping
Pristina and Belgrade to overcome the differences
between them and reaching compromise solutions that
are just and lasting, that are accepted by both sides and
that could lay the groundwork for peace and stability
in the region. We also encourage them to speed up
regional integration into European institutions, which
would improve the situation in the region as a whole.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The representative of Serbia has asked for the floor
to make a further statement. I now give him the floor.

