Myanmar strongly believes that the rule of law is a foundation for relations among nations. Multilateralism can succeed only if inter-State relations are based on rules and the law. A rules-based international order could be the key platform for bringing peace, harmony and development to our world today. The United Nations was established to strengthen the rule of law at the international level so as to govern States' behaviour under the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. International peace and security cannot be maintained without full compliance with international law and adherence to the letter and spirit of the Charter, as well as respect for the rule of law. One of the leading objectives of the United Nations since its inception has been to strengthen the rule of law with a view to governing the conduct of States in accordance with the principles set forth in the Charter. My delegation therefore attaches great importance to the role the United Nations and its agencies play in promoting and strengthening the rule of law. We also believe that the promotion of the rule of law shall be in accordance with such universally established principles and norms as respect for sovereign equality and territorial integrity, non-interference in the internal affairs of other States, prohibition of the use or threat of use of force and the peaceful settlement of disputes. This year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of the International Court of Justice, the sole and principal judicial organ of the United Nations, which has played an essential role in maintaining global peace and stability since it was established in 1945. Through its jurisprudence, the Court has solidified the role of international law and strengthened the rule of law so that peace and stability in a rules-based global order shall prevail. In addition, the Court contributes fundamentally to promoting and strengthening the rule of law through its judgments and advisory opinions on the legal questions brought before it. Accordingly, the international community has been able to enjoy the availability of numerous means of peaceful dispute settlement over the past 75 years thanks to the Court. In that regard, the Court is a linchpin to the implementation of Article 1, paragraph 1, of the United Nations Charter, which articulated a first purpose for the Organization, namely, "to bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity with the principles of justice and international law, adjustment or settlement of international disputes or situations which might lead to a breach of the peace". The relationship between the Court and the other principal organs of the United Nations, including the Security Council and the General Assembly, is therefore fundamental to promoting and strengthening the rule of law at the international level. However, we believe that the legal framework set out in the United Nations Charter for cooperation between the Court and the other principal organs of the United Nations, especially the Security Council, needs to be complementary and should not allow for encroachment of each other's courses of action. Therefore, when we consider revitalizing the relationship between the Court and the other principal organs of the United Nations, we should not - indeed must not - overlook the legal limits set forth in the United Nations Charter to safeguard the Court's independent status. In addition, the term "principal judicial organ", stipulated in Article 92 of the United Nations Charter, mirrors the independent status of the Court in the sense that, when exercising its judicial functions, it is not subordinate or accountable to any external authority, including the other principal organs of the United Nations. Therefore, any attempt to influence the course of an ongoing case before the International Court of Justice by another principal organ of the United Nations may more than jeopardize the independent status, legitimacy and credibility of the Court; indeed, it may set a dangerous precedent and foment uncertainty in the existing international legal order. In recent years, we have witnessed abusive applications of the notion of the rule of law. Some States Members of the United Nations have exploited international legal institutions, including the United Nations, for their own political interests. As such actions could undermine the established rules and principles of international law, as well as the principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter, my delegation would therefore like to express our serious concern at those illegal actions. We call upon all Member States to work together to prevent such actions and defend the United Nations Charter.
