Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
Bolivia, as a country committed to its region but above
all in the interest of responsibility and transparency,
would like to explain its vote today. We voted in favour
of resolution 2410 (2018), but would like to highlight
specific elements that were not considered by the
United States delegation, as penholder, with regard
to the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Support of Justice in Haiti (MINUJUSTH).
Those elements have already been expressed by some
delegations, including my own.

That is why, the resolution today to renew the
mandate of MINUJUSTH has not been adopted
unanimously, which is cause for concern given that it
does not send the right message to the Republic of Haiti,
to the Mission and to the international community, in
general. MINUJUSTH requires the full support of
the Council in order to fulfil its mandate, and Haiti
requires the effective support in order to tackle its
impending challenges.

Moreover, it is worrying that penholder States are
overstepping their boundaries without considering
the positions and opinions of other members of the
Security Council, not to mention those of the host
country. The resolution provides that the Security
Council shall act in accordance with Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations for the entire mandate of
MINUJUSTH. The main argument for that is that in last
year's resolution 2350 (2017), the Security Council was
already acting in line with Chapter VII. The fifteenth
preambular paragraph of that resolution states:

"Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations, as described in section 1 of
operative paragraph 7 of resolution 1542 (2004),
and with regards to operative paragraphs 5 to 14
that relate to the new mission,"

The human rights component is included in
paragraph 6. Nevertheless, the term "relate to" implies
that the Security Council acts under Chapter VII only
with regard to section 1 of operative paragraph 7 of
resolution 1542 (2004), included between operative
paragraphs 5 and 14, whereas section 1 of operative
paragraph 7 of resolution 1542 (2004) was only in
reference to a secure and stable environment, that is,
acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations with regard to section 1. It subsequently states
that the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
will enjoy the following mandate in a secure and
stable environment.

We have been told that the resolution is about Haiti.
During the June 2017 Security Council visit to Haiti, the
President of Haiti, members of the Haitian Parliament
and various representatives of civil society expressly
requested that the mandate be governed by Chapter
VI of the Charter of the United Nations because, in
their View, Haiti is certainly not a threat to regional or
international peace and security.

We are confident that, in order to build trust
between the United Nations and Haiti, at the very least
the language used in previous resolutions of the past 14
years should have been used. Finally, we are convinced
that the current language used in the adopted resolution
must not set a precedent for future missions. Obviously,
it is concerning that the reality on the ground is not
taken into account and that resolutions are put to a vote
with the knowledge that there is no consensus.

