Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): Let me begin by
congratulating the Permanent Representative of Botswana
on his assumption of the office of president of the Security
Council for the month of February. My delegation feels
sure that under the Presidency of Botswana, the affairs of
the Security Council are in very good hands. We also wish
to thank his predecessor, Mr. Cardenas, Permanent
Representative of Argentina, for his successful and efficient
conduct of the business of the Security Council during
January.

My delegation is delighted to welcome the high-
powered ministerial delegation from the Organization of
African Unity (OAU). Its presence with us today
underscores the importance which Africa attaches to the
acceleration of the peace process in Angola and to the full
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, which was
informed and influenced by the conclusions reached in the
"Acordos de Paz".

We also welcome in particular the Honourable
Mr. E.C.I. Bwanali, the Foreign Minister of Malawi, who
is Chairman of the OAU ministerial delegation, and also the
Honourable Mr. Venancio de Moura, Foreign Minister of
Angola, whose Government has demonstrated its
commitment to the Lusaka Protocol and to the "Acordos de

Paz .

Clearly, there are indications on the ground to assure
us that the enterprise we are about to undertake in the
United Nations Verification Mission in Angola (UNAVEM III) portends a viable prospect. The first indication is the
fact that the cease-fire agreed to last November is generally
holding. Second, after the trauma of a long-drawn-out
conflict, the parties now seem determined to pursue the
cause of peace in the higher interest of national survival,
national reconciliation and national reconstruction.
Thirdly, under the veritable leadership of the
Secretary-Generals Special Representative, Ambassador
Blondin Beye, and with the efforts of the Chief Military
Observer, Major-General Chris Garba, the otherwise fluid
situation in Angola now shows a clear possibility of
stabilizing. Fourthly, there is the solid commitment of the
Government and people of Angola to the prompt
deployment of UNAVEM. III by offering to make a
substantial contribution in kind to the operational costs of
the new peace-keeping operation. We commend this
gesture and trust that it will induce similar cooperation
and willingness on the part of the international
community to assist the ongoing peace process in Angola.

My delegation is particularly grateful to the
Secretary-General for his excellent report (S/1995/97),
dated 1 February 1995, which has provided valuable
insights into the continuing problems in Angola in the
political, military, civil and humanitarian spheres. After
decades of internecine civil war, it is conceivable that the
people of Angola are now fully prepared to let go the war
psychosis in favour of the pursuit of peace. Such conflict
situations cannot but have deleterious consequences for
the country's basic infrastructure, civil society and
economic development. It is against this backdrop that our
current authorization of UNAVEM. III finds its form,
legitimacy and consistency.

Through the mandate of UNAVEM. III, the United
Nations seeks to provide a credible force level that can
contend with the enormity and complexity of the problem
on the ground within a time-frame that will not imply a
perpetual United Nations presence in Angola. At the same
time, UNAVEM. III is mandated to ensure that there is
constant monitoring of the state of play in Angola,
including the strict observance of the cease-fire as well as
progress in the implementation of the peace process. This
deliberate mix of obligations with responsibility, in the
View of my delegation, enables the international
community to be fully involved in all stages of the
UNAVEM. III operation.

At the core of the current mandate is the flexibility
that the Secretary-General must retain to determine the
course, content and timing of the deployment of military
forces and civilian personnel as the situation on the
ground in Angola may warrant. In our view, the
deployment must in no case commence any later than
31 March 1995. We do not expect the imposition of any
additional layer of requirements that could constrain the
Secretary-General in carrying out his responsibilities

 

under the mandate to be approved by the Security Council
for UNAVEM. III.

As for the duration of the mandate itself, our preferred
option is for an initial period of 12 months, in line with the
Secretary-General's objective recommendation and
consistent with the realities on the ground. We can,
however, agree to the six-month initial period proposed in
the current draft, but only on the understanding that the
United Nations is not about to terminate its presence in
Angola after only six months, rather, that it is prepared to
undertake additional periods of extension, based on actual
performance, to enable the political process to take root.

A critical element in this effort is the need to create a
conducive environment for the political process to
materialize. It is in this context that we welcome the call
for a meeting between the President of Angola and the
leader of UNITA as soon as possible. We are confident that
President dos Santos is ready for this meeting, and we urge
Mr. Savimbi to join him for it without further delay. Such
a high-level meeting would provide additional impetus to
the peace process and constitute an enabling and
confidence-building measure between the parties. In the
long term, since the issue in Angola appears to be largely
one of pure power-sharing, my delegation believes that the
objective should be that all Angolans, without exception,
should have equality of opportunity and equality of access
to decision-making within a political framework. That, in
essence, is the true value of democracy and the prerequisite
for a sustainable democratic process.

The magnitude of the social dislocation and disruption
that have occurred in Angola requires that all efforts be
made to salvage the situation and assist the Republic to
reconcile, rehabilitate and reconstruct itself. In this regard,
the international community has a continuing role to play.
We commend, meanwhile, the efforts of those States and
organizations that have so far assisted these efforts, and we
urge them to continue. We request those that have not yet
done so to make such contributions and urge them to
endeavour to do so on an assured and continuing basis.

In conclusion, my delegation expresses its full support
for the draft resolution before the Council. We are
particularly gratified that the resolution reaffirms the
Security Council's commitment to both the sovereignty and
the territorial integrity of Angola. In our view, there is no
paragraph in the draft resolution we are about to adopt that
derogates from the sovereign rights of the Angolan
Government - that is, in the maintenance of law and order
and the preservation of the territorial integrity of the
country - either before, during or after UNAVEM. III.

Finally, my delegation hopes that today's adoption of
this draft resolution will represent for the Council a
critical watershed and an important step towards the
establishment of a durable peace in Angola, a country
which, after all, has been at war with itself for far too
long and whose people deserve, now more than ever
before, the opportunity to resume normal, productive
lives.

