Ms. Bila (Ukraine): At the outset, I would like
to thank you, Madam President, for convening this
important and timely open debate, which we believe
will make a valuable contribution in addressing the
issue of the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation
and misuse of small arms and light weapons (SALW).

Ukraine aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union earlier today. However,
we would like to make some additional comments in
our national capacity.

While Ukraine recognizes that weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) and their proliferation is a real
threat to humankind as a whole in 2015, we must admit
that the possibility of the use of WMDs depends on a
number of factors. In that regard, SALW also have a
powerful virulent effect. In particular, the instability
caused by the proliferation of SALW and their use
could serve as a real precondition to a nuclear conflict.
Therefore, today we must tackle the issue of the illicit
transfer, stockpiling and misuse of SALW with the
utmost responsibility.

In that respect, we welcome the entry into force
of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), in December 2014,
which includes SALW in its scope, contains provisions
on the stockpiling of ammunition and further raises
the level of attention and scrutiny given to controls of
SALW. Ukraine was among the sponsors of the General
Assembly resolutions on the ATT and signed the
document in 2014. The harmonization of its provisions
with the national legislation of signatory countries
would be an important step in reaching the ATT
objectives, particularly in preventing and eradicating
the illicit trade in conventional arms and preventing
their diversion. However, until the key arms-exporting
States become signatories to the Treaty, we can not
speak about the comprehensive nature of the ATT. We
therefore call upon all the States to become a part of
this important process.

The human cost of illicit SALW proliferation
is extremely perturbing. It is not a secret that in my
country SALW-related challenges emerged mostly after
the Russian aggression against Ukraine undertaken in
2014 and 2015. But the first steps in that regard were
made earlier. Long before the occupation started, the
Russian Federation made numerous supplies of arms,
including SALW, into the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea. It is clear that those weapons showed up
during the so-called referendum in Crimea in 2014. As
a result, since then this part of Ukraine is occupied by
the Russian Federation.

During 2014 and 2015, the illegal pro-Russian
armed groups - the so-called Donetsk People's
Republic and Luhansk People's Republic - in close
coordination with Russian troops, have gained and
continue to control those respective segments of the
Russian-Ukrainian border. In that way, a deadly route
for the illicit transfers of SALW to the territory Ukraine
has been opened. The continuous flows of sophisticated
weapons and ammunition from the Russian Federation
to Crimea and the eastern part of Ukraine have had a
disastrous and destabilizing effect. The most cynical
thing in that regard is that large amounts of SALW are
moved to the Donetsk and Lugansk regions of Ukraine
from Russian territory under the guise of the so-called
humanitarian convoys. These problems have been
regularly reported to the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission in
Ukraine. Numerous items of documentary evidence
have been presented to the members of the Mission.

Without delving into the technical details, I would
like to draw the Council's attention to one example
of the evidence of weaponry supplies through the
Ukrainian-Russian border segment. A week ago, during
the neutralization of a subversive group in the Donetsk
region, a model 34 under-barrel grenade launcher
(UBGL-34), which is in the inventory of Russian army,
was confiscated. It is easy to verify that the UBGL-34
model is not in the inventory of the Ukrainian armed
forces. We have many similar examples with relevant
documentation and photos. The UBGL-34 and other
SALW have a strong destabilizing effect in the heart
of Europe, killing hundreds of peaceful Ukrainians.
The conclusion is the following: we have no right to be
blind with regard to the illicit supplies of conventional
weapons, including SALW, from the Russian Federation
to Ukraine.

In the wider context, after the brutal occupation
of Crimea by Russian military forces with the use,
or threat of use, of conventional weapons, including
SALW, we heard statements by Russian officials about
their right to deploy nuclear weapons on the Crimean
Peninsula. Such acts would constitute a direct security
threat, both at the regional and global level. We should
keep an eye on every such action.

