Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Over the year and half of its work, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) has played a
leading role in the system that has been created under
the auspices of the United Nations to counter new
threats and challenges. Its lead role in building up a
global anti-terrorist capacity and its authority in
strengthening international cooperation in this area are
well recognized and respected by all States.

We associate ourselves with the words of
gratitude addressed to Ambassador Greenstock for the
detailed information about the results achieved by that
body, and we note the dynamism and the high quality
of its work. I am pleased to associate myself with the
words of praise for the personal contribution made by
Ambassador Greenstock to that work. I do not think
that anyone could doubt that its success, to a large
extent, is due to the talent and the personal dynamism
of Ambassador Greenstock. We are sure that the best
characteristics of the CTC - its effectiveness, its non-
confrontational approach and its transparency - will
be maintained and built upon under Ambassador Arias'
leadership.

I would also like to take this opportunity today
once again to express gratitude to the whole CTC team,
colleagues, Permanent Representatives of Security
Council members, the United Nations Secretariat and,
in particular, to the CTC experts.

We support the CTC's recently adopted
programme of work for the upcoming 90-day period.
The benchmarks contained therein will make it
possible to maintain high output standards and to have
a clear picture of the gaps that exist in anti-terrorist
activity, to continue to seek to eliminate those gaps and
to create a universal information network, as well as to
concentrate on priorities for providing assistance to
individual countries.

In the CTC's new work stage, which will be
devoted not merely to assessing the legislative basis
and infrastructure of counter-terrorism but also to
monitoring effective implementation, a balanced and
very well-considered approach will be particularly
important.

Our common goal is to establish effective
international, regional and national mechanisms that
are compatible and that make it impossible for
terrorists to evade punishment or to take advantage of
the weakness of certain individual elements of the
global anti-terrorist endeavour. This approach implies
strict compliance with all of the requirements of
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). We support
the urgent appeal to those States that have not yet
submitted their initial reports to the CTC or are
seriously late in submitting their second reports to
establish immediate ongoing cooperation with the
Committee.

The CTC has adopted a strategically correct
decision in placing particular stress in its future work
on cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations. The special meeting of the
CTC held on 6 March 2003 was highly commendable.
The meeting gave a positive impetus to the
Committee's interface with regional structures, among
which, we note with pleasure, the Anti-Terrorist Centre
of the Commonwealth of Independent States and the
regional anti-terrorist structure of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization. We think that these contacts
should be regular.

The effective activities of the CTC embody the
resolve of the Security Council to actively stand up to
the threat to international peace and security that is
emerging from terrorism. The Russian Federation,
which is one of the Vice-Chairmen of the CTC, will
continue actively to cooperate with all United Nations
Member States to achieve real success in our anti-
terrorism campaign.

