Ms. Buner (Turkey): We would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the Permanent Mission of Peru to
the United Nations for convening this open debate.
We would also like to thank the briefers for their
valuable remarks.

Turkey aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union, and
I would like to make the following remarks in my
national capacity.
Transnational threats, in particular terrorism and
organized crime, are no doubt among the main security
challenges that we face today. It is deeply alarming
that the global threat of terrorism is expanding both
geographically and in terms of tactics, despite the
increasing resources and means devoted to fighting it.

New technologies and opportunities are revealing
themselves to terrorist organizations. As terrorists
use new and more sophisticated methods, adapt their
tactics and modus operandi to changing circumstances,
countering terrorism is becoming more complex.
Furthermore, the expansion of the area in which
terrorists operate is connected to the financing and
financial support they receive. Therefore, terrorist
groups are becoming increasingly involved in lucrative
criminal activities, and criminal groups are helping
terrorist organizations by providing services.

This growing overlap between terrorism and
organized crime requires greater attention from the
international community. We cannot prevent and
counter current and future threats in isolation. We need
international and regional cooperation among us, as well
as with civil society and the private sector. Operational
and timely intelligence-sharing, cooperation among law
enforcement agencies and formal judicial cooperation
are also of vital importance.

Moreover, we can effectively address these
interlinked challenges only in a comprehensive and
cross-dimensional manner, while fully respecting the
principles of the United Nations, in particular those in
the field of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
The United Nations is naturally positioned at the centre
of our common efforts on counter-terrorism. The United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy provides
the backbone for both national and international work
to be done in this area. We support the instrumental
role played by all United Nations agencies and bodies
in this regard.

We believe that technical assistance is another
crucial aspect of our efforts. We applaud the work done
by United Nations entities, especially the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, to improve the capacity
of States requesting support. For its part, Turkey has
contributed to the capacity-building activities by
providing training to the officials of other Governments
based on their needs, by making financial contributions
to UNODC-led programmes and by hosting high-level
international meetings. We will continue to support
such activities.
Before concluding my remarks, I would like to
take this opportunity to reiterate that, as a country that
has a long and painful experience in the fight against
terrorism and continues to face an imminent threat
from several terrorist organizations, Turkey firmly
believes that the international community must stand
united, show mutual solidarity and cooperate against
terrorism without making any distinction between
terrorist organizations.

