Mr. AlNafisee (Saudi Arabia): I should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your country's assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for a second
term. I should also like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Fernandez-Taranco for his detailed briefing on
the subject today.

At the outset, I should like to express my
appreciation for the convening of this debate to address
the situation in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine, at a time when the Middle East has a dire
need to resume direct peace process negotiations and to
prevent a stalemate situation as a result of the ongoing
illegal Israeli settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, particularly East Jerusalem.

In spite of all of the efforts of the Palestinian
Authority to restart direct negotiations towards the
establishment of a two-State solution based on the
1967 borders, the Israelis continue to build these illegal
settlements and bring more irrelevant questions to the
negotiating table, such as the recognition of Israel as a
Jewish State - a clear indication from the Israeli side
that it is not seriously interested in reaching a just and
peaceful solution, which is an internationally supported
objective.

In light of the ongoing situation, my Government
repeats its call on the international community to
demand that Israel, the occupying Power, restart direct
negotiations with the Palestinian Authority and halt all
illegal settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, in particular East Jerusalem.

Two years have passed since Israeli occupation
forces invaded the Gaza Strip and the Security Council
adopted resolution 1860 (2009). Nonetheless, the
widespread destruction of Gaza remains unabated, in
spite of all assistance efforts. Israel's occupation forces
continue to hinder the delivery of assistance by closing
key crossings, increasing checkpoints, building a wall
that now isolates Gaza from the rest of the world,
pursuing a policy of collective punishment against the
population of Gaza, and creating obstacles to the
reconstruction process to heal the damage that Israeli
war machine caused. All of these practices and others
committed by the Israeli occupying forces clearly show
the persistence of Israeli aggression towards the
Palestinian problem.

Since Israel annexed East Jerusalem in 1967, a
bitter transformation of the holy city has displaced the
city's Arab population to create a Zionist East
Jerusalem. Stripping Arab citizens of their identities
and resettling them elsewhere is akin to ethnic
cleansing. The situation in East Jerusalem deteriorates

daily as Israel's policies demolish homes, destroy
identities, displace people and alter records in order to
rewrite history and change Jerusalem's demographics.
In light of these illegal activities, the Kingdom
reaffirms its condemnation of the continued
resettlement of Arab Israeli citizens and calls for the
immediate cessation and dismantling of Jewish
settlements in the occupied territories.

We reiterate that the building of settlements is
illegal under international law and constitutes an
obstacle to peace negotiations. If Israel claims that it
wants negotiations and is committed to peace, then it
should first cease all settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territories and dismantle existing
settlements.

The Secretary-General confirmed in a recent
statement the illegitimacy of settlement activity and
called on Israel to fulfil its commitment, in accordance
with the Road Map to peace, to freezing all new
settlement, including so-called natural population
growth, and dismantling all existing settlements built
since March 2001.

The international community has demanded in
concert the cessation of settlement activities on the
basis of their illegitimacy. Will these demands be met
with concrete action from our Security Council? Will
the Council respond to the positions of concerned
Member States by compelling Israel to stop new
settlement activities and dismantle existing
settlements?

Unfortunately, however, it is clear that things are
not going in the right direction if we wish to reach the
two-State solution, mainly due to Israel's insistence on
continuing to build illegal settlements. Indeed, the
Israeli Government announced last week the start of
construction on 238 new housing units in East
Jerusalem.

In Lebanon, the ongoing threat posed by Israel to
the sovereignty of the people of that country further
complicates an already complex situation.

Finally, Israel is ignoring or disregarding the call
of the international community to start negotiations in
good faith on the return of the occupied Golan to its
legitimate owner, Syria.
The Government of my country hopes that the
wish expressed by President Barack Obama at the
opening of the sixty-fifth session of the General
Assembly, that the Palestinians will take their seat as a
full member in next year's session of the General
Assembly, will come true. We hope that Israel will
avail itself of the opportunity of direct negotiations to
respond, howsoever late, to the Arab Peace Initiative
and prove that it is a real partner capable of making
peace by participating in the two-State solution in
order to end six decades of bloodshed, conflict and
continuous threats to international peace and security.

