Ms. Flores (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to express our appreciation to your
delegation, Mr. President, as well as to Portugal, for
the timely initiative to organize this important open
debate on the responsibility to protect and the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We also
welcome the presence here this morning of His
Excellency President Anibal Antonio Cavaco Silva of
Portugal and of the Secretary-General, as well as that
of High Commissioner for Human Rights Navanethem
Pillay, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs Catherine Bragg, and of Mr. Philip Spoerri,

Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross. Their
participation is a forceful affirmation of the urgent
need to address the sensitive issue before us today.

We can state without any doubt that the most
recent armed conflicts that have unfortunately broken
out in various parts of the world, and which we have
seen grow with feelings of sadness and disbelief, have
touched the conscience of the entire world. All
confrontations that claim lives cast shadows over the
universal desire for harmonious coexistence among all
peoples and the search for peaceful solutions to
differences, especially when there are innocent victims
and unprotected civilians who are pulled in by the
maelstrom of a brutal confrontation.

Such horrendous acts of repression and
indiscriminate State violence against innocent civilians,
in utter neglect of the responsibility to protect human
life - especially unarmed non-combatants - present a
painful scenario that cries out for greater involvement by
the international community. The Security Council plays
a guardianship role in the fervent quest for international
peace. Seeking and maintaining that peace are essential
to creating a more stable and secure world that
guarantees collective well-being.

At this point along the path we have traced since
51 countries founded the United Nations, we would
wait in vain for the realities of our day to resemble the
circumstances of that time, or for the post-Second
World War model to satisfy the expectations of the 193
States that today make up the Organization. If indeed
we want our resolutions to carry greater credibility and
legitimacy, then it makes no sense, in the twenty-first
century, to carry on with "provisional" rules of
procedure. Because we believe that it is imperative to
preserve the Organization's institutional integrity, we
cannot evade the need to make decision-making
processes more transparent and democratic. They must
be updated at every procedural stage in order to bring
them into line with new experiences and the
developments that the world has undergone to date.

We must overcome the distrust that has paralyzed
us so many times, so as to find solutions to pressing
conflicts. The urgent duty to preserve lives and to
rescue vulnerable populations fighting for survival, in
appalling helplessness, demands robust actions,
decisions and procedures - and ones that do not come
so late that nothing is left but to place wreaths on the

11-5866]
graves of hundreds of thousands of innocents who died
for lack of the urgent help they cried out for.

Having said that, we do not mean to take any
credit away from the Council for the fair and
courageous decisions it has taken aimed at saving lives,
just as we highlight the efforts launched at previous
meetings. We take note of the fact that the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations has
informed us that the Secretariat has finished drafting a
conceptual framework for the responsibility to protect
as part of a comprehensive strategy that includes
setting up protection training modules. It is
encouraging to learn that consultations are being held
with troop-contributing countries on requirements for
the protection of civilians.

Normally, human rights violations are among the
main drivers of conflicts. The Security Council
recently held an open debate on the protection of
children in armed conflict (see S/PV.6581) and adopted
resolution 1998 (2011). A step forward would be to
expand the listing criteria to include parties to a
conflict who attack schools and hospitals. Although the
Council has decided to broaden the provisions of
sanctions regimes in connection with violations of
international law in the context of the protection of
children, it is worth mentioning that there is still room
to broaden such protection mechanisms. We commend
the presidential statement adopted at the conclusion of
the Council debate of 28 October on women and peace
and security (S/PRST/20ll/20), which condemns all
violations of applicable international law against
women and girls in situations of armed conflict.

International peace and security require the
institutional reliability and strength that over the years
since the Second World War we have instituted and
built up at the United Nations. The Charter expresses
no small wish when it assigns the United Nations the
duty to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war. For that reason - with so much apocalyptic
talk, with a lack of civility in dealing with differences
and of brotherhood in living together, and with the
abuse of the planet's precious resources - we must,
today more than ever, pledge to renew that lofty
commitment, so that it rises to the scope of the
challenge we originally took on. It must be the right
fit - neither so big that it falls off nor so small that it
chafes.
11-58661
