Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Madam
President, at the outset I should like to extend to you
our congratulations on your presidency of the Security
Council for this month. By the same token, I should like
to extend my thanks to Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas,
Joint Special Representative for Darfur and Head of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), for his briefing, in which
be detailed the most recent report of the Secretary-
General on Darfur (S/2013/420), in the framework of
the Council's discussions of the renewal of UNAMID.

We hope that the resolution will be balanced and
objective and will forge ahead towards peace, stability
and the finalization of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur.

The report presented to the Council emphasized
that progress has been made in the implementation
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, although
it has been delayed. Yet the truth remains that the
implementation of the Document is moving forward
steadily. As is well known, while the funding
requirements for the DDS, which were based on the
needs assessment conducted by the Joint Assessment
Mission, amounted to $7.2 billion, donors at the
Doha Conference pledged a total of $3.6 billion. That
is reflected in the implementation of the DDS, in
accordance with the provisions of the Doha Document.
We therefore appreciate the Secretary-General's appeal
to donors contained in paragraph 73 of the report.

The report before the Council notes that regarding
the protection of civilians, a number of tribal clashes
took place in north-east and central Darfur that led to an

increase in the number of internally displaced persons
compared with the past two years. In that connection,
we would like to emphasize the key fact that all tribal
clashes revolve around national resources, water,
minerals and pastureland. As we have indicated in our
previous statements, that is one of the fundamental
raisons d'etre of the conflict in Darfur, which makes
clear the region's need for development projects and
their implementation.

In that connection, we would like to acknowledge the
appreciable efforts deployed by the central Government,
in coordination with the Darfur Regional Authority, to
convene a conference on peaceful coexistence among
the tribes as well to settle differences with no tribal
discrimination. That is in addition to the considerable
efforts made by local governments in Darfur. The
report before the Council refers in paragraph 24 to the
strenuous efforts made by Southern Darfur to settle the
conflict between the Gimir and Beni Halba tribes.

The Government of the Sudan condemns very
strongly the attacks against UNAMID, the most
recent of which was the barbaric attack that led to the
assassination of seven peacekeepers from Tanzania. We
reiterate our condolences to the sisterly Government
of Tanzania as well as to the bereaved families. We
emphasize the need to pursue the criminals and bring
them to justice.

Two hours ago I was speaking with the Special
Prosecutor for Darfur Crimes, who told me that he
is in contact with UNAMID authorities with a view
to securing the arrest of those who carried out that
barbaric attack. We emphasize the need for UNAMID
to cooperate and coordinate with the local authorities
in Darfur, with a view to guaranteeing the safety and
movement of the mission's personnel.

I should like, before the Council today, to emphasize
the importance we place on coordination. That does
not mean that we want to change the mandate of the
mission. The intention is not to restrict the movement
of the mission; on the contrary, we are more interested
in safeguarding the safety and security of the mission's
personnel.

By the same token, we emphasize the need for the
mission to be able to defend itself effectively, so that it
will not be easily targeted by those rebel groups that
wish to impede the peace process and send negative
messages to the effect that there is instability in the
region.

We acknowledge the commendable efforts made by
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas in the political arena, as
well as his endeavours to persuade those movements that
have rejected peace to join the peace process. However,
the international community's support for those efforts,
through the clear messages conveyed to the movement
leaders, has also been significant. We should also
emphasize the importance of the role played by States
of the region in achieving success in the peace process
by ensuring that they give no support or shelter to any
groups that reject peace. Last week, a leader of one of
those groups, Mr. Abdul Wahid Mohamed Al-Nur, was
bold enough to criticize the decisions on Darfur of the
African Union Peace and Security Council, implying
that he refuses to cooperate in seeing the peace process
through to completion.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize my
Government's firm resolve and willingness to achieve
a comprehensive settlement of the Darfur conflict and
a future of stability and peace, through the efforts of
the African Union and the Joint Special Representative,
working with the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.

