Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): I should like
to thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to outline the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As
members know, this is my first briefing to the Council
since I assumed my functions as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General.

I should like at the outset to underscore the
outstanding progress made in recent weeks in the
preparations for the presidential and legislative
elections, including the end of the voter registration
process across the country, the enactment ofthe revised
electoral law and the adoption of the electoral budget.
I note that at this stage, more than 46 million potential
voters, 47 per cent of whom are women, have registered,
thereby indicating their intention to participate in the
elections on 23 December.

Despite the many challenges they face, these
millions of Congolese men and women have signified
their commitment to ensuring the first peaceful transfer
ofpower in the history ofthe Democratic Republic ofthe
Congo. I wish to pay tribute today to the determination
of the Congolese people to participate in the political
process and to shape the future of their country,
because it is that determination and commitment that
will help achieve the goals set by the 31 December 2016
Political Agreement. On the eve of the commemoration
of International Women's Day, I wish to pay special
tribute to all Congolese women for their courage and
determination to bring about peace, stability and the
consolidation ofthe democratic process in their country.
They have played a critical role in ensuring a peaceful
process, and I am sure that they will continue to do so.

However, despite the progress made in the electoral
process, major challenges remain. In this respect, it is
important to restore the faith of the signatories of the
New Year Agreement, both in the political process as a
whole and in the organization of the elections. As such,
the effective implementation of conciliatory measures
and the respect of electoral deadlines are essential.
Regarding the implementation of the conciliatory
measures, although the Government has released
numerous political prisoners since the signing of the
31 December Agreement, many others are still being
detained. In that regard, more effort must be made to
examine the remaining typical cases and those involving
other prisoners, and to pursue political openness.

The disproportionate use of force by the security
services during the peaceful demonstrations of
31 December and 21 January is another major concern.
This disproportionate use resulted in 16 deaths,
more than 100 wounded and 100 arrests. During the
25 February protests, at least 2 more people were
killed, 47 were tried and 102 arrested by security forces
across the country. Ensuring respect for the freedoms
and fundamental rights enshrined in the Congolese
Constitution is also crucial. I call on the Government to
conduct credible investigations into these incidents and
to take appropriate sanctions.

With regard to the electoral process, several key
issues on the agenda of the Independent National
Electoral Commission (CENI) have yet to be resolved.
First, the electoral legislation must be finalized, in
particular with the adoption by Parliament of the
provisions on the distribution of seats. Secondly, the
financial resources needed to organize the elections
on time must be regularly disbursed and allocated to
CENI by the authorities. Moreover, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo electoral support project must
be adopted. Finally, differences with respect to some
of the election modalities, including the possible use of
voting machines, should be ironed out.

(spoke in English)

While national political attention remains centred
on confidence-building measures and progress in
the electoral process, the security situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has continued to
deteriorate. That brings increased risk for renewed
instability in many parts of the country, and poses a
serious threat to the civilian population, particularly in
the East. The activities of the Allied Democratic Forces
in the Beni area, and of Mayi-Mayi groups in North
and South Kivu continue to pose significant threats to
the civilian population, and those groups can still carry
out attacks against the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO.) In the Kasai
region, the security situation remains fragile, with
reports of increased destabilizing activities of Kamuina
Nsapu and other militia groups.

The rapidly deteriorating situation in Ituri
province, centred around events in Djugu territory, is
of grave concern. The outbreak of violence starting
early this year, which has led to the deaths of more
than 60 civilians and the displacement of more than
200,000 people, poses a significant risk of escalation
and requires our full attention. The attack on Maze less
than a week ago, which left at least 33 people dead,
most of them women and children, was a callous act.

I condemn the persistent attacks by the various
armed groups and militia across the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the recruitment of children,
the rape of women and young girls, the burning of
houses and schools, and the desecration of places of
worship. It is the responsibility of those who direct and
those who perpetrate such attacks to ensure that this
unacceptable violence comes to an end. And it is our
collective responsibility to ensure that those who direct
and perpetrate such crimes be held fully responsible for
their actions.

In the context of the political tension and the
deteriorating security situation, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo continues to face one of the
world's most serious humanitarian crises. The number
of internally displaced persons in need of humanitarian
assistance has reached 4.5 million, the highest number
in Africa. Hundreds of thousands have sought refuge in
neighbouring countries. More than 7.7 million people
face severe food insecurity throughout the country.
More than 2 million children are severely malnourished
and require urgent assistance. Relief efforts are
hampered by critically low funding. There is no other
way of saying it - the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is shocking.

I would encourage the Council in its deliberations
on the renewal of the MONUSCO mandate to maintain
its focus on how the political and electoral processes
can best be supported, in line with the 31 December
Agreement, the electoral calendar and the Congolese
Constitution; and on how the security situation can be
stabilized and protection for the Congolese civilian
population can best be assured.

A failure to generate confidence in the full and
faithful implementation ofthe 31 December Agreement
will serve only to heighten political tensions and to
fuel the risks of inciting violence for political ends,
particularly within a context of renewed and increased
armed group activities. It is essential that all stakeholders
find ways to ensure that the elections scheduled for the
end of this year are peaceful and credible, and thus
serve as a factor that contributes to the stability and
security of the country and of the region as a whole.

During these times of heightened tensions,
MONUSCO remains steadfast in its commitment to
supporting the Congolese authorities and protecting
the most vulnerable and most affected by acts of
violence - Congolese women and men, girls and boys,
who hold the aspirations of their country firmly in their

grasp.

We must also not forget those who have lost their
lives in the name of peace. That includes Congolese
from all walks of life, such as the 27 staff members
of the Independent National Electoral Commission
who lost their lives during the voter registration
process - three were beheaded * while working to
ensure that elections can take place on time. That also
includes those who have come to serve in the name
of peace, such as the 15 Tanzanian peacekeepers who
recently laid down their lives at the Semuliki bridge,
and the Pakistani peacekeeper who fell in South Kivu.
Our thoughts are also with our missing Tanzanian
peacekeeper, whom we are sparing no effort to find.

If we are to truly honour the memories of all those
who have paid the ultimate price for peace, then we must
complete the task at hand and ensure that elections that
contribute to the peace and security of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are held, and that the spirit
that led to the signing of the 31 December Agreement
prevail. That is a task to which MONUSCO remains
firmly committed, and I look forward to the continued
support of the Council in that regard.

