Mr. Badji (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, allow me to congratulate you,
Madam, on the exemplary and effective manner in
which you are steering the work of the Council this
month. I should also like to congratulate Ambassador
Claude Heller, Permanent Representative of Mexico,
for his effective guidance of the Council during the
month of June.

On behalf of the Committee, I would like to
express my appreciation to Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his thorough
and objective briefing on the situation in the Middle
East and the status of the question of Palestine. It
clearly showed that the parties and the international
community must engage forcefully at this critical
juncture to create conditions conducive to the
resumption of serious negotiations on all permanent
status issues of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

While we all would wholeheartedly welcome
serious direct negotiations between Israel and the
Palestinians, our Committee is of the View that such
negotiations can be successful only in an atmosphere of
mutual trust and if the parties are convinced that they
will lead to a comprehensive, just and lasting outcome.
To that end, the parties must first and foremost
implement their respective obligations as established in
the Road Map and endorsed by the Council.

Our Committee remains alarmed by the refusal of
the Israeli Government to heed the calls of the
international community for a complete halt of
settlement construction in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. In spite of the
limited moratorium, the pace of construction in certain
settlements has not even slowed, as reported by the
New York Times last week. The Committee calls on
Israel to enforce the moratorium and to extend it
indefinitely. The moratorium should also be applied to
East Jerusalem. That would certainly be the most
important step the Israeli Government could take to
contribute to a resumption of direct negotiations
between the parties.

The situation in East Jerusalem remains of utmost
concern to our Committee. Settlement expansion
continues and the city's planning and construction
committee approved new housing units in East
Jerusalem just last week. House demolitions have
resumed, residency rights are being revoked and
Palestinian politicians in the city are threatened with
deportation. This state of affairs is unacceptable and
calls for a swift reaction by the international
community. The Committee would like to reiterate its
position that Israel's dangerous policies in East
Jerusalem risk inciting forceful reactions by large parts
of the Muslim world that could lead to violence and
even armed conflict. It is the prerogative and obligation
of the Security Council to intervene swiftly and
resolutely to prevent a possible escalation of violence.

It will be six years this month that the
International Court of Justice rendered the historic
advisory opinion determining that the construction by
Israel of the separation barrier within the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
constitutes numerous violations of international law.
The International Court of Justice concluded that such
violations engaged Israel's responsibility to cease
construction, dismantle the existing sections in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem, and provide
reparations, including restitution of confiscated
property and compensation for damages incurred.

However, construction of the wall has continued
at the same pace, cutting thousands of Palestinians off
from their lands, families, schools and hospitals. Our
Committee is disturbed by the impunity with which
these legal obligations have long been flouted by
Israel, and calls on the Security Council to take the
required action to ensure respect for and compliance
with the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice, the Fourth Geneva Convention and relevant
United Nations resolutions.

The deadly raid carried out by the Israeli Defense
Forces on 31 May against the unarmed Gaza freedom
flotilla was more than a human tragedy. That incident
and the ease with which Israel has avoided an impartial
investigation into its actions clearly demonstrate that
politics often trump accountability to the law.

While our Committee acknowledges the value of
internal investigations at the national level, it fully
supports the Secretary-General's recommendation for
an international investigation under United Nations
auspices. Only after a truly impartial accounting of the
events of 31 May will all parties be satisfied that those
responsible for violations of international law will be
held to account.

Our Committee also follows closely the
repercussions of the Goldstone report (A/HRC/l2/48).
We maintain that the report of the United Nations Fact
Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict, established by
the Human Rights Council and led by Justice Richard
Goldstone, presents a comprehensive, balanced and
authoritative account of the 2008-2009 Israeli
incursion into Gaza. While our Committee recognizes
the value of the Israeli Government's recent
examination of some specific allegations in the
Goldstone report, it also calls for a comprehensive
investigation into the actions of the parties and
demands follow-up action. The Committee advocates
the creation by the Security Council of an independent
committee of experts to monitor the ongoing
investigations on both sides.

Since the Council's last open debate under this
agenda item (6298th meeting), our Committee has held
two international meetings one in Istanbul, Turkey,
and the other in Rabat, Kingdom of Morocco - to
support the resumption of the peace process.

 

The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People remains committed to
achieving the two-State solution, whereby Israel and
the future Palestinian State will live side by side in
peace and security. The United Nations, and the
Security Council in particular, have a special
responsibility in the realization of this vision. I assure
the Council of the Committee's cooperation and
support in implementing its resolutions on the
Palestinian question.

