Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States): Yesterday,
the Council met on the tragic anniversary of the use
of sarin gas in Khan Shaykhun, Syria (see S/PV.8221).
Ambassador Haley urged us to use the meeting as
the start of a renewed partnership and a renewed
commitment to addressing chemical weapons. That is
because, as she said, no one wants to live in a world
where chemical weapons are used. We were reminded
of the human toll of the devastation caused by chemical
attacks and of the fact that we came together over many
decades to build an international consensus banning
these despicable weapons of war.

Sadly, today's meeting is not about any of that.
Instead, it is yet another attempt by Russia to use the
Security Council for political gains. It is an attempt
to cast doubt on the attack in Salisbury, using phrases
like "collective psychosis" and "propaganda war", and
likening the media to a psychotropic substance that is
used to manipulate the public. Russia also likened the
response of any country that challenges the narrative
of Russia to Nazi propaganda and Joseph Goebbels.
This is not a tactic that is appropriate for this body.
Let us remember the facts about what happened.
We are discussing the egregious use of a military-
grade nerve agent against two civilians in the United
Kingdom - an attack that exposed hundreds of people,
innocent bystanders and first responders to the effects
of this agent. The fact that a permanent member of the
Security Council was involved is especially appalling.

As the United States has made clear before, our
support for the United Kingdom is unwavering, and we
continue to stand in absolute solidarity with our British
colleagues. We have stated previously, and do so again
today, our firm belief that Russia is responsible for
this chemical weapons attack on United Kingdom soil.
Either Russia deliberately used this military-grade
weapon or failed to declare and secure its stocks of
this nerve agent. We strongly support the independent
analysis of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) that is under way, as well
as the criminal investigation of the United Kingdom
into the use of chemical weapons on its sovereign
territory, and believe those responsible for the attack
must be held accountable.

The international community has rightly come
together to express its outrage and take action. The
United States, the United Kingdom, NATO and 27
other countries have expelled, all together, over 150
Russian intelligence officers. That is a testament to the
grave concern that we and our partners share for the
attempts of Russia to undermine international peace
and security.

Meanwhile, Russia puts forward a series of
conspiracy theories in an attempt to shift blame, with
wild claims that the United Kingdom or the United
States might be responsible. This disinformation and
projection coming from our Russian colleagues is
preposterous. Member States should not be fooled or
led astray by these absurd efforts to dissemble from the
facts. Russia is known to have developed military-grade
nerve agents of the type used in the Salisbury attack.
Russia has a well-documented record of conducting
State-sponsored assassinations, including previously
in the United Kingdom. High-ranking Russian officials
have themselves made clear in public statements that
defectors and so-called traitors are legitimate targets
for assassination.

Yesterday, Russia tried to get the OPCW to adopt
a decision that would have undermined its ongoing
independent investigation into the Salisbury attack
and that would have helped Russia to disguise its
culpability. The members of the OPCW Executive
Council overwhelmingly rejected Russia's proposal.
Now Russia wants to try again at the Security Council.
But the truth of Russia's involvement in the Salisbury
attack remains, and the international community
should remain united behind this truth. Once again,
as Ambassador Haley said, if we do not change course
now on chemical weapons, we will be fast approaching
a new and far more dangerous reality for all of us.
We must hold those who have used chemical weapons
accountable and rebuild the global consensus that these
weapons must never be used under any circumstances.
As the Security Council, that is the goal we should be
working to achieve, rather than using this Chamber to
undermine the truth.

