Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): During
the past 20 months as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council, I believe that I have already said on
other occasions that it is always difficult to listen to
the words of Mr. Stephen O'Brien because he confronts
us with the uncomfortable reality of the horrors of war
with absolute and uncompromising frankness.

The Charter of the United Nations refers to the
"scourge of war", and that scourge is represented to
us in what Mr. O'Brien has shown us, regrettably not

just this month but continuously, as he has briefed the
Council with compassion, conviction and in a direct
and frank manner - and I should say that he has been
brutally frank. Although during the past 20 months I
have learned to appreciate each ofhis briefings, however
frank they have been, they do not leave us feeling very
much at ease, because ultimately they confront us with
our failures and our inability to effectively contribute
to stopping the horrors in Syria in an effective and
swift manner, as is the case today. As Mr. O'Brien
leaves us, he also leaves us with a major life lesson and
has set the bar very high for his successor. On behalf
of my Government, I wish him every success in his
future endeavours.

I should also like to take this opportunity to thank
our tireless friend Staffan de Mistura, whom we have
long admired for his unyielding optimism. He is
determined and continues to do all that he can to carve
out spaces and forums in which an agreement can be
forged regarding the situation in Syria. He is struggling
in the worst of all situations, which is to a great extent
the result of the absolute lack of political commitment
on the part of all the opposition groups in Syria,
which, through their disunion and lack of common
interests, makes it very difficult for them to come to
the negotiation table, because the same groups appear
very far from finding the necessary common front to
begin serious negotiations. Once again, we extend to
Staffan de Mistura and his entire team our gratitude
and prayers that he will never let up.

Since Uruguay took up its mandate as a
non-permanent member of the Council 20 months
ago, we have focused our work on the protection of
civilians and international humanitarian law, and have
continuously worked to prevent efforts to hinder the
access to and distribution of aid, while demanding
the protection and safety of humanitarian workers in
carrying out their work.

Stephen O'Brien recalled that only a few days
ago, we commemorated World Humanitarian Day, and
my delegation recognized the hard work and personal
sacrifice of every one of the thousands of humanitarian
workers throughout the world, who, on a daily basis,
put their lives at risk to help those most in need in the
interests of peace and a more humane world. The case
of Syria is the best example of that today.

We therefore vigorously reject the unfounded
accusations made by the Syrian delegation against the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) during our meeting on this agenda item (see S/PV.8015) in July. We firmly attest to the absolutely
professional, impartial and depoliticized attitude of
OCHA in Syria and wherever else it carries out its
work, and we reiterate the full support of Uruguay for
the Office. At this point in time, with the transition
of leadership in the Office, we believe that Damascus
should make the positive gesture of inviting its new
Director to visit Syria, which could lead to a fluid
relationship, thereby allowing for the regular delivery
of humanitarian aid.

The Astana process and other initiatives launched
over the past months aimed at bringing about a
cessation of local hostilities have led to a significant
reduction in the violence in the country. We stress
that it is truly important that those areas maintain a
transitional status with a view to maintaining for the
future the unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian
Arab Republic. We must, however, express our concern
that for four consecutive months we have not received
any information regarding the implementation of the
memorandum of 4 May, particularly since, to date,
unrestricted access has not been provided to the United
Nations or to groups seeking to distribute humanitarian
assistance to those areas. Stephen O'Brien mentioned
the work carried out with the Russian Federation over
the past days, but it is also necessary to ensure the
unrestricted access of the United Nations to those areas.

That should provide assurances that the fundamental
principles of international humanitarian law, including
the prohibition of forced displacement and the freedom
of movement to enter and leave voluntarily those
territories, will be respected. Regrettably, aid deliveries
are increasingly being discontinued, thereby preventing
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs from being able to discharge its work. The
ongoing fighting, security issues and - what is even
more incomprehensible - the lack of authorizations
and the bureaucratic obstacles imposed by the Syrian
Government prevent humanitarian aid from being
delivered to those who need it.

As we have already said on previous occasions,
that is not a failure on the part of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, but of the
Security Council and of the Member States with
influence over the parties. Thus far we have not been
able to persuade all the various actors in the Syrian
conflict to allow regular access to convoys with
humanitarian aid. To date, all parties to the conflict in
Syria have consistently ignored and violated that basic
principle of international law. For that reason, Uruguay
supported the establishment of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011, including those that constitute war crimes, such
as the use of chemical weapons against civilians.

Providing justice to the hundreds of thousands of
innocent victims of that conflict will be essential for
lasting peace in Syria and for that country and its entire
population to overcome the horrors of the protracted
war. It will also have a persuasive effect for the future.
On a related note, we also support the Secretary-
General's request that incidents in Syria be referred to,
and considered by, the International Criminal Court.

The priorities in Syria have been clearly
defined - achieving a political settlement that can
end the war and pave the way for a peaceful political
transition; consolidating local ceasefires; and ensuring
humanitarian access to the millions ofpeople in need in
areas that are besieged or hard to reach.

