Ms. Menendez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, we express our condolences to the Government
and people of the Republic of Korea on the loss of the
lives of citizens of their country who served in the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UMMISET).

We are thankful for the special report of the
Secretary-General (S/2003/243) and for the briefing by
Mr. Guehenno on the question of the adjustment of the
programme envisaged for downsizing the Mission.

We regret the quantitative and qualitative increase
in the violent incidents in recent months. Such actions
appear to have various origins, but all underline the
importance of creating in Timor-Leste police and
armed forces capable of maintaining the country's
security and stability and of ensuring respect for the
rule of law. It is crucial that the Governments of
Indonesia and Timor-Leste cooperate with one another
and with UNMISET in all aspects.

Several issues continue to be fundamental and
will contribute to the creation of an environment of
greater security. First, agreement on the demarcation of
borders should be reached by 30 June. Second is the
issue of the repatriation and resettling of the refugees
who are currently located in Indonesia. Thirdly, all
those responsible for serious crimes need to be brought
to trial.

We believe that the downsizing plan for
UNMISET must be readjusted in keeping with
resolution 1410 (2002), as proposed by the Secretary-
General, in order to protect security in the short term in
an effective manner and to prepare the institutions of
Timor-Leste for full responsibility in the future. We
therefore support the revised two-phase military
strategy proposed by the Secretary-General, which will
conclude with the handing over of the responsibility for
defence to the Timor-Leste defence force in May 2004.
Finally, we also support the revised strategy for police
activities, as described by the Secretary-General, to
ensure that the handing over of competencies takes
place in such as manner as not to endanger stability,
while respecting the legitimate wish of the Government
of Timor-Leste to take over responsibility for security
issues at the earliest possible opportunity.

