The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

I once again thank the Under-Secretary-General
and his teams on the ground.
The previous speaker referred to the normalization
of the situation in Syria. I have to say that what we
heard from the Under-Secretary-General today does not
sound much like normality to me. We continue to have
huge concerns about the situation on the ground and the
ongoing struggle to deliver humanitarian assistance,
which is still not straightforward, to put it mildly. From
what has been said, my understanding is that assistance
is used to punish or reward particular communities or
areas for their perceived loyalty. The situation on the
ground is therefore far from improved.

We share the sentiments of other colleagues who said
that it is Vital that we renew resolution 2165 (2014) for
another 12 months. It is not a political tool but a lifeline
for those in desperate need. The United Kingdom is one
of the largest donors to the Syrian response, and we
will continue to work with the United Nations to ensure
that our funding supports a principled, predictable and
coherent response, prioritizing humanitarian needs
through both in-country and cross-border operations,
and to ensure that the current structures for supporting
that are maintained.

At this juncture, I want to echo what the
representative of France said about reconstruction. I
want to put down a marker with regard to our concern
about the humanitarian implications of recent events in
north-eastern Syria. We hope that the United Nations
can scale up its response in the area. Humanitarian
actors must have unrestricted access to people in need
and be protected from any violence. We share the
concerns of others about returns, which must be in line
with internationally agreed principles. We also share the
concerns of others about the operation of international
humanitarian law.

One of the speakers referred to salvaging
individuals from the hands of terrorists. I think that if
there is any salvaging being done it is by the rescue
workers clearing bodies out of places like Idlib, where
the situation looks less and less like a ceasefire every
day. We too remain deeply troubled by the reports
of renewed air strikes. Any further escalation in the
violence will have inconceivable humanitarian costs,
so we appeal to all the parties to make sure they do
everything they can to avoid that. With regard to Idlib,
I want to take this opportunity to call on the Secretary-
General to make public the findings of the board of
inquiry's investigation into attacks on United Nations
de-conflicted and supported infrastructure in north-
western Syria.
I want to conclude by joining the United States
representative in what she said about the White
Helmets and about the death of their founder, James
Le Mesurier, in particular. Were it not for this group
of Syrian volunteers, a great many more people would
have suffered and would still be suffering at the hands
of the Syrian authorities. We have heard Russia and
Syria make many charges against them. The Russian
Ministry of Foreign Affairs only recently referred
to Mr. Le Mesurier as a spy. In the wake of his sad
death, I want to take this opportunity to once again
state categorically that he was not a spy. He was a
humanitarian who was working for the good of the
people of Syria, which, ifI may say so, is more than
their own Government has been doing.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

