Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank you, Madame
President, for convening this meeting, and I
congratulate you and your delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of December. I also thank the delegation of the
United Kingdom for its outstanding work in leading the
Council during the month of November. We welcome
the presence of the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
International Criminal Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia, and we thank them for their briefings.

The Security Council, by resolutions 1503 (2003)
and 1534 (2004) set timeframes during which the
Tribunals were expected to complete all trial activities,
and has stressed the importance of fully implementing
the completion strategies. We therefore welcome the
trial management initiatives undertaken by the
Tribunals, which have resulted in more expeditious
trials. We also recognize that the discovery of new
evidence - such as the finding of Mladic's diaries -
may lead to further delays. Accordingly, we support the
requested extensions to enable the judges to complete
their cases with due regard for the envisaged
completion strategies.

We are concerned by the high turnover of highly
qualified and essential staff, which exacerbates an
already difficult situation, further impacting the
expeditious completion of the trials. The loss of about
100 staff members this year alone is a cause for
concern. We call upon the Office of Human Resources
Management of the United Nations to recognize the
unique repercussions of downsizing the Tribunals and
to exercise the necessary flexibility in order to forestall
this staff attrition. We therefore commend the staff
members who have continued to serve at the Tribunals
amidst the uncertainty of job security.

We welcome the plan of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda to transfer some cases
for appropriate action within the Rwandese judicial
system. We also welcome the increased tracking efforts
to secure the arrest and transfer to the Tribunal of
Felicien Kabuga, Protais Mpiranya and Augustin
Bizimana. We commend the increased cooperation
between the Prosecutor and the authorities in Kenya,
Zimbabwe and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in an effort to successfully track those suspects.

It is important to ensure that the relocation of
witnesses, discharged convicts and acquitted persons is
properly handled in order to avoid long-term
ramifications for international justice, as was expressed
in the briefings. In this regard, we therefore welcome
the recent signings of the cooperation agreement
between the Government of Senegal and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

It is essential to ensure not only that justice be
done but that it be seen to be done. That should also be
reflected in the compensation of those charged with
dispensing justice. My delegation is hopeful that the
General Assembly will appropriately address the issue
of inequality in emoluments between permanent and ad
litem judges.

Finally, I would like to thank the staffs of the two
Tribunals for their very good work, and I also thank
Ambassador Mayr-Harting and the delegation of
Austria for the important work they have done in the
past two years as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals.

