Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his latest report
on the protection of civilians (S/2012/376) and for
his comprehensive briefing today. I also welcome the
presence of Ms. Amos, Mr. Simonovic' and Mr. Spoerri
and commend them for their invaluable work on the
protection of civilians.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union later in
the debate.

Civilians continue to be victims of death, injury,
sexual violence and forcible displacement or are
subjected to conflict-induced increases in disease,
hunger and malnutrition. The violent and tragic events
in Syria and ongoing developments in, for example, the
Sudan, South Sudan, Mali and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo remind us of that worrying fact every day.

How can we get better at protecting civilians in
armed conflict? The Secretary-General has identified
a number of challenges that need to be addressed, some
of which I would like to touch upon.

First, there is a need to continue exploring ways
to ensure that those responsible for violations of
international humanitarian law are held accountable
and that serious violations of international humanitarian
law continue to carry not only a strong stigma but also
consequences.

Encouraging progress has been made since our
last debate (see S/PV.6650). The convictions of Charles
Taylor by the Special Court for Sierra Leone and of
Thomas Lubanga by the International Criminal Court
(ICC) are significant steps forward. Those judgments
send a strong signal to the perpetrators of atrocities.

When national authorities fail to take the necessary
steps to ensure accountability, the Council's role
should be strengthened. We therefore welcome the
Secretary-General's proposal to create a checklist to
guide the Council's engagement with the ICC when it
considers the possibility of referrals.

Secondly, we share the View of the International
Committee ofthe Red Cross (ICRC) that attacks against
health care and other interference with it remains
an underrecognized humanitarian issue. It deserves
increased attention, including that of the Security
Council. The recent decision by the World Health
Assembly to mandate the World Health Organization
to collect and report data on attacks on health care, and
the Council's resolution 1998 (2011), are encouraging
developments. They ensure that perpetrators of acts
against hospitals and schools and related personnel
will be listed in the Secretary-General's annual
report on children and armed conflict. We support the
Secretary-General's view that the Council must assume
a more proactive approach to preventing and responding
to such incidents.

Thirdly, a central question is the application of
the rule of distinction in today's military operations.
Experiences in recent conflicts beg the question of how
the principle of distinction is implemented in practice,
in particular when conducting warfare within densely
populated areas. The devastating humanitarian impact
of explosive weapons in densely populated areas is a
major concern in this regard. We agree with the ICRC
that explosive weapons with a wide-impact area should
be avoided in densely populated areas. We welcome
initiatives to address this issue in a more systematic and
proactive way, including possible stronger engagement
of the Security Council in this regard.

We share the Secretary-General's view that there
is a need for greater and more systematic engagement
with non-State armed groups on compliance with
international humanitarian law, while bearing in
mind that engagement does not constitute political
recognition of these groups. In the context of the
Council's engagement on children and armed conflict,
the conclusion of action plans with non-State armed
groups by the United Nations to end the recruitment
and use of children in armed conflict is a good example
on how such engagement can successfully lead to
improved compliance with international humanitarian
law by non-State actors.

Fourthly, continued widespread sexual Violence
against women and children, as well as men, demands
our attention. The pursuit ofjustice and accountability
for such crimes remains of utmost importance. We
commend the continued efforts of the Secretariat and
United Nations missions on the ground to assist national
and local authorities in creating more protective
environments by supporting the establishment of
effective rule of law and security institutions and the
building of local and national civilian capacity in this
regard. Germany continues to actively support such
initiatives.

I now come to my fifth and final point. The absence
of international standards for the trade in conventional
arms has obvious negative consequences for civilians.
These arms are all too often used to commit serious
human rights violations on a massive scale. The
international community must act now to improve
control of these weapons and use the dual opportunity
presented by the upcoming negotiations on the arms
trade treaty and the United Nations Conference to
Review Progress Made in the Implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects. Germany strongly supports a strong, robust
and effective arms trade treaty that is comprehensive in
scope and legally binding.

In closing, I would like to briefly mention a few
country situations that are of great concern to us.
We remain very concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states of
the Sudan. The situation continues to deteriorate, and
people starve to death every day. Hundreds of refugees
arrive every day in neighbouring South Sudan. We urge
the Government in Khartoum and the Sudan People's
Liberation Army-North to accept the tripartite proposal
ofthe United Nations, the African Union and the League
of Arab States, which provides for humanitarian access
and the presence of humanitarian relief workers.

In the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
we are worried and appalled by the high numbers of
civilians killed and displaced by increased attacks
by armed groups using the security void left by the
Congolese armed forces. In this context, the sharp
increase in the recruitment of children by armed groups
and mutineers is of particular concern to us. Given
the persisting violence in the region, the protection of
civilians needs to remain the top priority of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Lastly, the appalling Violence in Syria may be
the most blatant failure these days of a Government's
responsibility to protect its own people. Not only
does Damascus fail to protect the Syrian people, as
the commission of inquiry established by the Human
Rights Council has reported, but the Syrian authorities
have for months now committed systematic and gross
human rights violations. We are particularly appalled
and disgusted by recent reports of the use by the Syrian
army of children as human shields. Opposition forces
also commit abuses, which we condemn. They too must
protect human rights, including those of children.

