Ms. Luqman: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on behalf of
Food for Humanity and the Women Solidarity Network.

I am a survivor of the devastating war in Yemen. I
was in Taiz, the third-largest city, and vividly recall the
terrifying air bombardment and indiscriminate shelling
there, as well as the siege of the city and the horrors
perpetrated by all parties in complete disregard of
international humanitarian law. My own home in Taiz
was partially destroyed by an air strike by the Saudi-led
coalition that targeted a nearby school being used by
the Houthis as a military warehouse and prison. I woke
up to what seemed to be a volcanic eruption lighting
up the sky, followed by what felt like an earthquake.
Our neighbours - a family of five - perished under
the rubble.

I also experienced the siege of Taiz. As the Houthis
tightened their grip on the city, they deprived civilians
of food, water and basic living necessities. The siege
started three years ago and has continued to this day. The
Houthis and armed-resistance groups loyal to President
Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour are engaged in
vicious hostilities in populated areas. I mediated the
evacuation of children from an orphanage that had been
stormed by Houthis seeking to position snipers. After
the children were successfully evacuated, a Saudi-led-
coalition air strike hit a nearby building and terrified
the children, many of whom sustained injuries from
shattered windows. I visited families trapped in the
crossfire, brought them food and supplies and facilitated
their evacuation, thereby mitigating the risks of being
targeted by snipers or stepping on mines. Escaping
death in Yemen is becoming increasingly difficult.

The Stockholm peace consultations successfully
brought parties together, but they excluded women
and led to an agreement that is blind to gender. The
establishment of the United Nations Mission to Support
the Al-Hudaydah agreement reflected the seriousness
of the Council to bring peace to Yemen. However, we
have yet to see the Stockholm Agreement enforced.
Four months after the Stockholm Agreement, our
team members in Al-Hudaydah report to us that armed
clashes continue and that more families are being
displaced every day. People are collectively being
punished and deprived of basic necessities, including
food, medicine, fuel and electricity. Roads leading to
downtown Al-Hudaydah, where the main hospital is
located, are blocked. Many have lost their lives trying
to get there.
New fronts have opened in Hajjah, leading to
a catastrophic humanitarian-displacement crisis
and famine. Government forces continue to liberate
locations, while the Houthis attack opposing tribes,
persecute tribal leaders and their families and destroy
their homes. The Saudi-led coalition air strikes continue
to target civilian areas, including in Saada. A week ago,
a devastating explosion near a girls school in Sana'a led
to the death of 14 children, mostly girls, and injured
dozens of civilians. The parties to the conflict blame
each other for that horrific crime, and the victims
will see their right to justice denied if no independent
investigation takes place.

Humanitarian access remains restricted due to the
overall blockade imposed by the Saudi-led coalition,
and the Houthis have resorted to laying siege to areas
where they deny delivery of humanitarian aid to areas
under their control. More recently, they prevented the
delivery of badly needed cholera vaccines. Hunger is
still used as a weapon of war. Thousands of Yemenis
cannot afford to buy food because their salaries have
been suspended or diverted, cutting off people's
livelihoods. Girls are married off for dowry money, and
boys continue to be forced into becoming fighters.

The prisoner-exchange agreement signed prior
to Stockholm has yet to be implemented. The
Association of Mothers of Abductees shared concerns
that arbitrarily detained civilians are being tortured,
badly treated and denied fair trials. The Stockholm
Agreement converts their status to that of prisoners of
war and proposes exiling released detainees to other
governorates, thereby separating them from their
families. In addition, women human rights defenders,
journalists and religious minorities such as Baha'is
are detained and have no representatives in the current
peace consultations who can negotiate their release.
Space for civil society organizations is becoming
increasingly restricted, especially in areas under Houthi
control. Women peacemakers are arbitrarily detained
and forced to abandon their work in peacebuilding and
promoting women's and human rights. Beyond physical
threats against women human rights defenders to
deter their activism, accusations of immoral acts and
defamation are another tool used against women.

Women are not passive victims of this war. With
limited resources, they have been leading efforts to
bring peace to Yemen and hold communities together.
In tribal areas, women can contribute to mediation
efforts because they are respected and trusted.
The patriarchal society in Yemen had already been
challenged when women went into the streets to demand
change and secured their 30 per cent representation in
the National Dialogue.

We have consulted the only woman member in
the Government delegation to the peace consultations,
Ms. Rana Ghanem, who proposed increasing the
number of seats for women within delegations - seats
that must remain vacant if no women are selected.
We have also approached Houthi women who express
their readiness to participate in peace negotiations. It
is not impossible to envisage including Houthi women
in the peace process, because the Houthis had women
representatives in the National Dialogue. There is no
longer any excuse for continuing to exclude women,
but that is the effective result of a poorly designed
peace process.

Among other groups excluded in the peace process
are the southerners, who continue to demand a just
solution for the southern issue. Continuing to delay
addressing their demands constitutes a ticking time
bomb for another layer of conflict that could be just
around the corner.

Today, almost five years into the devastating
war in Yemen, we members of the Women Solidarity
Network have been working hard to fill the gap left by
the State, providing internally displaced persons with
food and life-saving necessities, diverting youth away
from fighting towards peacebuilding, mediating for the
release of detainees, and ending armed conflicts over
water and land resources. We are disappointed that all
national, regional and international parties have yet to
take bold action to end the war and the suffering of the
Yemeni people. We are frustrated because, despite our
continuous calls for the inclusion of women, the role of
women in peacebuilding continues to be ridiculed, and
women - who are the real peacemakers - continue to
be excluded in the ceasefire and peace process. I invite
Council members to take a serious stand with us and
adopt a bold new approach to addressing the following.

The Security Council should act to end this
devastating conflict and facilitate an immediate
comprehensive ceasefire that includes the Saudi-
led coalition air bombardment campaign and the
Houthi missile and drone attacks, both within Yemen
and across our borders. The Council should enforce
the Stockholm and prisoner exchange agreements,
unconditionally release all arbitrarily detained civilians
and hold all parties to account, especially spoilers.
It should establish mechanisms to implement the
previous resolutions focusing on aspects related to the
disarmament and demobilization of Houthis, as well
as humanitarian access, starting with operationalizing
medical evacuations through Sana'a airport and,
ultimately, lifting the aerial, naval and land blockades.

It should continue to adopt an approach to
deconstruct the conflict and localize the peace process
by creating local peace agreements in conflict areas,
including in Taiz, which entails opening humanitarian
corridors, as well as the withdrawal of fighters from the
city and civilian institutions and ensuring that they are
not redeployed to other fronts.

Starting with liberated areas, the Council should
support the restoration of Government institutions to
full functionality, including institutions that deliver
services, such as the social welfare fund, and assist
the Government in addressing core conflict issues
and grievances in areas under its control. It should
demand serious efforts to demilitarize liberated
cities, ensuring the relocation of military depots and
camps away from populated areas, and facilitate the
development of professional security forces that are
well trained, including in human rights. It should
urge for the disbursement of civil servants' salaries in
Houthi-controlled areas by ensuring the Government's
commitments based on the 2014 civil servant lists.

The Council should demand that the negotiating
parties include no less than 50 per cent of women in
their delegations and that the United Nations Special
Envoy and the Chair of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee consult regularly with women and ensure
women's meaningful inclusion in all peace processes,
as well as the use of stronger language in its legally
binding texts that call for an inclusive peace process,
emphasizing the inclusion of women, young people,
southerners and other marginalized social groups.
We hope that our recommendations will inform the
Council's decisions and lead to firm and decisive actions
towards peace spoilers, as well as contribute to ending
this unnecessary suffering of millions of Yemenis.

