Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): We would
like to thank the Spanish presidency for convening
today's open debate on the current, unprecedented
and extremely grave crisis in the Middle East, which
we hope is compelling Member States to act with a
sense of responsibility and urgency. Ifit is not speedily
addressed, the current situation in the region will
destabilize security globally.

The prevailing tensions in the Middle East are
primarily concentrated on the Palestinian issue,
and which should begin to ease once the problems
there are resolved. Kazakhstan therefore recognizes
the Palestinian people's legitimate right to self-
determination and strongly supports the creation of an
independent State of Palestine, coexisting peacefully
with Israel within the 1967 borders. We also support full-
fledged membership in the United Nations for Palestine
and welcome the raising of the Palestinian flag on the
grounds of the United Nations Headquarters. We see a
two-State solution as the only viable option for lasting
peace, and we call on Israeli and Palestinian leaders to
demonstrate the political accountability and goodwill
they need to reach a historic peace agreement. We also
urge calm over the situation around Haram al-Sharif.

The devastating situation in Syria, which has now
spread beyond the region, is one of great concern to
the rest of the world. Kazakhstan has continued to
support the steps taken by members of the international
community, including the United Nations, the League
of Arab States, the United States and the Russian
Federation, as well as the actions of the Syrian
Government and the opposition that are aimed at
deciding Syria's political future through dialogue and
reconciliation and bringing a speedy end to the violence
and bloodshed. We hope that negotiations will continue
between the Government and the opposition in the
effort to solve the Syrian conflict within the framework
of the Geneva 11 process. Kazakhstan believes firmly
that the crisis can be resolved only by peaceful means.

We believe it is critical to establish a counter-
terrorism coalition led by the United Nations, with
a unified mechanism designed to defeat this scourge
and bring its perpetrators and their supporters to
justice. The current United Nations mechanisms
aimed at countering terrorism, including the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, should
be made legally binding through appropriate Security
Council resolutions. During his address to the General
Assembly last month (see A/70/PV.13), my President,
Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan, called for
strengthening the global anti-terrorist network by
bringing together existing measures under the auspices
of the United Nations. We call for the speedy adoption of
a comprehensive document on international terrorism,
which has challenged our efforts for the past 20 years.
We call on all delegations to support this bold and
forward-looking approach.

The growing speculation about issues between
the two major denominations of Islam has little basis
in reality, but tension is nonetheless increasing over
the spread of extremist ideology. In that regard, my
country proposes to establish an international forum
entitled "Islam against Terrorism", with the aim
of demonstrating religious unity in the face of the
destructive nature of terrorism and violent extremism.
We must recognize that the activities of terrorist groups
undermine the foundations of the existing world order
far beyond the conflict zones of the Middle East. The
escalation of violence has resulted in more victims
among the civilian population, mainly women and
children, as well as the forced migration of civilians
from the Middle East and North Africa to Europe. This
is the largest exodus of populations since the Second
World War, and is of great concern not only to the
European Union but also to all ofus, the United Nations
community.

Finally, we reiterate our robust commitment to
ensuring peace in the Middle East, based on freedom
and justice for all.

