Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): is
pleased that a public debate in the Security Council
open to all Members of the United Nations is being
devoted to the question of Iraq. This is a useful first on
an issue that has occupied the attention of the Council
for 11 years now.

Maintaining the current status quo is not
satisfactory. It is not satisfactory in terms of the
authority and credibility of the Council. Its decisions
have remained a dead letter. The Council has been
unable to impose a solution.

It is not satisfactory for the Iraqi population
either. Iraq is experiencing a humanitarian crisis of
unparalleled scope. Just to take one figure, the infant
mortality rate has more than doubled since 1990. The
efforts made by the Council through the oil-for-food
programme have of course had their merit. However,
the extremely bureaucratic nature of the system and the
blocking of the functioning of the sanctions Committee
have barely made it possible to do anything other than
ensure the survival of the Iraqi people and keep them
indefinitely dependent on assistance. Iraq's interruption
of its oil sales a month ago can only further aggravate
the situation.

Finally, it is not satisfactory for regional security.
For two and a half years the Security Council has no
longer had any inspectors in the field to verify that Iraq
has not resumed its programmes of weapons of mass
destruction. The magnitude of smuggling, a practice
representing several billion dollars, makes the validity
of the escrow account illusory.

It is essential that we find a way out of this
impasse. Despite its divisions, the Security Council is
aware of this. It endeavoured to do this by adopting
resolution 1284 (1999), which we think was an
improvement upon resolution 687 (1991). In exchange
for the return of inspectors to Iraq and the
establishment of a long-term monitoring system,
Baghdad could have speedily obtained the suspension,
and then the lifting, of sanctions. The advantage of this
proposal was to reconcile humanitarian needs with
security concerns and to provide a long-term solution.
Iraq could expect to rejoin the community of nations.
This course has not yet been taken because of Iraq's
rejection of resolution 1284 (1999). Yet this course
remains available. resolution 687 (1991) and its
complement, resolution 1284 (1999), remain the
foundation for the Council's work. We intend to
continue advocating the return of United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and International Atomic Energy Agency
monitors to Iraq. We welcome the preparatory work
done to this end by Mr. Blix, and we call upon Iraq to
cooperate with the United Nations and UNMOVIC.

We appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-General
in the context of the dialogue he began with Iraq after
the Islamic Summit Conference in Doha last
November. We encourage the Secretary-General to
continue his dialogue with Iraq in order to better ensure
that Iraq will understand Council action, to remind it
that resolutions 687 (1991) and 1284 (1999) are the
Council's reference points and to promote the
resumption of Iraqi oil sales and the implementation of
the oil-for-food programme.

We would like Iraq to respond to that willingness
to engage in dialogue with constructive gestures, so as
to restore trust: the return of Kuwaiti missing persons
and Kuwaiti property; adherence by Iraq to the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction; and permitting travel by the
Chairman of the sanctions Committee. An opening by
Iraq would enable the Security Council to begin
working to clarify certain elements of resolution 1284
(1999).

Difficulties in the implementation of resolutions
687 (1991) and 1284 (1999) should not prevent the
Security Council from acting. If Council action is
unified and takes into account humanitarian and
regional security needs, it will be useful. With that in
mind, we welcomed the United States proposals for
improving the functioning of the oil-for-food
programme.

For more than three years we have been
proposing significant reform of the oil-for-food
machinery. We cannot fail to support a transfer of
jurisdiction from the sanctions Committee to the
Secretariat. That ought to result in a very substantial
reduction in the number of contracts that are on hold.
That is indispensable. Even after a decrease in holds
amounting to $600 million, $3.2 billion in contracts
remain on hold in the Committee established by
resolution 661 (1990). To that we must add $1.1 billion
in contracts still being studied by the Secretariat. The
length of the list of goods subject to sanctions
Committee control and the way in which this provision
is being applied by the Committee and by the
Secretariat are key elements in ensuring the success of
this enterprise.

Easing restrictions on trade with Iraq cannot by
itself enable the economy to recover sufficiently to
respond to the humanitarian crisis. That recovery
requires the return of normal economic conditions.
That is why France has proposed that foreign
investment be authorized, as proposed by the panel
chaired two years ago by Ambassador Celso Amorim.
That is why we propose that services be approved
without delay. That is why we request that local
expenditures for the petroleum industry - the cash
component - be accepted, as the Secretary-General
proposes in his 6 June report, and as had already been
agreed in resolution 1284 (1999).

To be successful, Security Council action must be
understood and supported by the international
community, especially the main interested parties:
Iraq's neighbours. Is it not in the name of regional
security - the situation of Iraq's neighbours - that
the Council is exercising its authority? It therefore
seems important that the Council, through the
Secretary-General, should work in close cooperation
and coordination with those States. Everyone
acknowledges that what should be done is to set up
machinery for cooperation with the countries
concerned, rather than imposing Chapter VII
obligations on them. Decisions on possible trade
arrangements between Iraq and its neighbours and on
possible improvements in border controls should be
taken with the agreement of those neighbours. Such
arrangements must not jeopardize the existing
arrangement between Iraq and Jordan, which has been
accepted by the sanctions Committee. Indeed, to our
mind, that arrangement could serve as a model.

Finally, a resolution must provide solutions to
thorny problems. There must be a liberalization of air
traffic without pointless constraints and without
creating problems for Iraq's neighbours. Iraqi arrears to
all organizations must be subject to payment. Rates of
assessment on Iraqi oil sales for the benefit of the
Compensation Commission should be the focus of a
machinery agreed upon by the Council.

We are ready to work on all these matters with a
view to agreeing on an ambitious text that will truly
address the defined objective of easing civilian
sanctions. We are looking for a way for the Security
Council to regain unity on the issue of Iraq. Without
consensus, any resolution, even if it is adopted, could
be incompletely or poorly implemented. We must build
a system that will enjoy the support of the international
community, first and foremost Iraq's neighbours. That
is the thrust of France's written contribution to the
present discussion. We want speedy agreement on that
basis within the timeframe set out in resolution 1352
(2001).

