Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to welcome our new colleague the
representative of the United States of America. We
wish him every success and look forward to working
closely with him.

At the outset, I should like to thank Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA); Mr. Bedializoun Moussa
Nebie, Special Representative of the African Union to
the Central African Republic; and Brigadier General
Herminio Teodoro Maio, Force Commander of the
European Union Military Training Mission in the
Central African Republic for the valuable updates they
have provided the Security Council.

I will focus in my statement today on three aspects.

First, with respect to the security situation, our
meeting today is taking place in the context of an
unstable security situation in the Central African
Republic that has now entered its fifth year. Since
April, the security situation has been deteriorating
rapidly in a deeply concerning manner owing to the
escalation of violence between armed groups and the
conflicting parties. Once again there is resurgence
of inflammatory rhetoric and hate speech, as well as
religious and sectarian incitement. We are concerned at
the recurrent violence and attacks committed by those
extremist armed groups and gangs that target Muslim-
majority areas as well as Muslim religious figures and
places of worship, and burn mosques. We condemn in
the strongest terms all attacks against people or their
holy places because of their religion and denounce all
acts of violence and killings as a result of radicalism.
We call on the authorities of the Central African
Republic to redouble their efforts to stop those actions
and increase awareness among all segments of the
population so as to put an end to such hate speech and
create an environment conducive to coexistence.

Against this backdrop, the security situation in
the Central African Republic is deteriorating, which
we strongly deplore. Even humanitarian personnel
and MINUSCA peacekeepers are being targeted,
resulting in a number of dead among Mission staff and
many wounded. These attacks have become a source
of concern for us and require that we all focus on the
security situation in the Central African Republic and
support the efforts of President Touadera so that the
Government forces can retake control of the security
situation. We condemn in the strongest terms the
recurrent armed attacks and call for an end thereto. We
reiterate our support for all of the statements made by
the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
statements to the press issued by the Security Council
in the aftermath of the attacks that took place in recent
months, as those attacks against peacekeepers could
amount to war crimes and violations of international
humanitarian law.

We call on the Government of the Central African
Republic to investigate the attacks and hold the
perpetrators accountable. We reiterate our support to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga and to MINUSCA in their efforts
to help the Government and the people of the Central
African Republic to achieve lasting peace and stability.

Secondly, with respect to the humanitarian
situation, we have followed the reports of international
organizations regarding the humanitarian situation
in the Central African Republic and taken note of
the information contained in the recent report of the
Secretary-General dated 18 June (S/2018/611), and
deplore the fact that the humanitarian situation remains
critical and that almost half of the country's population
is in dire need of urgent humanitarian aid. The Central
African Republic has thus become one of the countries
most in need of humanitarian assistance, and half of
those who are in need are children. As a result of the
deterioration in the humanitarian situation, one of
four people in the country is now facing a very critical
situation. This is worrying and frightening.

Thirdly, cooperation is needed between the various
relevant organizations and United Nations offices,
including coordination and cooperation efforts between
the African Union, the European Union and MINUSCA,
in collaboration with the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa and the Economic Community of
Central African States, to support security and stability
in the Central African Republic. We reiterate, however,
that it is very important to intensify such cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union in
order to give impetus to the African Initiative for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic and
to achieve tangible results that will eventually translate
into stability in the security situation and reduction of
violence in the country.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
appreciation to Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Parfait Onanga-Anyanga and the staff of
MINUSCA for their determined efforts to help reinstate
stability amid a precarious situation. We hope that they
will succeed, for the sake of achieving security and
stability for the people of Central African Republic.

