Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Under-Secretary-
General, Mr. Pascoe, for his substantive briefing on the
situation in the Middle East. We share the deep concern
over developments in and around Gaza. We firmly
condemn both rocket firing against towns in southern
Israel and the blockade of Gaza that causes the deep
suffering of its peaceful inhabitants. Such methods are
unacceptable.

To overcome differences between Palestinians
and Israelis, there is a need for resolve and political
will. That is the only way to curb Violence and
terrorism and deal with the problems of Jerusalem,
borders and refugees, and to approach the ultimate aim,
which is the coexistence of two States, Israel and
Palestine, living in peace and security.

Contacts on these issues were recently relaunched
in Annapolis. Hopes emerged for progress in a
Palestinian-Israeli settlement. Now, however, after the
developments of recent days in and around Gaza, the
positive momentum is in jeopardy.

We continue to believe that Israelis and
Palestinians need to agree among themselves. Russia
supports any agreements from them if they are in
keeping with the fundamental elements of the
international legal basis for the settlement.

What is particularly important is outside support

for the negotiations. Collective methods for work

within the framework of the Middle East Quartet of

international mediators, working in close contact with

the League of Arab States, have demonstrated how
effective it is.

Moving forward requires that Israelis and
Palestinians clearly fulfil their obligations under the
road map and avoid additional impediments towards a
settlement. The crisis in Gaza erodes the atmosphere of
mutual trust, and we cannot help but be concerned by
this erosion.

We are continuing to steadfastly advocate
resumption of inter-Palestinian negotiations on the
restoration of national unity. We support and welcome
the efforts of all those regional parties, especially the
President of Egypt, Mr. Hosni Mubarak, who are
working on relaunching contacts between the leading
factions of Palestine, Fatah and Hamas. It is important
that the initiative of the President of Egypt also be
supported by all members of the League of Arab States.

Russia closely followed the recent trip of
President Bush to the Middle East, which Mr. Pascoe
referred to. The fact that the United States has
energetically taken up the problem of a settlement in
the region is a necessary signal for all participants in
the negotiation process. Such an intent can only be
welcomed, particularly when it is continuously linked
to the activities of the Quartet. For its part, the Russian
Federation, within the Quartet and in working with the
parties, is making a practical contribution to addressing
the issues of achieving a comprehensive Middle East
peace settlement.

The Middle East was again visited by a special
envoy of the President of Russia, Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs Alexander Saltanov, who had contacts
with the leadership of Egypt, Jordan, Syria and
Lebanon. Intensive contacts are held daily on Middle
East issues by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Russia, Mr. Sergei Lavrov.

We continue to advocate our proposal to hold in
Moscow a new representative meeting on a settlement
in the Middle East. For us, what is important is not the
meeting itself, but the outcomes of such a forum. The
event being planned calls for serious preliminary
preparation and commensurate efforts by the parties.
Participants are also asked to strive to successfully
hold the next substantive phase of negotiations.

Our view is that the path to a settlement lies in
resumption of the negotiation process on all tracks -
Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese. It is only through a
comprehensive approach that we can bring peace and
stability to the peoples of the Middle East region.

Today, one cannot fail to take up the issue of the
latest heightening of tensions in Lebanon. Terrorist acts
and unrest in the streets of the capital, against the
backdrop of the prolonged political crisis and the
ongoing stalemate in the election of the president, are
of deep concern. At this dangerous point in time, we
call upon all Lebanese political leaders to display not
only restraint and calm, but also an understanding of
their responsibilities to the people of Lebanon and to
the international community. It is important to avert
further escalation and to seek a solution to all disputed
issues through dialogue within the constitutional
framework.

In the current tense situation, implementation of
the League of Arab States initiative on the interim
Lebanese settlement is even more relevant. It provides
for, as a first step, prompt election of a consensus
president of the country. Russia will continue to
support this approach, working together will all leading
political forces in Lebanon.

