Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, on behalf of the entire delegation, I would like to
thank the Secretariat, the Security Council staff and the
United Nations security services, for their invaluable
assistance and for the enormous amount of wonderful
organizational work they did during our trip under very
difficult working and transportation conditions.

I would also like to say what a good reception the
mission received and how well it was supported, how
much transparency there was from the Governments of
Chad and of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I
would also like to thank the Government of Rwanda:
because of the unplanned circumstances that required
us to extend our stay in Goma, it provided invaluable
assistance that enabled us to travel to C6te d'Ivoire
without diminishing the value of our visit. I would like
to thank Mr. Victor da Silva Angelo and Mr. Alan Doss,
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General, who
helped us enormously.

I led the Council mission to eastern Chad -
Abeche and Goz Beida - as well as to N'Djamena. It
was very important that the Council go to eastern Chad
because it is at the centre of the Council's mandate for
the multidimensional presence authorized by resolution
1778 (2007), and also because the mission was able to
see first-hand the situation and the threats that are still
hanging over the heads of the inhabitants, whether
local people, Chadian internally displaced persons
(IDPs) or refugees from Darfur. Recent events that
have affected the refugees, the IDPs and the
humanitarian community alike, show how volatile the
situation is.

On 6 June, the Security Council mission, with the
effective support of MINURCAT - and in particular
that of Mr. Angelo and Ms. Rima Salah, humanitarian
assistance coordinator - visited the refugee camp at
Djabal and then the camp for internally displaced
persons (IDPs) at Gouroukoun. The mission visited
camps and other facilities operated by the international
community and by the Chadians themselves, and we
were able to speak freely with camp populations and
with humanitarian workers. It was striking that
refugees - who benefit more directly from the
international community's involvement - in some
ways enjoy better living conditions than IDPs - who
in turn enjoy better living conditions than local
populations. It is remarkable that good relations among
those three categories of people, at a time when the
total population of the Goz Beida area has exploded,
have been maintained in spite of the inevitable
competition for resources such as water and firewood. I
think it is important here to stress the importance of the
development and reconstruction effort in the affected
areas, as called for in resolution 1778 (2007).

Refugees in the Djabal camp described to
Council members the conditions under which they had
to flee Darfur and the attacks they experienced. Many
individuals said that their villages had been the targets
of attacks, including recent aerial bombardments.

Both refugees and IDPs told us that acts of
violence - including theft, the "recruitment" of child
soldiers, etc. - regularly occurred in the camps. The
groups of women with whom the Security Council
mission met complained of a high number of incidents
of sexual violence. The populations we met did not,
however, say where the armed militias guilty of such
violence came from. They all wanted the Security
Council to take action to improve security in the area.
As they grow in strength, MINURCAT and EUFOR
will make it possible to respond better to this insistent
demand for security. The Governor of Goz Beida gave
us his assessment, which is that armed groups from the
Sudan, in particular the Janjaweed, posed the principal
threat to these populations.

At a meeting with representatives of non-
governmental organizations and international
humanitarian organizations, the mission heard of the
increasing number of acts of violence affecting
humanitarian workers: there have been two deaths
since the beginning of the year, and 26 vehicles have
been stolen. Humanitarian aid workers have insistently
called for better road security, in particular in the Goz
Beida area on routes between camps and villages,
without desiring the militarization of their convoys.

In these conditions, the Security Council mission
conveyed its encouragement to MINURCAT, which is
beginning its deployment, and to EUFOR, some 3,000
of whose personnel are already securing the area, as
mandated in resolution 1778 (2007). I note too that, in
accordance with its mandate, EUFOR protected
civilian populations, including those in the Djabal
camp and humanitarian workers, during the recent
events.

The Security Council mission called on
MINURCAT to do everything possible to hasten its
deployment and to be able to fully shoulder its mandate
as soon as possible. We were encouraged by the fact
that the training of the 71 Chadian commanders in the
Integrated Security Detachment - the Detachement
integre de securite (DIS) - had been completed and
that the training of DIS gendarmes had begun.

The mission also noted the excellent relations
between MINURCAT and EUFOR and the very good
cooperation that has been forged with the Chadian
authorities.

At N'Djamena, the Security Council mission,
unfortunately, was unable to meet with President Deby,
who had left the country for Libya. President Deby
offered to receive the mission the following morning,
but that was not possible because the mission had a
meeting with President Kabila and the entire
programme would have been delayed. The Council
mission was received by Prime Minister Youssouf
Saleh Abbas, in the presence of officials including the
Minister of Communications, the Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs and the Director-General of the
Coordination nationale d'appui a la force internationale
(CONAFIT), the body established by Chad to provide
liaison with the international community. The Security
Council mission recalled the importance that the
Council attaches to the sovereignty, independence and
unity of Chad, and it encouraged the Government to
continue along the path of political dialogue, with
respect for the constitutional framework, as set out in
the 13 August 2007 agreement. At the same time, we
encouraged it to strengthen the rule of law and enhance
the promotion and defence of human rights. As it had
done at Khartoum, the mission called on the Chadian
authorities to commit themselves to the path of
dialogue with their neighbour and urged the two
countries to distance themselves from armed groups. In
the case of Chad, we stressed the necessity of further
distancing itself from the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM).

Finally, the mission recalled that the Council
would carefully study the report to be submitted by the
Secretary-General in September on the future of the
present arrangements and on a possible peacekeeping
operation to succeed EUFOR.

The Chadian Prime Minister welcomed the efforts
of the international community and stressed his
country's total commitment to cooperate fully with
MINURCAT and EUFOR. He denounced the role of
the Sudan and indicated that Chad had not supported
the JEM. attack on Khartoum, which indeed had been
condemned by the Chadian Government. The Security
Council mission was encouraged by the fact that the

Prime Minister recalled Chad's determination to
remain engaged in the process defined by the Dakar
agreement, with the support of Libya and the Republic
of the Congo as mediators; their ministers would be
going to Brazzaville a few days later.

The Security Council mission's visit to Chad
enabled it to see for itself the Darfur conflict's
consequences in eastern Chad, as well as the threats
hanging over the civilian population. In our view, it is
necessary for the Council to continue along its path, at
a time when for some days Chad has been the target of
attacks by illegal armed groups, which are
destabilizing the eastern part of the country and
undermining ongoing humanitarian operations. As it
has done in a presidential statement, the Council
should again reaffirm its support for the United
Nations operations.

I turn now to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We began with a working session in Kinshasa
with Mr. Alan Doss, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, his Deputy, Mr. Ross Mountain, and
their main colleagues. The Security Council mission
also met with Prime Minister Antoine Gizenga, who
was accompanied by officials including the Minister of
State for the Interior and Ministers for defence, foreign
affairs, justice and gender issues; we also met with the
presiding officers of the two legislative chambers -
the National Assembly and the Senate - in the
presence of representatives of all political groupings
including the opposition. The Security Council mission
also had an audience with President Joseph Kabila.

In Goma, the Security Council mission spoke
with the Governor of North Kivu before a working
lunch with Father Malu Malu, who is responsible for
preparing local elections and is the national
coordinator of the Amani security, pacification,
stabilization and reconstruction programme, and with
the members of the joint technical commission on
peace and security, the main monitoring body for the
Goma process. Some members of the Security Council
mission then visited the Mugunga II IDP camp while,
at facilities of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC),
another group met with civil society representatives,
including representatives of women's associations.

The overall purpose of the mission was to
indicate the Security Council's commitment to
contributing to building peace and security in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular
through MONUC.

The mission took place a few months after the
launch of the Nairobi and Goma processes, which the
Council has supported, including through its adoption
of resolution 1804 (2008). Our visit to North Kivu took
place after a bloody 4 June attack by the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR)
against the population of an IDP camp. The situation in
the eastern part of the country would thus be the
principal subject of our meetings.

We welcomed the positive dynamic created by
the Nairobi joint communique of 9 November 2007,
which opens the path to active cooperation between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda, as
well as by the conference which took place in Goma
last January. We recalled that in resolution 1804 (2008)
the Council had asked the armed groups operating in
the east, and especially the Forces democratiques de la
liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), to immediately lay
down their arms and to participate in the voluntary
disarmament and repatriation process. We encouraged
the Government's efforts to that effect. The mission
noted with great satisfaction the convergence of the
approach of all Congolese political actors with that of
the Security Council and their commitment to the
Goma and Nairobi processes. We were encouraged to
note the determination of the Congolese authorities to
pursue the improvement of their relations with Rwanda
and with Uganda. Close cooperation between the
Congolese and Ugandan Governments exists to restore
peace and security to the border areas where the Lord's
Resistance Army is attacking civilian populations.

We noted in the Mugunga II camp as well as
during our discussions with civil society that this
dynamic has unfortunately not yet had the time to fully
bear fruit. Violence is continuing, in particular, sexual
violence against women. Too often, impunity remains
the rule. From this point of view, we noted that,
unfortunately, the militias remain de facto the recourse
preferred by the people who, in the absence of the
State, tend to turn to armed groups that in turn maintain
ethnic divisions and discrimination. From this point of
view, and in order to strengthen MONUC's action, it is
essential, according to the Special Representative, to
give MONUC greater resources to confront armed
groups, in particular resources for obtaining
intelligence and for carrying out commando operations
missions. It also seems essential - and I will come
back to this point - to develop a Congolese State
presence closer to the population.

With respect to the humanitarian situation, the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
told us that they completely understood the gravity of
the situation. President Kabila also assured the Council
of his determination to fight impunity; he mentioned
the exemplary collaboration of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo with the International Criminal
Court. The Council welcomed his assurances on this
point. The Government, the local authorities and the
civilian population have stated their appreciation for
the role played by MONUC and want it to be able, as I
said earlier, to react more quickly in case of attack.

That is one reason why we have insisted on
strengthening the country's democratic institutions, the
role of the opposition, decentralization and the
organization of local elections. The Security Council
mission noted with satisfaction planned and ongoing
reforms in relation to the status of the opposition, the
financing of political parties, the in-depth reform of the
justice, security sectors and decentralization. The
Congolese authorities have stated that local elections
will take place in 2009. Obviously, we insisted that
besides adopting democratic legislation, it was
necessary to work for its implementation. I think that it
is useful to recall that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has arguably, over the past four years, seen its
first real period of democracy in 50 years.

We also noted the very important role played by
the parliament in the implementation of the reforms
that I just spoke about. We noted that the opposition is
playing its full role in a political climate that appeared
to us to be calm. The mission stressed the importance
of the local elections to complete the electoral cycle
started in 2006, as they are essential if democratic
institutions are to take firm root in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The mission also underlined
the importance of offering the Congolese people a
peace dividend and, to this end, to bring to a positive
conclusion the reforms necessary in the areas of good
governance and the management of the country's
natural resources.

I would like to reiterate the Council's thanks to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Alan Doss, and to his deputy, Mr. Ross Mountain,
as well as to all MONUC personnel, who are working
closely with the people under extremely difficult
conditions.

MONUC remains the largest peacekeeping
operation in the world in terms of numbers of
personnel. It will continue to play an irreplaceable role
for the protection of the civilian populations in the east
as long as the national security forces are not fully up
to playing their role. At the same time, MONUC is not
intended to remain in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo indefinitely. The country's authorities are aware
of that fact. That is why it is essential to make the
Nairobi and Goma processes to succeed, to strengthen
democratic institutions and to complete security sector
reform. In our view, it will only be with progress in
these areas that MONUC's force levels can be
gradually reduced.

I would like to say in conclusion that we have
been encouraged by the determination of the
authorities to allow the Congolese people themselves
take their destiny in their own hands. The Congolese
political forces are fully aware of the expectations of
the population in this regard. In those conditions, it
seems essential to us that the Security Council continue
to fully support the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

