Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, let me join
other delegations in congratulating you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. You can count on our support. Let me
also thank the Chinese delegation for its very able
stewardship of the work of this body during the month
of November.

Allow me also to offer my most sincerest
condolences to the American people on the passing of
former President Bush, who played quite an important
role in assisting the peaceful and democratic transition
in Poland and in our part of Europe starting in 1989.

Let me also thank Mr. Khan and his team for the
report (see S/2018/1031) and the very informative
briefing. His work, which consists in the collection,
preservation and storage of evidence, remains crucial
to achieving accountability and to providing justice
for the victims of the crimes committed by Da'esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Allow me also
to commend the Iraqi authorities for their cooperation
with Mr. Khan's team.

As Mr. Khan rightly pointed out, resolution 2379
(2017) is of crucial importance. By that resolution
the Security Council recognized, in a united way,
the importance of judicial accountability to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
In that context, for the record, let me stress that we
cannot agree with the view expressed in the Chamber
by one delegation that the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, is illegal.
There is no basis to question the legality of that body,
which was established by General Assembly resolution
71/248. That claim also runs counter to the spirit of
resolution 2379 (2017), concerning the importance of
accountability.

Poland welcomes the commencement of the
Investigative Team's preparatory activities, the
development of a strategic vision and guiding principles
for the Team's activities, as well as the implementation
of the financial, logistical and administrative
measures necessary to facilitate the commencement
of its substantive work. We look forward to the Team's
achievement of its full operational capabilities. We
encourage all United Nations agencies to collaborate
closely with the Team and provide it with all necessary
assistance in fulfilling its mandate. As Mr. Khan
stressed, he and his Team need solidarity and support.
Let me assure him of Poland's full solidarity and
support for his extremely important work.

We strongly believe that in order to advance national
reconciliation and restore stability in Iraq, it is vital to
deliver justice to the victims of atrocities committed
by terrorist groups by holding the perpetrators of those
crimes accountable. Accomplishing this goal will
require, inter alia, carrying out thorough investigations,
evidential material collection and analysis. It should
be done in accordance with the highest international
standards and in close cooperation and communication
with the Iraqi authorities to ensure the broadest
possible usability and admissibility of such evidence
and materials before national courts and by national
investigative and prosecutorial authorities.

We welcome the planned inclusion of Iraqi personnel
in the Team, who will work on an equal footing with
international staff members. We are convinced that their
participation will not only increase the effectiveness
of the Team's work and its capacity to deliver on its
mandate, but will also enhance support for its activities
among the Iraqi population. We hope that it will also
help to maximize the potential use of its evidentiary
material in credible, impartial and independent
domestic criminal proceedings conducted by competent
domestic courts in Iraq and in third States, as well as
enhance existing accountability processes, commence
new fair proceedings and contribute to reconciliation
and stabilization. We highly appreciate the recognition
of the need to ensure geographic diversity and gender,
ethnic and religious balance in appointing the Iraqi
members of the Investigative Team, which will reflect
the diversity of the Iraqi population and increase the
Team's capabilities in collecting evidence in various
communities affected by Da'esh.

The provision of protection and support for the
victims should be paramount. Therefore, we commend
the intent to establish the victim and witness protection
unit with the aim of facilitating the delivery of
appropriate support.

With regard to the efforts to provide accountability
for the crimes committed by terrorist groups, we
encourage the Iraqi authorities and the Investigative
Team to pay special attention to sexual and gender-
based crimes in prosecutions of Da'esh fighters, as
already highlighted by other delegations. Particular
emphasis should also be placed on investigating all
violations and abuses committed against children. In
addition, it is, in our View, indispensable to avoid the
penalization of women and children who are of Da'esh
families and who have no link to the organization.

In conclusion, let me reiterate once again Poland's
support for the Investigative Team and call for
cooperation with the Special Adviser and the Team in
fulfilling its important mandate. Allow me to stress
the importance of carrying it out in accordance with
United Nations best practices and policies, including
on sharing evidence for use in criminal proceedings in
which capital punishment could be imposed or carried
out, as well as relevant international law, including
international human rights law, rules and standards,
notably those relevant to fair trial and due process. Let
me finally once more acknowledge the commitment of
the Special Adviser to achieving the full operational
capabilities of the Investigative Team and ensuring full
compliance with the Team's mandate, in accordance
with resolution 2379 (2017), and wish him and the Team
the best of success in fulfilling their important tasks.

