Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
the Chinese New Year, and to thank you for having
convened this very important debate of the Security
Council on the theme "Maintenance of international
peace and security: reflect on history, reaffirm the
strong commitment to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations".

This year marks the seventieth anniversary of
the end of one of the most abhorrent wars witnessed
by world, which claimed millions of victims and led
to told suffering. The destruction brought about by the
Second World War was not limited to a few parties to
the conflict; many nations of the world paid the price
of that destruction. Indeed, one of the most important
chapters of the War took place in Egypt, where
approximately 20 million landmines were left along the
northern coastline of the Western Desert. That, too, led
to a great deal of bloodshed. The nations of the world
emerged from that tragedy more determined than ever
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
to practice tolerance and to promote social progress,
better standards of life and freedom.

The seventieth anniversary of the war and the
founding of United Nations is a turning point calling
for us to review the history of the Organization. We
should take pride in our achievements in the context
of peace and security, but we must also learn lessons
and learn from the mistakes and shortcomings in the
performance of the Organization in the past. In this
regard, I would note that we must not believe that the
Second World War ended with one victorious party
and the defeat of another; the result was a victory for
humankind, which determined to build a new world
in which efforts to maintain peace and security and to
achieve prosperity for all nations were combined.

To that end, Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations stipulates that the Security Council discharge its
mandate on behalf of all Members of the United Nations.
In that regard, we need to make greater efforts to reform
the working methods of the Council so as to make it
more transparent, democratic and representative. We
must also end the unfair representation of the African
continent so as to improve the work of the Council and
its credibility.

Our debate today is an opportunity to reaffirm the
principles of sovereignty equality, non-interference in
the internal affairs of States, the non-use or threat of
use of force and the peaceful settlement of disputes. The
Council must uphold those principles in discharging its
mandate. It must also support the role of parties and
regional organizations in mediation and the facilitation
of negotiations and respect national ownership in
reconciliation processes.

The threats we are faced with today are no less
serious than those the United Nations faced when it
was first established. We must therefore develop the
tools of our Organization in dealing with conflicts,
primarily peacebuilding and peacekeeping operations,
but also special diplomatic missions. Such missions
may take place under the current review of both the
peacebuilding and peacekeeping systems and focus on
preventive diplomacy.

The world is today witnessing a number of
transnational security threats. At the forefront are the
issues of organized crime, trafficking in drugs, people
and weapons, and the horrific acts of terrorism that
have been committed in many areas around the world,
such as those that have taken place recently in Syria,
Iraq, Libya, the Sahel and Western Africa.

We do not feel the need to absolve any specific
religion of those attempts by ignorant or ill-intentioned
parties to link a religion to terrorism. We are confident
that the noble and lofty goals and principles that
are shared by all religions are able to stand on their
own. But we must not be complacent. We must adopt
intellectual and practical mechanisms that will enable
us to work collectively to face the challenges posed by
those extremists, who try to attract more extremists
while exploiting religion. I would also like to recall
many instances from history. Those who overlook
or exploit terrorism for political purposes will be
inevitably hurt by terrorism at some point. That is what
Egypt reaffirmed lately when it dealt with the threat of
terrorism by besieging terrorist groups and cutting off
their provision lines.

In conclusion, I must mention the Palestinian cause,
which remains unresolved. This state of affairs is in
direct contradiction with the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and international legitimacy. We
must call for a just and comprehensive peace among
the nations of the Middle East and end this injustice,
which has been done to the Palestinian people by
guaranteeing that they can enjoy their rights, including
self-determination and an independent State with
Jerusalem as its capital.

