Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I welcome Special
Representative Haysom and Ambassador Saikal back to
the Security Council and thank them for their briefings.
I will stick to the five minute rule, particularly since we
rigidly enforce it when we are President.

The extension of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) today is a welcome
Sign of the Council's continued commitment to
Afghanistan. It is a commitment to standing by the
people and the Government of Afghanistan so that,
together, they can forge the safe, stable and prosperous
country that all Afghans deserve. As we have just
heard from the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, the road ahead will be difficult at times, but
together with the international community's assistance
and the support of the NATO Resolute Support Mission,
I am confident that Afghanistan can successfully
navigate the path ahead. UNAMA will play a vital role
in that effort.

We see three priorities for the coming months.
First, economic growth needs to be the linchpin of
Afghanistan's development. A growing economy will be
the engine of opportunity for all Afghans - opportunity
for men and women tired of years of violence,
opportunity for the next generation of entrepreneurs
and innovators, and of course opportunity that will help
Afghans choose a future inside Afghanistan rather than
risk fleeing to find an uncertain future abroad.

I therefore congratulate Afghanistan on its recent
accession to the World Trade Organization and on
its progress on the International Monetary Fund
programme. These are vital steps towards creating
opportunity, steps that will integrate Afghanistan into
lucrative international and regional trade networks,
but major challenges remain and a clear strategy on
economic reform will be needed by the National Unity
Government if long-term growth is to be secured. I
hope that Afghanistan's leaders will seize on recent
momentum to make this a reality.

Turning to my second point, it is clear that an
economy cannot flourish without security. Long-
term growth needs long-term stability. As my Foreign
Secretary made clear during his visit to Afghanistan
last week, the United Kingdom fully supports the
crucial work of the National Unity Government and the
Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the Afghan Peace
and Reconciliation Process. I would like to take this
opportunity to welcome the new leadership of the High
Peace Council, who will also have an important role to
play in these efforts.

But it is not just those within Afghanistan or the
Quadrilateral Coordination Group who can assist this
process. The international community and the region
all can provide valuable support. Therefore, let us all
make clear this Council's united support for the peace
process, our united call for the Taliban to come to
the negotiating table and our united encouragement
for Afghanistan and Pakistan to cooperate even more
closely to combat the shared threat posed to them
by extremism.

The UNAMA report (S/2016/218) paints a clear
picture of the consequences of such extremism. We
wholly condemn the Taliban's continuing attacks,
especially those against civilian targets. The violence
must stop. The people of Afghanistan have paid too
high a price for far too long. I would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the bravery and sacrifice
of the Afghan Nation Security Forces in their efforts
to halt the violence. I welcome their robust actions
supported by their international allies, including to
combat the emerging threat of Da'esh affiliates in the
east of the country, to which Special Representative
Haysom referred in his remarks.

My final point is about the National Unity
Government. While a strong economy may require
security, both can only really succeed with strong
governance. The United Kingdom is a strong supporter
of the National Unity Government, and I hope we can
all show our support today for President Mohammad
Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai and Chief Executive Abdullah
Abdullah as they work together in pursuit of stability
and prosperity.

The Brussels Conference in October is the moment
for the National Unity Government to demonstrate
its own commitment to the three priorities I have
just outlined. It is a chance for them to showcase the
reforms they have made so far and the reforms ahead
that will lead the country towards self-reliance in the
coming years. This will need to include concrete action
to combat corruption, a coherent plan for economic
growth and a plan for reforming and strengthening
the electoral system, one that builds on the Special
Electoral Reform Commission. We support the work of
UNAMA in this area.

I would like to conclude with this final point.
Although the onus is on the National Unity Government,
the Brussels Conference is also a moment for us, the
international community, to match our words with
action. It is the moment to set the parameters for
the international community's future engagement
in Afghanistan and really demonstrate what our
commitment means. To step away now would not only
damage the three priorities I have just outlined, but it
would also send the wrong signal to the people and the
Government of Afghanistan.

