I make this statement on behalf of Germany and Belgium, the humanitarian co-penholders of resolution 2533 (2020). We would like to thank Under-Secretary General Lowcock for his briefing. We also thank Ms. Amany Qaddour for describing the challenges a humanitarian non-governmental organization faces on the ground serving people in need in desperate circumstances. Some 11 million Syrians continue to be in need of humanitarian assistance and protection. These needs are growing and becoming more acute. On the one hand, years of war, mismanagement and oppression, as well as the economic crisis in neighbouring Lebanon, have resulted in an economic crisis in Syria. This situation has increased pressure on the humanitarian needs across the country and led to an additional 1.4 million people becoming food insecure over the last six months. Furthermore, we are extremely concerned about the spread of coronavirus disease across the country. Over the last week, as Mr. Lowcock mentioned, the number of cases has increased significantly. Across the country, testing capacity remains incredibly low, so most cases may go unnoticed. The destruction of health facilities and the shortage of health workers further endanger any response. It is therefore incredibly frustrating that while growing needs must be met, humanitarian access is increasingly being limited. Since 2014, cross-border operations have offered the Syrian people a lifeline, allowing the United Nations and its implementing partners to ensure life-saving assistance from across the borders. Although there were changes on the ground and cross-line access to certain areas has improved, the cross-border mechanism is as needed today as it was six years ago. Following the recommendations of the Secretary-General, we have worked tirelessly to continue to ensure maximum humanitarian access, both from inside Syria and from across its borders. The closing of Al-Yarubiyah in January defied humanitarian arguments, and now the closing of Bab Al-Salam once again contradicts humanitarian logic. While 13 members of the Security Council supported renewed access through two border crossings in the north-west of the country, two members vetoed such renewal at the beginning of this month, not even accepting a transition period of a mere three months for Bab Al-Salam. The current situation will result in a more costly and riskier humanitarian operation in the north-west and frustrate timely access to the region north of Aleppo. Meanwhile, the gaps in medical access in the north-east that were left after the Al-Yarubiyah crossing point was closed at the beginning of this year are still far from being filled. Mr. Lowcock has just confirmed that many health-care stations do not receive what they urgently need to treat patients and fight the virus. The burden of responsibility therefore lies with those countries that have systematically limited the cross-border modality for humanitarian access. Let us be clear: member States that vetoed the proposed draft resolutions are voluntarily putting human lives at stake out of political motives. Meanwhile, at the recent fourth Brussels conference, together with other European member States, the humanitarian co-penholders have reconfirmed their support for non-politicized humanitarian aid. Sadly, protection issues persist, not only for those in arbitrary detention or who are missing, but also for those who become victims of air or ground offensives. We call on all parties to show maximum restraint and consider the humanitarian repercussions of any military actions. While we condemn the recent attacks by terrorist groups, we still wish to emphasize that any response to those attacks should comply with obligations under international law, in particular with obligations under international humanitarian law. Finally, a political settlement in line with resolution 2254 (2015) is the only way to put Syria back on track towards peace. There is no justice without accountability. The humanitarian co-penholders fully support the conclusions of the Secretary-Genera's board of inquiry, the work of the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, and the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as justice initiatives on national and international levels. We continue to see immense value in the humanitarian notification system, and we underline once again that parties that withdraw from this mechanism nevertheless continue to be bound by international humanitarian law.
