Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel (UNOWAS), Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, for
his briefing. We appreciate his performance and the
efforts he makes on a daily basis.

The work of special political missions is an
important tool for developing strategies for building
and sustaining peace. In the case of UNOWAS, the
work it is doing pursuant to its mandate and, of course,
in the areas of preventive diplomacy, good governance,
the protection of human rights, good offices, political
mediation and facilitation of dialogue is vital, and we
want to highlight and support its efforts to promote the
active participation of women in political processes
related to peace and security.

We would also like to highlight the mission's
excellent coordination with regional and subregional
organizations such as the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States, which
enables it to encourage the leadership of the countries
of West Africa and the Sahel to work for political,
institutional and security-sector reform. In that regard,
we would like to single out the extraordinary electoral
process held in Liberia towards the end of last year
in a peaceful, credible and stable environment, and
to congratulate the Liberian people on demonstrating
their commitment to democracy through such a
significant event. We stress this case because it shows
how fundamental it is to have reconciliation processes
based on inclusive political dialogue, consensus and
rapprochement among the parties, which promote the
strengthening of lasting and sustainable peace.

We welcome the progress made in the
implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. We believe firmly that the
contribution and commitment of the countries of
the Sahel, regional and subregional organizations
and the cooperating countries will be critical to that
implementation, with a View to achieving long-term
results that will enable us to meet security challenges,
strengthen political and socioeconomic stability and
promote comprehensive development. The Strategy
should assist countries like Mali, which remains in
serious crisis thanks to the policies of regime change
in Libya, and identify the root causes of instability
and conflict there. In that context, we reiterate our
firm rejection of interventionist, interfering policies
that destabilize and undermine international peace
and security.

We also encourage the States members of the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel)
to continue working for the definitive deployment and
operationalization of their forces. The cooperation
of the United Nations, through the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, and the African Union will be key, and we
therefore encourage the conclusion of the technical
agreement between the United Nations, the European
Union and the G-5 Sahel in the framework of resolution
2391 (2017).

Despite those significant efforts, we are concerned
about the continuing complex situation in some
countries of the region, whose peoples are facing
enormous challenges, mainly in the area of security,
which bring with them problems such as cross-border
crime, human trafficking, the smuggling of migrants
and trafficking in drugs and arms * just some of the
consequences of conflict that have a negative impact
on the civilian population and development in the
region - and to which we must add the scourge of
terrorism. Bolivia emphatically condemns all forms
of violent and criminal activity that harm civilian
populations, particularly terrorism, a completely
unjustifiable type of aggression and one of the most
serious threats to international peace and security in
all of its forms and manifestations. We demand the
full implementation of resolution 2349 (2017) in the
fight against terrorist groups, particularly Boko Haram
and Da'esh.

The presence of Boko Haram persists in the
subregion, with severe consequences. According to
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1104),
between June and September 2017, there were 156
attacks attributed to that terrorist group, of which
100 were perpetrated in Nigeria and five in the Niger,
claiming almost 300 fatalities, most of them women,
not to mention the shocking kidnapping of girls and
children for evil purposes. In that regard, we commend
the coordinated efforts of UNOWAS, the Lake Chad
Basin Commission and the Multinational Joint Task
Force to develop a strategy for combating Boko Haram.
The members of the Security Council and of the United
Nations as a whole should give every support possible
in order to help them eliminate terrorism and work to
bring the perpetrators of these crimes to justice so that
they can be duly investigated, prosecuted and punished.

We should not fail to mention the worrying
humanitarian situation facing the population of the
subregion, in which 5 million people have been
displaced - 2 million of them in the Lake Chad
basin region - in addition to the enormous figure of
30 million who are at risk of food insecurity, 4 million
of whom are children suffering from malnutrition. We
encourage the international community in general to
continue to contribute technical support and economic
and humanitarian cooperation and to make its best
efforts to help the most vulnerable populations.

Lastly, Bolivia reaffirms its full support for the
regional and subregional architecture for resolving
conflict in Africa. We consider it essential to ensure
that an African vision is reflected in the implementation
of every initiative aimed at bringing genuine peace
to the continent. We encourage the Governments of
West Africa and the Sahel to continue the process of
stabilizing the region while strictly respecting States'
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.

