Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): The
Security Council will be extending the humanitarian
programme in Iraq for a ninth phase. France will vote
in favour of the text for two reasons.

First, France is deeply committed to the
continuity of the programme, for the long-suffering
Iraqi population, after 10 years of sanctions, needs it
badly. Furthermore, this text contains a number of
positive measures that will make it possible to increase
the resources available to the population. Additional
funding from the Compensation Fund and the
programme services account will be immediately
allocated to humanitarian projects, in conformity with
existing procedures.

The draft resolution also calls upon the Secretary-
General, in consultation with the Iraqi Government, to
make the necessary arrangements to find resources for
the maintenance and operation of Iraq's oil
installations. These funds will enable the Iraqi
Government to increase its oil production capacity
while safeguarding the environment and ensuring the
safety of its personnel. This measure is therefore a
positive one, for it will bring about a sustainable
increase in Iraq's oil income, which is the only source
of funding for the humanitarian programme.

However, we regret the fact that there are several
shortcomings in the draft. No decision has been taken
about the payment of Iraq's arrears to the United
Nations from the escrow account, which is not a
humanitarian account but a bureaucratic instrument.
We will have to come back to this important question,
for the principle of paying the arrears is set out in the
draft resolution.

Nor has any concrete measure been included to
decrease the high level of holds, which has been
deemed unacceptable by the Secretary-General. We
believe that this is regrettable, because the question of
holds is the principal obstacle to the smooth
functioning ofthe programme.

Finally, the Council will have to take a further
decision very soon to authorize Iraq to give financial
aid to the Palestinians from the escrow account.

At a time when the Secretary-General was
engaged in a dialogue with the Iraqi authorities to
renew cooperation between Iraq and the United
Nations, on the basis, in particular, of the
implementation of resolution 1284 (1999), it was
particularly important that the Security Council not
overlook its responsibilities with regard to the
management of the humanitarian programme. The
Council has responded by renewing the programme for
a ninth phase and by including meaningful
improvements.

It is now up to the Council to proceed to a further
phase of its work by clarifying anything that is
ambiguous or obscure in resolution 1284 (1999), an
indispensable prerequisite to its implementation. The
French delegation will act accordingly in the weeks to
come.

