Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Mr. President, it
is a great pleasure to see you chairing this important
meeting of the Security Council on a subject to which
your country's proactive interest and dedication are
well known. We therefore thank the Pakistani
presidency and you personally, Mr. President, for the
initiative to hold this public meeting on United Nations
peacekeeping operations. The earlier presence of the
Secretary-General and the depth of the opening
remarks have provided us with very meaningful
orientation for our debate.

In recent years, the United Nations has made
considerable progress in peacekeeping. The foundation
for a new approach has been laid. Remarkable results
have been achieved in Sierra Leone, Liberia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kosovo and East
Timor, to mention but a few. The capabilities of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations have been
reinforced and the United Nations Standby
Arrangements System has been strengthened.

We can draw lessons from the rich experiences
gained in a wide variety of peacekeeping theatres since
1948, the central one being that the international
community needs to ensure that any given
peacekeeping mission is provided with adequate
financial and other necessary resources, but
particularly political support, so that it can succeed and
complete its assigned tasks.

The United Nations is fielding 15 peacekeeping
missions with about 53,000 peacekeepers and a very
significant budget worldwide. Over the next few
months, new peacekeeping operations will be deployed
in Haiti and in Burundi. That will result in a substantial
increase in the number of peacekeepers, as well as in a
demand for additional financial, administrative and
logistics resources for the exit strategies of existing
missions and for support of the new ones.

This meeting today is a very good opportunity to
review our peacekeeping record and to look into ways
of improving it. Some very valid proposals have been
offered by previous speakers, and the Security Council
may be advised to revisit some of those suggestions in
the near future. Security Council resolution 1327
(2000), which embodies the follow-up to the
recommendations of the Brahimi report (S/2000/809),
the reports of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and the report of the Secretary-General to
the fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly under
agenda item 85 (A/58/694) all provide us with a useful
catalogue of priorities, as well as with food for
thought. Support by Member States for the United
Nations Standby Arrangements System also provides a
very significant way of strengthening United Nations
capacity for rapid deployment.

While peacekeeping operations should not be
used as a substitute for addressing the root causes of
conflict, they should, in the meantime, address all
challenges in a comprehensive way. If peace and
development are indeed indivisible, as we keep
reminding ourselves, the international community must
improve its efforts to devote its resources to the
economic recovery of the countries affected by or
emerging from conflict in order to prevent conflict and
promote international peace and security. We are
therefore of the View that the inclusion, as appropriate,
of peace-building elements in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations, with a View to ensuring a
smooth transition to a successful post-conflict period,
is very important.

Furthermore, quick impact projects, referred to in
the Brahimi report in the context of peace-building,
should also be used proactively for preventive purposes
and should be linked to longer-term strategy. In that
context, we welcome the growing cooperation between
the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council, as experienced in the cases of Guinea-Bissau
and, more recently, Burundi.

In my delegation's View, United Nations
peacekeeping missions and their respective mandates
must also incorporate programmes for populations with
sensitive needs, such as refugees and internally
displaced persons, and for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes,
particularly for child soldiers. For instance, in
Angola - and, we believe, in the majority of affected
countries or countries emerging from conflict - mine
action is providing employment opportunities in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes. A successful disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme has
proved essential for the effective transition from civil
war to sustained peace.

While recognizing the primacy of the United
Nations as the leading organization responsible for
global peace and security, we should stress the
importance of building regional and subregional
capacities. Regional and subregional organizations
such as the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the Southern African
Development Community, for instance, have been
proactive in developing regional organizational
capacity, but often they suffer from lack of resources.

We believe that the effectiveness of the forces
deployed by ECOWAS in C6te d'Ivoire and Liberia,
the deployment of the Interim Emergency
Multinational Force in Bunia, Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as well as the deployment of African
missions in Burundi - although financial constraints
impeded the deployment of the mission in full
strength - testify that the focus of continued
cooperation, including with the European Union,
should be based on a long-term enhancement of the
peacekeeping capacity of those regional and
subregional organizations.

Working more effectively in partnership with
different actors, including troop-contributing countries,
the Bretton Woods institutions, international donors
and the international and local private sectors should
be the foundation of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, since that emerges as a key component of
prevention, peacekeeping and peace-building.

The African continent today has the largest
number of United Nations-based peacekeeping
operations. We therefore hope that, in a true spirit of
international partnership for peace, all relevant actors
will continue to work closely with the African Union
regarding the establishment of an African standby
force and a military staff committee, as called for in
the Protocol relating to the Establishment of the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union.

The broad objectives of improving the planning
process of peacekeeping operations continue to be
effectively pursued by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. We commend its ability to bring together
the relevant United Nations departments and funds and
programmes to advance coordinated and effective
action, including the excellent work with regard to the
follow-up of Security Council resolution 1308 (2000).
Developing the capacity of peacekeepers to become
promoters of and actors for awareness concerning the
prevention of HIV/AIDS transmission in the context of
peacekeeping operations is an important task, since the
pandemic is a threat to the entire world. We therefore
consider that every peacekeeping operation should
have an HIV/AIDS focal point.

Let me conclude by reiterating the continued
commitment of my country, Angola, to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We pay tribute to the men
and women who have admirably served and continue to
serve in peacekeeping operations for their high level of
professionalism, dedication and courage. A particular
tribute is due to those who have given their lives for
the maintenance of peace and security in the world.

