Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): Allow me first to thank
Germany for organizing this important open debate. I
also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
the Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme for their remarks on this
serious and timely topic.

Slovenia also welcomes the participation of the
President of the Republic of Nauru, as well as his
contribution to today's debate. We clearly understand
the gravity of the situation and the challenges faced by
small island developing States, particularly those of the
Pacific, whose characteristics make them among the
most vulnerable countries in the world to climate
change.

I would like to align Slovenia with the statement
made earlier by the observer of the European Union
(EU).

Climate change is not a distant threat. Its impacts
are real and are already felt by many nations. In many
cases, it jeopardizes their very existence. While climate
change is a global phenomenon, its negative impacts
are disproportionate. Some parts of the world will be
more affected than others. Furthermore, climate
vulnerability depends not only on exposure to climate
risks, but also on adaptation capacities to reduce those
risks. Consequently, many of the developing countries
will be the hardest hit by climate change.

Climate change has detrimental effects on human
security and well-being, it endangers economic
development and efforts to eliminate poverty and has a
negative impact on international peace and security.
Rising sea levels and coastal erosion will result in the
loss of territory, and in some cases even statehood.
Rising temperatures and extended droughts will
increase desertification and land degradation, making
vast areas of our planet uninhabitable. According to
one empirical study, there could be 350 million
environmental migrants by 2050 as result of those
phenomena. Climate change also has a significant
2
impact on food security, which is at the same time
inextricably linked with water security.

With the onset of climate change and the
increasing number of natural disasters, the link
between the environment and security is hard to
dispute. Already in 1987, the Brundtland report
(A/42/427, annex), which coined the term sustainable
development, also highlighted environmental
degradation as a key factor in creating insecurity. The
report also recognized that environmental stress was
seldom the only cause of major conflicts but played an
important part in causality associated with any conflict.
Today, we generally regard climate change as a threat
multiplier, a root cause or an underlying cause of
instability and vulnerability. Careful consideration of
those implications can help strengthen conflict
prevention.

Slovenia is aware that climate change is the
ultimate global challenge that calls for global
responsibility. Although climate change is already a
reality, with collective effort there is still time to secure
our future.

The European Union and its member States are at
the forefront of the debates on the issue of climate
change. This has led to the presentation of a joint paper
by the High Representative and the European
Commission on Climate Change and International
Security in March 2008, during the Slovenian
presidency of the EU. The document remains a
reference and guidance for EU action.

Slovenia believes that our success in addressing
the climate change challenge depends foremost on our
ability to achieve an ambitious post-2012 climate
agreement and to limit global warming to below 2° C.
Furthermore, building climate resilience is a priority
for the most vulnerable countries and regions, which
bear little historical responsibility for climate change.
Negotiations under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change should deliver a new
climate deal that will reduce emissions and provide
adequate financing and technology transfer for
adaptation actions in developing countries.

However, neither adaptation nor mitigation alone
can avert all climate change impacts. Close
cooperation is needed among the relevant organs of the
United Nations to intensify efforts in addressing the
issue of climate change and its possible security
implications. We need to use all our knowledge and
11-42397

 

resources to find proper solutions. We see today's
Council debate as an important contribution to that
end.

