Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Feltman, for his comprehensive
briefing on the situation in the Lake Chad Basin region.

Terrorism remains the main threat facing the
entire world, and the African continent in particular.
The increased activity of militants of the terrorist
group Boko Haram in north-eastern Nigeria and north-
western Cameroon is of great concern. Attacks on
civilians, refugee camps and humanitarian convoys
have become more frequent. Terrorists are not afraid to
use women and children as suicide bombers. By some
estimates, over the past six months there have been
several hundred victims.

We strongly condemn the criminal ideology and
practices of Boko Haram. We should abandon the
harmful classification of the fight against Boko Haram
as a conflict. That organization is classified as a terrorist
entity by the Security Council. The fight against it is
therefore a counter-terrorist operation. Attempts to
represent terrorists as one of the parties to a conflict
only serves to create the illusion that punishment for
their crimes can be avoided.

We are convinced of the importance of coordinated
action by Africans, including its subregional
organizations, in the fight against terrorism. We note
the relevant efforts of the Lake Chad Basin Commission
and the Multinational Joint Task Force, formed by
Cameroon, the Niger, Nigeria, Chad and Benin. We
welcome the results achieved to date.

Fundamental advances in counter-terrorism
activities are hampered by the close link between
terrorists and various criminal groups, pirates and
smugglers. Bandits exploit gaps in national and cross-
border security to engage in their illicit activity. As a
result, the region is witnessing a flourishing trade in
drugs and arms and uncontrolled and illegal migration.
One cannot but be alarmed by the fact that in profiting
from the chaos and suffering ofthe population, criminal
elements provide material support to terrorists.

Despite the priority of the counter-terrorism
element, the situation in the region cannot be rectified
by force alone. To achieve sustainable political
stabilization, it is necessary to work to address the
root causes that have led to the deterioration of the
situation and the creation of Boko Haram. Terrorists
and extremists of every kind must be deprived of fuel
to grow. It is important to resolve acute social and
economic problems and to strengthen the institutions
of State authority in that part of the African continent.

As noted in the Secretary-General's report on
the situation in the Lake Chad basin (S/2017/764),
the humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate.
Resources that national Governments could allocate
to alleviating the suffering of the population are being
redirected to fight Boko Haram. A vicious cycle has
therefore been created; people cannot be fed until
terrorism is defeated, but terrorism cannot be defeated
so long as extremist groups thrive on a despairing and
desolate population.

In that regard, we support a decisive and adequate
response on the part of the international community
to the threats and challenges faced by the countries
of the Lake Chad basin. It is important to ensure the
coherence of approaches to assisting countries of the
region. At the same time, outside support should not be
turned into the imposition of ready-made formulas that
are alien to African states. The international role must
be supported by the coordinating role of the United
Nations, in close coordination with African structures
and individual African States.

We welcome the Secretary-General's intention to
develop a comprehensive strategy for the region. We
believe that it should serve as a consolidating and
cementing element for external support for the region.
In our View, it is important to take into account the
experience garnered from the implementation of the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, the
real impact of which has yet to be seen.

For our part, we stand ready to continue to support
African States in addressing the problems facing
them in the context of the fight against Boko Haram
and in helping refugees and the victims of natural
disasters. We will continue to provide humanitarian
and other assistance, both bilaterally and through
international organizations.

