Mr. Corr (Ireland): As other colleagues have
done, may I first warmly congratulate Colombia, and
you personally, Sir, on assuming the presidency for the
month of December. I would also like to thank China's
Ambassador Wang Yingfan and his colleagues for a
very successful and effective presidency in the month
of November. I would also like to thank Mr. Morris for
a very clear and comprehensive assessment of the
gravity of the food crisis situation facing Africa and,
indeed, the international community. It was a very
clear, focused, honest and candid presentation, for
which we are very grateful.

Three general themes emerged from the
presentation made by Mr. Morris. The first is that this
is a humanitarian situation of the utmost gravity, with
14 million people in Southern Africa and the same
number in the Horn of Africa affected. It is a situation
that is intolerable from a moral and humanitarian
perspective. I think it must first be seen in that context.

Secondly, as Mr. Morris rightly said, it is also a
threat to international peace and security of the most
fundamental nature - if not today, then perhaps
tomorrow or the day after. That is of course the current
situation in crisis situations such as those in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Angola and other
areas recovering from enormous levels of violence and
conflict, where the situation concerning reintegration
programmes for internally displaced persons already
poses major social challenges throughout those
countries and also poses challenges to the work of the
World Food Programme (WFP).

Another theme that came across very clearly in
the presentation is the fact that a central issue is
political commitment, particularly by developed
countries, where the resolution of many of these crises
is in our hands if we display imagination and good
will. What is now important is that that imagination
and good will be shown not just in meeting the short-
term humanitarian crises, but in support for the WFP
and its long-term development work, which has
suffered, as Mr. Morris said this afternoon, because of
the scale of resources now required on the
humanitarian front.

In saying that, I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank Mr. Morris and everyone else
involved in the WFP for the work that they do. That is
work that is carried out for the entire international
community. It is work that matters a great deal to the
peoples of Africa and other areas that are suffering
food insecurity. A major debt of appreciation is owed
by the entire international community for it.

This also relates, of course, to the issue of
support and donor contributions, which was a strong
theme of the presentation. I am grateful for the kind
words that were said about my own country, Ireland,
and also about the European Union, which has
substantially increased its funding in the recent past,
including in the response to the current situation in
Africa.

Three points struck me while listening to the
presentation about which I would like to ask questions
in a very general, not detailed, way. First, in terms of
the challenge facing Governments and the private
sector in Africa, the document of the New Partnership
for Africa's Development (NEPAD) states clearly that
the agrarian system and biases in economic policy are
clear factors in causing food insecurity, as well, of
course, as drought and the instability in world
commodity prices. I would be grateful for an
assessment, however brief, of what can be done by
Governments and the private sector in terms of the
provision of irrigation equipment for developing arable
land to address the food insecurity situation.

That also links up with the question of
Government policy that Ambassador Williams and
others have mentioned, the strong theme that comes
across in NEPAD of the importance of developing
community leadership and Government policies to
support it. That was also a theme that I think came
across recently in the International Food Policy
Research Institute programme, which emphasized that
the role of small farmers is probably the single most
important dimension in addressing food insecurity in
Africa.

A second question that struck me in this area was
the recent report by the United Nations University
Institute for Natural Resources, which very strongly
emphasized that - and this goes to the point of long-
term programmes, not just to the short-term issues -
low soil fertility and degradation of land suggest there
is a very real need for very long-term support by the
WFP, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations and the international community in
general in tackling soil degradation and strengthening
soil fertility. I believe the figure for degraded cropland
was 72 per cent in sub-Saharan Africa, and 31 per cent
for pastureland.

The third point is the level of support that has
been given in terms of long-term development funding
by the international community. The NEPAD paper
makes the strong point that support by developed
countries, including the multilateral institutions, has
seriously diminished for agriculture over the past
decade. The figure of the World Bank from its loan
portfolio, as far as I recall, was around 39 per cent for
agricultural development in 1980, I believe. Now the
figure is something less than 10 per cent. That is a very
serious factor in terms of tackling food insecurity, if
that trend persists. So, would it be possible to say what
can be done by the WFP to encourage donors to return
to long-term agriculture support development,
particularly through your own programmes?

A final point that I did want to ask about, which
was touched upon by Mr. Morris, is the question -
without getting into a wider debate - of globalization
and protectionism. There has been some criticism in
some African countries that the liberalization of their
economies has not been met with a reciprocal response
by developed countries in terms of reduced tariffs and
an easing of protectionism in agriculture. It has also
meant that in some countries, for example in Senegal
and Tanzania - I think I saw recent figures on
fisheries - there has been a diversion of food
production for exports, given its greater value, which
has implications for the local economy where the
promotion of exports can weaken the local base. It can
also lead to weakness in prices of commodities, which
is another issue. But I think that is a related point.

Finally, in terms of the immediate crisis involving
the planting of seeds for next year - something that
the WFP has been emphasizing in recent weeks - is
this something, in terms of support by the international
community, or indeed by the WFP, about which much
can be done over the coming weeks, or is the shortfall
in seeds, fertilizers, hand tools, and so on, a real
difficulty in terms of planning for a reasonable crop,
given climate conditions next year?

