Mr. Loulichki (Morocco): Allow me, at the
outset, to welcome Mr. Jan Kubis, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and thank him for
his presentation. At the same time, I would like to
express our appreciation to Ambassador Zahir Tanin
for his update on the situation in his country.

Throughout the period covered by the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2012/133), the situation in
Afghanistan witnessed significant progress in several
aspects. Indeed, the national political dialogue among
Afghans evolved significantly during that period, and
we express the hope that those steps will boost the
peace process.
The sustained progress in the implementation of
the Afghan Peace and Reintegration Programme helped
thousands of combatants to disengage from fighting in
order to reintegrate into Afghan society. Health and
education sectors also recorded real progress for the
benefit of the vulnerable population.

The security situation, however, remains a real
concern for all, despite the decrease in security related
events in December 2011 and January 2012, compared
to the previous two-month reporting period of last year.
Despite those challenges, we cannot fail to
acknowledge that approximately 50 per cent of the
Afghan population lives in areas where responsibility
for security has been handed over to Afghan security
forces.

We commend the role of UNAMA for its real
multifaceted engagement in Afghanistan, as well as the
International Security Assistance Force and its efforts
to keep peace in the country in a very difficult
environment.

In that regard, we appreciate the
recommendations listed in the comprehensive review
of the mandated activities of UNAMA, as requested
under resolution 1974 (2011). We support a
comprehensive and inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned political process, which should lead Afghan
authorities to address the challenges of stabilizing the
country and reconciling different communities.

We also express our support for the Afghan
Government during the ongoing transition period,
which should be completed by the end of 2014,
consistent with the Kabul process, and aim at enabling
the Afghan Government to fully exercise its sovereign
authority over its entire national territory.

We consider that the phase of transformation
from 2015 to 2024 will enable Afghanistan to complete
the building of its institutions and achieve a democratic
and stable country based on the rule of law, respect for
human rights and good governance.

Morocco encourages Afghanistan to pursue
political dialogue and partnerships with its
neighbouring countries, with a view to strengthening
cooperation in areas such as security, anti-terrorism,
counter-narcotics and the problem of refugees. We
value the efforts of neighbouring States to assist
Afghan refugees, and we look forward to the orderly
and voluntary repatriation of those refugees to their
homeland.

Finally, we look forward the conclusions of the
Tokyo conference in July 2012, aimed at building on
the outcomes of the Bonn and Istanbul Conferences
and at ensuring delivery on the commitments made by
the international community towards Afghanistan's
stability and sustainable economic development.

As Ambassador Zahir Tanin put it, Afghanistan
has a long way to go and counts on the international
community to remain steadfast and assist it in making
it a successful transition. We hope that the Council,
which has an important role to play, will heed that call.
To that end, Morocco supports the extension of the
mandate of UNAMA for an additional 12 months.

