Ms. Loj (Denmark): I, too, would like warmly to
welcome President Johnson-Sirleaf to the Council. Her
presence among us today as the democratically elected
President of Liberia is proof that, after a long night's
travel, morning has finally broken in her country.

My message today is one of full support for the
new Liberian Government. We are determined to work
with it to consolidate peace and democratic processes
in Liberia. It is our clear position that the United
Nations Mission in Liberia should continue its robust
presence in the foreseeable future in order to guarantee
a secure and stable environment as the Government
strives to implement urgently needed reforms and to
tackle issues of impunity and justice.

Denmark appreciates the fact that important and
bold steps have already been taken in key reform areas,
including financial management, anti-corruption, and
the cancellation of Government contracts and forestry
concessions. The proper implementation of the
Governance and Economic Management Assistance
Programme will help sustain those new policies.

Both in my national capacity and as Chairman of
the sanctions Committee, I welcome the President's
resolve to work towards meeting the conditions for
terminating the Council's measures on timber and
diamonds. I assure her that we share the same interest
in terminating those measures as soon as possible when
the conditions are met and the revenues from those
sectors will benefit the Liberian people. If the current
reform momentum is kept up, that goal should be
within short reach.

The sanctions Committee stands ready to
cooperate with the Government on how, alongside
Member States, it might assist President Johnson-
Sirleaf in expediting the efforts needed to meet the
conditions, as well as on how the Committee might
assist her in the implementation of the assets freeze
imposed by Security Council resolution 1532 (2004).

Let me finally welcome the President's request to
African partners to consult on the resolution of the
Taylor issue, in conformity with the requirements of
the United Nations and the international community.
We know that it has been a difficult decision, but also a
courageous and timely one. We hope that the
consultations will be brought to a speedy conclusion,
as bringing an end to impunity is key to long-term
stability in Sierra Leone, Liberia and, indeed, in the
whole subregion.

