Ms. Juul (Norway): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway. We
thank the United Kingdom for convening this important
open debate.

In the transition to lasting peace, relationships
must be rebuilt and victims' rights must be at the
centre of any peace process. The Final Agreement for
the Termination of Conflict and the Construction of a
Stable and Lasting Peace in Colombia has established
a new standard for dealing with victims' rights,
transitional justice and truth. The broad participation
at the negotiation table, which included victims and
women, was essential. It led to the establishment of the
Truth Commission, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
and the International Commission on Missing Persons,
which are now fully operational.

In war-torn and polarized societies in particular,
the voices and leadership of civic, social and religious
leaders are critical to ensuring the creation of a dynamic
of reconciliation and dialogue. A clear example of that
was South Africa, whose reconciliation process has
been an inspiration to many peacebuilding efforts since.
Inter- and intrareligious dialogues may prove vital and
useful policy tools that help foster social cohesion
and sustainable peace. Religious actors can provide a
gateway to understanding and working with different
local communities.

In any conflict, reconciliation efforts must include
the affected communities and their people and be owned
by them, but the United Nations has powerful tools at
its disposal to help parties bring about reconciliation.

I would like to highlight five ways we can maximize
that role.

First, the Security Council must remain engaged
long enough not only to foster but to sustain peace. It
must make full use ofthe tools at its disposal to promote
reconciliation, including at stages where outbreaks of
hostilities may be imminent.

Secondly, the Council must continue to develop its
partnerships with regional organizations, including the
African Union. Regional actors are often best placed to
support lasting reconciliation.

Thirdly, the Peacebuilding Commission has an
important role to play in sustaining peace, and its role
and resources should be better utilized.
Fourthly, the United Nations must assist in
addressing the root causes of conflict. The promotion
of economic and social development should, wherever
possible, be connected to efforts to sustain peace.

Fifthly, we support the Secretary-General's call
for a surge in peace diplomacy, and we welcome the
recently enacted United Nations reforms to this end.
We must draw on the strengths of United Nations
country teams, the Mediation Support Unit, United
Nations peacekeeping operations and special political
missions. The United Nations system should now be
better positioned to take a holistic approach, linking the
promotion of security, development and human rights.

In all those efforts, women's empowerment is key.
Excluding halfthe population from peacemaking simply
does not work. Engaging with young people is also
crucial if we are to build strong and resilient societies.

Finally, the Nordic countries would like to
stress that all of the foregoing is possible only if the
States Members of the United Nations ensure that
the Organization is given adequate resources and the
support it needs to play an effective role in peace efforts.

