Mr. Johnston (United Kingdom): I would like to
welcome and thank the High Representative at this, his
first meeting with Council members. The United
Kingdom wishes him well in his new role of what he
has rightly called a crucial stage in the development of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we will support him fully
in his work. We would also like to welcome back to the
Council Prime Minister Terzic and thank him for his
intervention.

The United Kingdom fully associates itself with
the European Union statement to be delivered later by
the representative of Austria. I would like to briefly
make five points on priorities ahead for Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

First, the United Kingdom welcomes the recent
agreement on constitutional reform. As the High
Representative himself said, this is an important first
step down the road to a more functional State, leaving
behind arrangements and structures that are no longer
necessary and enabling Bosnia and Herzegovina to
start looking forward. We therefore urge the Bosnian
parliament to ratify the amendments quickly.

Secondly, we agree that the time has come for the
Bosnian authorities to be more responsible and
accountable for governing their own country. But also
it is important that any review of the Bonn powers
must reflect conditions on the ground, especially with
regard to the continuing priority we must give to
securing full cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
As the High Representative said, the international
community must take a firm stance on the need for
this.

Thirdly, the United Kingdom urges Bosnia and
Herzegovina to implement the other changes and
reforms necessary to meet the requirements set out by
the European Union in November 2005, when it was
agreed to open negotiations for a stabilization and
association agreement. The European Union made a
clear commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is
now up to the Bosnians to demonstrate their
commitments to European integration.

Fourthly, the United Kingdom is concerned about
progress towards a restructured Bosnian police force.
Agreement has been reached in principle and a
directorate has been established, but this has yet to
produce any real recommendations or results. It is an
important issue and work must not be left until just
before the September deadline.
Finally, on the issue of decertified police officers,
the United Kingdom also wants to find a way forward.
It is important that we explore all options in
consultations with the relevant parties, and we look
forward to hearing about the planned expert-level
discussion between the Office of the High
Representative, the European Union and the United
Nations.

In conclusion, the Bosnian Government will need
determination and commitment to meet the challenges
of further reform and development. It will also need
the help of the High Representative and of the
international community in all its guises. We will
continue to play a full role in this work to help build a
stable and sustainable European future for Bosnia and
Herzegovina and for the region as a whole.

