Mr. Sajdik (Austria): I would first like to thank
the Azerbaijani presidency for convening today's open
debate. Austria aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
(ACT) group. The issues of accountability, coherence
and transparency of the Security Council, which the
group aims to enhance, are extremely important to my
delegation. As a member of the ACT group, Austria
will now limit this intervention to two specific points.

First, we believe that efforts to improve the
working methods of the Council must also focus on
strengthening the interaction between the Council
and the United Nations membership at large. This
applies particularly to United Nations peacekeeping

missions, which is the United Nations flagship activity.
Resolution 1353 (2001) and last week's presidential
note S/2013/6130, on the enhancement of consultations
with troop- and police-contributing countries, among
other Council documents, provide a very good basis for
an intensified engagement of the Council with those
countries. We call on the Security Council to make
more frequent and effective use of those existing tools.
It is the contributing countries that have their boots on
the ground and that must implement the mandates of
the missions.

As practically all United Nations peacekeeping
operations have become more challenging
and multifaceted, the need for dialogue and
information-sharing has increased. Troop- and
police-contributing countries should be consulted
by both the Secretariat and the Council, not only on
a regular basis but also and particularly on an ad hoc
basis and at short notice, in the light of the sometimes
rapidly evolving developments in the respective areas
of operation.

Let me address a second point that has been very
dear to my delegation for many years - the rule of law.
Thirteen months ago, Member States at the High-level
Meeting of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law
at the National and International Levels recognized the
positive contribution of the Security Council to the rule
of law in discharging its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. On
that same occasion, the General Assembly encouraged
the Security Council to first ensure that sanctions
imposed by the Council are carefully targeted and,
secondly, to further develop fair and clear procedures.
That reflects a conviction that the implementation of
sanctions must respect the rule of law. Austria strongly
believes that the United Nations must practice what it
preaches. The rule of law must apply not only outside
the United Nations, but also within the United Nations,
in particular in situations in which actions by the United
Nations and its organs directly affect individual rights.

The United Nations in general and the Security
Council in particular should lead the way in this
regard. As former Chair of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities during

its term as a non-permanent member of the Council in

2009 and 2010, Austria worked hard to improve the

procedures under the sanctions regime of resolution

1267 (1999) in terms of due process. Resolution 1904
(2009) of 17 December 2009, which established the
Office of the Ombudsperson, was a significant step
forward in improving the fairness and transparency of
the Al-Qaida sanctions regime and enhanced the rule
of law in the implementation of Council decisions. We
therefore reiterate our call on the Security Council to
continue on that path and extend the mandate of the
Ombudsperson, which has been further improved in the
meantime, to other sanctions regimes.

In concluding, I would like to emphasize that the
Council's working methods have developed remarkably
over the years, yet they remain a work in progress.
As the work of the Security Council has to constantly
adapt to new challenges and changed circumstances,
so should the Council's working methods. Engagement
with troop-contributing countries and respect for the
rule of law are thereby key to making the Council's
work more effective and legitimate.

