Mr. Seenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): On behalf of my delegation, I would like to
state that since the establishment of the Government of
Unity and National Reconciliation of Angola on 11 April
1997, the peace process in that country is irreversible, and
both the Government of Angola and UNITA should fulfil
the implementation of the remaining commitments under
the "Acordos de Paz" and the Lusaka Protocol.

We have no doubt that the non-compliance with the
commitments between the parties, as well as with the
obligations imposed by the resolutions of the Security

 

Council, cannot be tolerated, as the people of Angola
deserve to live in peace and to enjoy prosperity.

Part A of resolution 1127 (1997) demanded that the
Government of Angola, and particularly UNITA, comply
fully and without further delay with the remaining aspects
of the peace process. In particular, it called on UNITA to
demilitarize all its forces, transform radio Vorgan into a
non-partisan broadcasting facility and cooperate fully with
the process of normalizing of State administration
throughout the territory of Angola.

Part B, paragraph 4 of the same resolution imposed a
set of measures on UNITA in order to encourage that group
to cooperate even more with the peace process; those
measures were to go into effect on 30 September 1997.
However, given the cooperation shown by UNITA, the
Council issued resolution 1130 (1997) on 29 September, by
which it postponed the entry into force of those measures.

Regrettably, according to the report of the Secretary-
General to the Security Council UNITA has not fully
complied with its obligations under resolution 1127 (1997).
The measures set out in that resolution should therefore
enter fully into force so as to speed up the peace process in
Angola.

My delegation would like to express the hope that
these measures should help persuade UNITA once and for
all to fulfil each and every one of its obligations towards
the people of Angola and the international community.

My delegation wishes to underscore the nature of the
measures imposed on UNITA, as they are another example
of the trend prevailing in the Council to impose sanctions
aimed at leaders or elite groups of the parties to a conflict
so as not to affect the humanitarian situation of the civilian
population of a given country.

The conditions for the full demobilization and
demilitarization of UNITA exist in Angola, as the
representatives of that group hold posts in the Government
structure, the army and the National Police. UNITA has no
reason whatever to maintain an armed force or territory
under its control. In this connection, UNITA should hand
over the areas of Andulo and Bailundo in order to complete
the extension of State administration to all Angolan
territory.

Furthermore, Costa Rica confidently hopes that
President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi will be able to meet
soon on Angolan territory to negotiate the outstanding
points with a view to comprehensive peace in their
country.

My delegation believes that we cannot fail to
mention, as other delegations have done, the reports on
the presence of Angolan armed elements in the Republic
of the Congo. These kinds of actions endanger the peace
process - which has cost the people of Angola so
dearly - as well as the stability of the region itself. They
are also a violation of the basic principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. We therefore join those who have
condemned all foreign interference in the Republic of the
Congo, and we urge foreign forces, including
mercenaries, to withdraw immediately from that country.

I wish finally to express my country's appreciation
to the civilian, military and police personnel of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola for their outstanding
efforts, to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Angola, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, and to
the personnel of United Nations programmes and agencies
in Angola. It goes without saying that we reiterate our
appreciation also to the countries of the troika: Portugal,
the Russian Federation and the United States of America.

Costa Rica supports the draft resolution before the
Council today.

