Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): We would like to thank
the Indonesian presidency of the Security Council
for the choice of the theme of today's open debate.
We thank the Secretary-General, the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
the Executive Director of the Center for Civilians in
Conflict for their briefings earlier today.

This meeting provides an important opportunity to
reflect on the ways in which the global efforts for the
protection of civilians have evolved over the past 20
years. We recognize the considerable progress achieved
within the Organization and the efforts of the Security
Council to strengthen the normative framework
of the protection agenda. At the same time, we are
concerned about the persisting challenges highlighted
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/373) on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Supporting impartiality and independence in
humanitarian action and providing safe, timely and
unimpeded humanitarian access is crucial to preventing
and alleviating the suffering of civilians caught up in
conflict. Attempts to politicize humanitarian access,
along with the refusal to cooperate at the level of
the relevant authorities, demonstrate an intention to
deliberately impede efforts to protect and assist those in
need. We strongly condemn violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, including
attacks on humanitarian and medical personnel, as well
as violence, threats and intimidation againstjournalists
and media workers.

Armenia has been consistent in advancing the
prevention and protection agendas, including through
our involvement in United Nations and United Nations-
mandated peace and stability operations, namely, the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. We have also shown a consistent
commitment to helping to alleviate the suffering of
populations in areas affected by crisis, as reflected in
our national humanitarian mission in Syria in response
to the request of the Syrian authorities and the Armenian
community. Demining specialists from Armenia are
currently operating in the southern communities of
Aleppo, and our medical team provides assistance in
four hospitals, as well as in a medical facility under the
Armenian Relief Cross of Syria in Aleppo.

Promoting the norms of international humanitarian
law and raising awareness in that regard is an important
element in Armenia's security-sector governance.
International humanitarian law is incorporated in
the curricula of Armenia's military educational
institutions. We also highly appreciate the cooperation
with the ICRC in implementing training projects
and reaching out to people affected by conflict who
are in need of humanitarian assistance. Armenia's
commitment to promoting the importance of the safety
of children and students in armed conflict is reflected
in its endorsement of the Safe Schools Declaration.

We fully recognize the importance of the
empowerment of women and how it is linked and
intertwined with sustainable peace and development
efforts on different levels. An important example of
women's participation in peacebuilding efforts is the
Women for Peace initiative led by the spouse of the
Prime Minister ofArmenia, as an inclusive platform for
women and mothers to promote peace and reconciliation
in our region and beyond. Armenia is fully committed
to the promotion of gender-sensitive policies and has
adopted a national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) that prioritizes the enhancement
of training and career-development possibilities for
women, with a View to increasing their participation in
peacebuilding activities.

The civilian population of Nagorno Karabakh and
the bordering regions of Armenia have been constantly
exposed to serious humanitarian risks. Azerbaijan's
attempted aggression against Nagorno Karabakh in
April 2016 was accompanied by grave violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
including barbaric acts rising to the level of war crimes
and crimes against humanity, such as beheadings,
mutilations and other atrocity crimes. Attacks and
indiscriminate shelling, including of a school building,
inflicted losses on our civilian populations, including
children and the elderly.

The international community should resolutely
condemn any pursuit of military solutions to conflict
situations. We reject any alternative to a peaceful
settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict. The
ceasefire agreements of 1994 and 1995 signed
by Nagorno Karabakh, Azerbaijan and Armenia
constitute the foundation of the cessation of hostilities.
Armenia urges Azerbaijan to undertake genuine
steps to create conditions conducive to advancing the
peace process. Azerbaijan should bring an end to its
persistent warmongering and cultivation of hatred and
intolerance against Armenians and instead invest real
efforts in promoting a culture of peace and respect for
human rights.

The effective utilization of the capacity of the
regional dimension in the prevention and resolution of
conflict is ofthe utmost importance. Armenia welcomes
the support of the international community, the United
Nations and the Secretary-General for the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe Minsk Group
co-chairmanship towards the peaceful resolution of the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict.

Protecting civilians in armed conflicts is closely
linked to the prevention of mass atrocities, including the
crime of genocide. To be effective in our determination
to protect, a primary role should be given to early
action on warning signs of deteriorating situations that
can potentially result in conflicts, atrocities and human
suffering. As is well known, crises, atrocities and
genocides do not occur overnight; they are detectable
and predictable. The denial of past crimes, impunity
and discrimination and the prevalence of hate speech
are among the precipitating factors leading to massive
crimes and conflict and represent explicit and detectable
early-warning signs. We are of the view that the Joint
Office of the Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect has a
prominent function in detecting such risks. The United
Nations system should do more to engage affected
populations, including women and girls, and support
entities that amplify their voices.

