The President (interpretation from French): As this
is the first meeting of the Security Council for the month
of July, I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute,
on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Nabil
Elaraby, Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security Council
for the month of June. I am sure I speak for all members
of the Security Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Elaraby for the great skill with which he
conducted the Council's business last month. I am quite
certain that Ambassador Awaad will convey this very
sincere and unanimous tribute of the Council to
Ambassador Elaraby, and I take this opportunity to thank
the entire Egyptian delegation for the way in which it
supported its Ambassador during his presidency of the
Council in June.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Croatia

Further report on the situation of human rights in
Croatia pursuant to Security Council resolution
1019 (1995) (S/1996/456)

The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Croatia, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nobilo

(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
further report on the situation of human rights in Croatia
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1019 (1995),
document S/ 1996/456.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the
further report of the Secretary-General of 21 June
1996 (S/ 1996/456) submitted pursuant to its
resolution 1019 (1995) on Croatia.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned at
the failure by the Croatian Government to take
sufficient measures to safeguard the rights of the
local Serb population and to ensure their safety and
well-being. The Council is also deeply concerned at
the Croatian Government's failure to promote
conditions, including satisfactory procedures,
facilitating the return of all Croatian Serbs who wish
to do so. The Council strongly deplores such failure
to act.

"The Security Council notes that the Croatian
Government has begun to cooperate with
international human rights mechanisms, and that it
has considered various initiatives for the protection
of minority rights. Nevertheless the Council
underlines that the Croatian Government must
undertake determined and sustained efforts to ensure
respect for and protection of the rights of Croatian
Serbs and to provide for their safeguarding in the
legal and constitutional framework of the Republic
of Croatia, including by the reactivation of the
relevant articles of its Constitutional Law. The
Council reminds the Croatian Government that its
obligation to promote respect for and protection of
such rights cannot be made conditional upon other
factors, including upon political negotiations with the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

 

"The Security Council expects the Croatian
Government to take steps forthwith to comply with the
demands contained in its resolution 1019 (1995) and
in its statements of 8 January 1996 (S/PRST/ 1996/2),
23 February 1996 (S/PRST/1996/8) and 22 May 1996
(S/PRST/ 1996/26).

"The Security Council reiterates that all States
must cooperate fully with the International Tribunal
and its organs established pursuant to its resolution
827 (1993). It notes the cooperation by the Croatian
Government with the International Tribunal to date,
and reminds the Croatian Government of its obligation
to execute arrest warrants in respect of any person in
its territory indicted by the Tribunal. The Council calls
upon the Croatian Government, with due respect to the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to use its
influence with the Bosnian Croat leadership to
ensure their cooperation with the Tribunal.

"The Security Council will continue to follow
this issue closely. It requests the Secretary-General
to keep it regularly informed on measures
undertaken by the Croatian Government in the light
of this statement, and to report in any case no later
than 1 September 1996."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1996/29.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.05 pm.

