Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Mali welcomes the convening ofthis open
debate by the presidency of Cote d'Ivoire on the role
of States, regional agreements and the United Nations
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts. I hardly
need to point out the relevance and acutely topical
nature of this matter, especially for African countries,
including Mali.

I thank the Secretary-General, the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the President
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Commission for their very informative
briefings this morning.

No country better encapsulates the relevance of
this topic than C6te d'Ivoire. Indeed, we deeply admire
the continued leadership, vision and appropriate
measures undertaken by President Alassane Ouattara
to bring lasting stability and genuine reconciliation
to our neighbour Cote d'Ivoire after years of crisis,
the resolution of which required the crucial support
of ECOWAS, the African Union and, notably, the
United Nations.

I am aware that each crisis situation is unique, but I
remain convinced that Cote d'Ivoire's model - I should
say the country's success story, to use the expression
President Ouattara used yesterday (see S/PV.8413) - is
certainly a great source of inspiration for many countries
seeking to emerge from crisis and instability. That is
the essence of the regular high-level contact between
Mali and cote d'Ivoire.

For its part, Mali is resolutely committed to
resolving the crisis that has affected it since 2012. To that
end, under the authority of President Ibrahim Boubacar
Keita, the Government is working to strengthen State
institutions and enhance the legitimacy of the State in
the eyes of the population. We are also working to bring
the State closer to its citizens by improving governance
in all areas, at both the national and local levels, in
order to better address the concerns of our population,
including with the provision of basic social services.
Moreover, we have always fostered inclusive dialogue
and regular consultation as a means of settling national
problems, with a sustained focus on economic and
social recovery, which includes creating employment
opportunities, particularly for young people, and
income-generating activities for the population, placing
women and children at the heart of those policies.

For that reason, and to achieve a lasting resolution
to the multidimensional crisis afflicting our country,
the Government and other signatories are resolutely
working towards the prompt implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
emanating from the Algiers process. It must be recalled
that the Agreement contains relevant provisions for the
political and institutional realms, those of defence and
security, as well as for the economy and the areas of
social development and national reconciliation. I remain
convinced that the agreement, if fully implemented,
will guarantee sustainable stability in Mali and beyond.

As part of the implementation of the agreement,
Mali welcomes the active solidarity of several friendly
countries and subregional and regional organizations,
including the African Union, ECOWAS, the Group of
Five for the Sahel and the United Nations.

1 will conclude by saying that Mali fully supports
the work undertaken by the three African members of
the Security Council on a draft resolution for financing
peacekeeping operations in Africa.

