Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I join others
in thanking Mr. Mladenov for his precise briefing and
dedicated work. Listening to him, we can draw one sole
conclusion - we cannot allow the peace process to be
put on the back burner.

I align myself with the statement to be made later
by the observer of the European Union.

I will focus on three important aspects of the
situation in the Middle East: first, the tragedy and lack
of de-escalation in Gaza; secondly, the overall peace
process and the importance of resolutions 2334 (2016)
and 478 (1980); and thirdly, the upcoming elections
in Lebanon.

On my first point, Gaza, on 30 March we convened
an urgent meeting here in the Council (see PV.8219).
It took place as the first demonstration in Gaza ended
in tragedy. I concluded my statement with a call on
all sides to prevent further escalation. Otherwise, we
would have the same debate the next month. Today
is the next month. We regret to note that all involved
have continued stubbornly on the track they chose then,
despite the calls for de-escalation and for the prevention
of further losses oflife. I trust that all Members feel the
same way and would welcome a joint statement in that
vein from the Council. The sad score after four weeks
of protests is more than 30 people killed, including four
minors and thousands of injuries.

We repeat our call on Israel to ensure that its
responses are proportionate and necessary at all times,
in line with Israel's obligations under international law.
The use of live ammunition should be a measure of last
resort only, as stated in the Basic Principles on the Use
of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials.
The high number of victims, including paramedics, and
the death of the journalist Yaser Murtaja raise serious
questions regarding the proportionality of the Israeli
response. That includes the respect for the right to
peaceful protest. Facts must be established regarding
reports about violent attacks against Israel under the
cover of the protests.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands calls upon the de
facto authorities in Gaza and the Palestinian Authority
to do everything possible to ensure that protests
remain peaceful. We call upon all sides to refrain from
making inciting statements. We repeat the call for an
independent, transparent investigation. We note the
fact-finding assessment mechanism established by the
Israel Defence Forces (IDF) to review IDF actions and
specific incidents that have taken place since 30 March.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands will be following its
work closely.

The growing crisis in Gaza requires a solution.
Economic development, humanitarian aid and the
rebuilding of infrastructure need to go hand in hand.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands is concerned about
the difficult financial situation of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) and welcomes the additional
contributions that were announced. We will continue to
support UNRWA in its efforts to improve its financial
stability and broaden its international support.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands calls upon Israel
to ease restrictions on the movement of goods and
people, while safeguarding its security needs. We call
upon Hamas to end its efforts to rearm and rebuild its
military infrastructure.

We support the efforts to reunite Gaza and the
West Bank under one single and legitimate Palestinian
Authority. The attack on Prime Minister Hamdallah
further complicated the already difficult process
of reconciliation. That negative course needs to be
reversed. All Palestinian factions must work genuinely
together to overcome the current stalemate and we
welcome the ongoing efforts by Egypt and Mr. Mladenov
in that regard.

With regard to my second point, the peace
process, we cannot afford to put it on the back burner.
International law, including humanitarian law and
human rights law, provides a cornerstone for peace and
security in the region. In that connection, the Kingdom
of the Netherlands recalls the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 2334
(2016) and 478 (1980). Those resolutions and the well-
known parameters clearly lay out the framework for a
sustainable solution to the conflict. In the end, only the
parties can come to an agreement on all final-status
issues, including Jerusalem and refugees. We underline
the need to refrain from unilateral steps that make a
two-State solution more difficult.

On my third point, Lebanon, on 6 May Lebanon
will hold parliamentary elections for the first time since
2009. We look forward to that memorable occasion.
Provided the elections are properly executed, they
will reinvigorate public trust in Lebanon's democratic
institutions. Above all, the elections provide an
opportunity to reinforce the positive momentum of the
Rome, Paris and Brussels conferences. We encourage
all Lebanese to cast their vote, and we hope that the
elections will be an expression of peaceful competition
and democracy in action.

