Mr. Flynn (Ireland): Mr. President, I wish to thank you for having organized this important debate. Ireland congratulates Viet Nam on its election to the Council and for successfully meeting the challenge of chairing the Council during its first month. I also congratulate the other new members of the Council and wish them well. Ireland also expresses its gratitude to the Secretary- General and the Chair of The Elders for their valuable briefings yesterday. We strongly echo their support for multilateral approaches to current challenges, and we in particular commend Mary Robinson's highlighting of the dangers posed to international peace and security by climate change and nuclear proliferation. Mr. President, your Deputy Prime Minister, who presided over the Council yesterday, said in the General Assembly last September (see A/74/PV.11) that given today's daunting challenges, it is critical that we all work together to revitalize multilateralism and strengthen the United Nations and that we must all reaffirm the fundamental importance of international law and the United Nations Charter. In very similar terms, the President of Ireland, Michael D. Higgins, in his General Assembly address (see A/74/PV.6), said that we, the Members, must ask ourselves whether we are being true to the values and principles of the United Nations Charter. He noted that the United Nations and its agencies are under attack through underfunding, withdrawal of support and the promotion of narrow self-interest. Even more fundamentally, he observed, the very idea of a rules-based order is being called into question and undermined. In such circumstances, President Higgins called on all of us to recognize our collective responsibilities and to advocate for multilateralism. He stated that partnership, cooperation, mutual trust and respect are at the heart of multilateralism. They are embedded in the rule of law and in values that aim to protect all individuals on this planet and their rights, aspirations and dignity. Indeed, at this current time of heightened global tension, Ireland urges all to heed the Secretary- General's call for de-escalation, and we reiterate the importance of the United Nations and the primary role of the Council in preventing and resolving conflict. The promise of the Charter of the United Nations, when it was agreed 75 years ago as the world emerged from the devastation of the Second World War, was precisely to save humankind from the scourge of war. We have made significant progress in this regard, including due to the establishment of peacekeeping operations in 1948. Ireland has been proud to participate in these operations for more than 60 years, and we pay tribute here today to the more than 3,000 uniformed personnel from 120 countries, including Ireland, who have lost their lives in this service. The Security Council has also responded to the greater complexity of conflicts and crises by adapting its response, not only through the evolution of peacekeeping but also through the development of peacebuilding mandates and the establishment of political missions, with humanitarian actions and through the good offices of the Secretary-General and his representatives. We have also seen the United Nations take important steps to uphold the values and advance the vision set out in the Charter. The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change showed the capacity of the international community to put its faith in multilateralism and chart a course towards the common good. It is clearer to us today than ever before that peace and security, development and human rights - the pillars of the United Nations - are intrinsically linked. Mary Robinson has repeatedly pointed out how climate change affects security, as she did again so powerfully here in this Chamber yesterday. Hunger, the issue of access to natural resources and the denial of human rights are also major factors. The Security Council at present is, frankly, failing to meet its responsibilities. It is divided on many issues, with some permanent members repeatedly vetoing draft resolutions. The situation with regard to the provision of cross-border humanitarian relief in Syria is just the latest example. Ireland expresses its support in particular for the efforts of the elected members to overcome these divisions and pledges to work towards this if we are elected to the Council for the 2021-2022 term. Multilateralism is based on the principle of compromise, of shared vision, of finding the capacity to put ourselves in the language, thoughts, culture and concerns of each other. It allows the large and small, the powerful and weak, to coexist in shared concern and joint prospect for the betterment of a shared world. We know that common challenges call for common responses so that the United Nations can best serve the peoples in the enduring spirit of the Charter. In this, the seventy-fifth year of the Charter, we should spare nothing in the quest to achieve those goals.
