Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, we would like
to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres,
for his important briefing today. I would also like to
take this opportunity to thank him for his personal
commitment and his resolute action on this front.

The increase in food insecurity and the risk of
famine in Yemen, South Sudan, Somalia and north-
eastern Nigeria is worrying not only because the lives
of more than 30 million people are at risk, according to
figures from the Food and Agriculture Organization,
but also because that humanitarian crisis is the result
in great part of ongoing armed conflicts and human-
generated violence, the consequences of which have an
impact on the lives and rights of millions trapped in the
middle of those conflicts.

Tragically, the number of victims and other people
who have left their homes and livelihoods in droves to
escape violence has given rise to an alarming number
of forcibly displaced persons - more than 65 million
around the world, according to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. That constant
flow of the forcibly displaced has clearly resulted in
a cessation of agricultural and productive activities
on the one hand, affecting sustainable basic food
supplies, and, on the other, severe restrictions on those
supplies, producing skyrocketing prices of foodstuffs
in local markets. In several cases, the situation has been
aggravated by the fact that the parties to the conflicts
impose restrictions on the transit routes, ports and
airports where imported food as well as other forms of
humanitarian assistance enter those countries to meet
the needs of the population.

Climate change is also clearly a determining factor
that negatively affects the capacities of countries in
crisis to combat food insecurity. However, as has already
been said today, food insecurity is exacerbated by the
cross-cutting instability that conflicts bring, thereby
contributing to a spiral that prolongs that instability.

We must also bear in mind that the high
humanitarian costs of such conflicts go hand in hand
with the politics of war and enormous expenditures
on armaments for conflicts, to the detriment of the
well-being of the people. They perpetuate the cycle of
poverty, need and confrontation. That is immoral and
intolerable. If there is starvation, it is not because there
is a lack of food but because of a lack of political will
on the part of the parties concerned when it comes to
resolving their differences. To that end, we urge the
Council, and Member States in general, to maintain
a firm, unanimous position with regard to the crises
in the four countries under discussion that have led
to damaging instability affecting the lives of millions
of innocent people. We also call on the parties to
the conflicts to ensure the security and integrity of
humanitarian facilities and personnel, which must
never be seen as military targets for any reason. The
principles of international humanitarian law must be
upheld at all times.

We believe that the multiple and complex causes
of humanitarian crises in the three countries under
discussion and in north-eastern Nigeria call for a
comprehensive, coordinated and sustained response
from the international community. We must take
preventive measures on the basis of early warnings
issued by the Secretary-General, as such crises have
humanitarian consequences and can lead to famine.
We must also strengthen the global information and
early-warning system for food and agriculture of the
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAQ) in order to
develop preventive measures and create resilience so
that such crises can be handled better. In that regard,
we support the initiatives of the Secretary-General to
address the obstacles that are impeding the efforts to
counter famine in Yemen, South Sudan, Somalia and
north-east Nigeria.

In conclusion, we believe that the joint efforts
of the international community and the coordinated
work of United Nations agencies such as the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
FAO, among others, are vital to alleviating the fragile
humanitarian situation in those countries. We would
also like to take this opportunity to express our support
and pay tribute to all humanitarian workers, who often
risk their own lives in order to help others.

