The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing. The United
Kingdom is deeply alarmed by the escalation of
Russian military intervention in eastern Ukraine over
the past 72 hours. Formed units of the armed forces
of the Russian Federation are now directly engaged
in fighting inside Ukraine against the armed forces of
Ukraine. Those units consist of well over 1,000 regular
Russian troops equipped with armoured vehicles,
artillery and air defence systems. That incursion is a
clear violation of sovereign Ukrainian territory by the
Russian Federation. It is a clear breach of international
law and a contravention of the Charter of the United
Nations.

Russian denials of that reality fit into the pattern of
Russia's dishonest approach to Ukraine from the very
beginning of the crisis. We all remember that Russia
denied that it had any extra military personnel on the
ground in Crimea right up until its illegal annexation
with military force. Russia has denied providing
military support to the separatists. In fact, Russia has
been transferring significant quantities of advanced
weapons, including tanks, armoured personnel carriers
and artillery, to separatist groups for several months.
As of today, the separatists' arsenal includes up to 100
main battle tanks, 80 armoured personnel carriers,
100 man-portable air defence systems, 500 anti-tank
weapons and more than 100 artillery pieces. Almost all
of those have been directly supplied by Russia since the
conflict started.

In the past three weeks, that support has increased
significantly, no doubt in response to Ukraine's success
in liberating territory from the separatists. On 7 August,
50 vehicles, including tanks, armoured personnel
carriers and BM-2l Grad multiple rocket launchers,
crossed from Russia into Ukraine at the Chervono
Partizansk border crossing. On 15 August, a convoy
of 23 armoured personnel carriers crossed close to
where the Russian humanitarian convoy was awaiting
customs clearance. The following day, a further
convoy of 84 military vehicles crossed the border.
The evidence is overwhelming, and plenty of it comes
from the Russian military itself. On 13 July, armoured
vehicles flying Russian flags were photographed by a
Russian serviceman crossing the Ukrainian border at
Izvaryne, Donetsk. On 31 July, a Russian soldier posted
photographs of himself operating military hardware
inside Ukraine. His photographs included images of
himself inside an SA-ll missile launch system - the
very weapon that appears to have been used to shoot
down Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17.

Russia has also denied that it has shelled Ukrainian
territory. In fact, over just five days, between 14 and
19 August, Ukrainian armed forces were fired upon
from positions inside Russian territory on at least 21
separate occasions, with weapons systems ranging
from heavy mortars to Grad rockets. Now we see
irrefutable evidence of regular Russian forces operating
inside Ukraine. For some months, Russia has deployed
small groups of its special forces operating under the
command of the main intelligence directorate of the
Russian armed forces in support of the separatists.
Those forces have been responsible for coordinating
attacks and facilitating communications and transfers
of equipment and personnel. Their presence is clear
from their communications. Over a single 24-hour
period from 29 to 30 July alone, there were 45 separate
instances ofRussian secure military radio transmissions
originating from inside Ukrainian territory.

Today, NATO has released satellite imagery, taken
on 21 and 23 August, of Russian self-propelled artillery
units inside Ukraine in the vicinity of Krasnodon,
Luhansk province. On Monday, 10 Russian paratroopers
belonging to the 331st Regiment of the 98th Svirsk
Airborne Division were captured near the village of
Dzerkalne, 20 kilometres inside Ukrainian territory.
We have satellite imagery confirming the deployment
of Russian armoured vehicles supported by artillery
south of Donetsk close to that location. Today, another
Russian soldier, Petr Khokhlov, serving with the 9th
Motor Rifle Brigade, was captured in Luhansk.

It is simply not credible for Russia and its proxies
in Donetsk and Luhansk to keep claiming that those
serving members of the Russian armed forces are in
Ukraine by accident or on holiday. Nor is it credible
for Russia to continue claiming to the whole world,
including to the Russian people, that Russian soldiers
are not present on Ukrainian territory. The increasing
number of Russian casualties and captured soldiers
gives the lie to that. Russia can no longer pretend that
it is not a direct party to this conflict. Indeed, this
conflict would no longer exist without direct Russian
military involvement in support of the separatists.

President Putin has said that Russia is willing to
find a peaceful solution to the conflict. Those words
have little value against this clear pattern of escalating
Russian military involvement in eastern Ukraine.
Violating international law and the Charter of the United
Nations in such a brazen manner is not compatible
with Russia's responsibilities as a permanent member
of the Security Council. We again call on Russia to
immediately withdraw its military forces from Ukraine,
stop its flow of weapons to the separatists and instead
help to secure a political solution to the crisis.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.

