Ms. Lind (Estonia) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the French presidency for having organized
today's open debate.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to thank the briefers for their
statements earlier today.

Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.

The focus of this debate on non-State armed
groups is particularly pertinent, since, as the concept
note annexed to the letter by the French presidency
(S/2015/168, annex) reveals, the overwhelming majority
of the parties - 51 out of 59 - listed in the annex to
the Secretary-General's 2014 report on children and
armed conflict (S/2014/339) are non-State actors.

We have seen progress with regard to national
security forces. Thousands of children have been
released as a result of action plans mandated by the
Security Council. We thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui
and UNICEF for their enormous work, most recently
through the "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign.

We believe that the main measures that need to
be taken with non-State armed groups are similar to
those used when working with national security forces,
namely, to focus on prevention, action plans and ending
impunity for the crimes committed.

We all know that education is one of the key
elements for prevention. It is therefore important to
guarantee education for children, even in times of
crisis. During emergencies, children in schools can be
cared for, accounted for and protected from abduction,
recruitment and sexual and economic exploitation.
Schools should be for children and should never and
under no condition be used for military purposes.

Let me express our appreciation to UNICEF for
providing education to children in humanitarian crises.
Estonia has recently supported UNICEF's work in
South Sudan, the Central African Republic, Gaza,
Syria and Somalia.

We urge all armed non-State actors listed in the
annex to the latest Secretary-General's report on children
and armed conflict to adopt and implement action plans
committing themselves to end grave violations against
children, and we call on the Secretary-General and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Children and Armed Conflict to develop strategies
for outreach to armed non-State actors. We also urge
concerned Governments to facilitate and support the
engagement ofnon-State armed groups with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNICEF.

We see impunity as clearly being one of the main
reasons for the recurrence of such grave violations
against children. It is only by consistent prosecution
that we can deter the commission of such crimes.
To that end, we reiterate the important role of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in situations where
States are unable or unwilling to bring perpetrators to
justice domestically.

Furthermore, we also believe that the international
community should assist in strengthening national
judicial capacities so as to ensure accountability,
including through the development of legislation
criminalizing violations against children. Estonia
allocates development cooperation resources to assist
countries requesting help in the domestic prosecution
of Rome Statute crimes, and we encourage others to do
the same.

The Council itself has on numerous occasions
acknowledged that the fight against impunity for
atrocious crimes, including against children, has been
strengthened through the work ofthe ICC. To make good
on its commitment to deal effectively with persistent
perpetrators, the Council could increase pressure on
them by including violations against children in the
mandates of all sanctions committees and by improving
the exchange of information between the Council,
the sanctions committees and the ICC to include the
individuals sought by the ICC on the sanctions lists.

The recruitment and use of children in armed forces
and groups is a grave Violation of international law. We
categorically condemn the barbaric acts committed on
a large scale by violent extremists. We are appalled by
the mass abductions of children by non-State armed
groups, be it by Boko Haram in Nigeria or by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham in Syria or Iraq. We
call for the immediate release of all abducted children
without delay.

In that connection, we call on the Security Council
to introduce the abduction of children as an additional
criterion in the annexes to the Secretary-General's
reports on children and armed conflict.

