Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): Let
me start by congratulating you, Mr. President, and
your team on assuming the presidency of the Council
for the month of December. You can count on my full
support and that of my entire delegation. I would also
like to thank the Chinese delegation for its professional
steering of the work of the Council during the month of
November.

I would also like to echo the delegation of the
United Kingdom in offering our condolences for the
passing of the former President of the United States
George H.W. Bush.

I would like to thank Special Adviser Khan for
his very informative briefing and welcome him as he
addresses the Council for the first time.

Please allow me to focus on three aspects today:
first, supporting the work of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant; secondly, protecting and supporting
survivors and victims; and thirdly, accountability.

First, we welcome the commencement of the work
by Mr. Khan and his team and we have looked forward to
this discussion and support the priorities as formulated
in his first report (S/2018/1031). My Government feels
strongly about the need for accountability for atrocity

crimes committed by Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS). These are crimes that may amount to
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide, as
mentioned by Mr. Khan in his briefing. We recognize
that his investigations are starting in 2019 and that the
task that lies ahead of him and the Iraqi Government
is a vast one. Its continued support and cooperation
are of course paramount, especially in a challenging
security context. We expect that the Investigative Team
will establish an effective working relationship with
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq that is
characterized by complementarity.

The Council adopted resolution 2379 (2017)
unanimously, which is worth noting. Let me reiterate
that Mr. Khan has the continued and full support of the
Kingdom of Netherlands to end impunity for atrocity
crimes committed by ISIS. That is why my Government
announced that it would contribute financially to
support the Investigative Team. We call on others that
have not yet done so to follow suit.

Secondly, I want to speak about protecting and
supporting survivors and victims. A week from today,
Nadia Murad will receive her Nobel Peace Prize in
Oslo - a recognition of her activism, which has shed
light on some of the most terrible crimes imaginable.
She has given a voice to survivors of sexual and
gender-based violence, the Yazidi community and other
Iraqi victims.

Mr. Khan has written that survivors and victims
should be at the centre of the work of the Investigative
Team. We could not agree more and are happy to
see our pledge be used for specialized psychological
support and assistance to witnesses and victims. As
the Investigative Team becomes fully operational in
2019, its ability to build relationships with affected
communities - especially women - will be crucial.
Inclusive communication with and towards communities
is an important aspect of its work.

We count on the Team to secure, collect and
preserve evidence in line with international standards;
to protect witnesses brave enough to speak up and
ensure the broadest use of the evidence collected; to
give information to families that are missing loved
ones; and, finally, to help demonstrate the extent of the
atrocities committed by ISIS and its vile ideology so
that it does not create new Victims.

Thirdly, I have spoken about the need for
accountability for individuals and communities alike.
The work of the Investigative Team and the Iraqi
Government is crucial to documenting and laying bare
the despicable ideology and practice of ISIS and give
it its rightful place in history going forward, and to
helping to further reduce its appeal across the world.
After all, the actions of ISIS in Iraq led to the gravest
kind of crimes. In this light, we look forward to Iraq's
implementation of international crimes into national
legislation. This would be a significant and very
positive development. In order to achieve justice and
eventually reconciliation, it is our understanding that
evidence gathered by the Investigative Team should be
used only in prosecutions that comply with the highest
international legal standards, and that no capital
punishment will be applied.

In closing, I want to wish Special Adviser Khan
and his team the best of luck with the valuable and
substantial tasks that lie ahead of them.
