Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Thank you for
convening the debate today, and of course, for
Portugal's own very strong commitment to the
protection of civilians agenda, which is intrinsic to
both the purpose and the identity of the United
Nations.

In the interest of time, as you have requested,
Mr. President, I will abbreviate my spoken comments.
I of course endorse the statement that has just
been delivered by the representative of Switzerland on
behalf of the Group of Friends.

Obviously, justice is best achieved at the national
level, as I think everybody in the debate has recognized
so far. Individual States must fulfil their own
responsibilities to investigate and prosecute those
responsible for serious international crimes.

The international community's role must be to
assist States to do that, especially by working to
enhance the capacity of national rule of law
institutions. Strengthening security and judicial
institutions - the entire system, and not just the
capacity to investigate and prosecute - is not only key
to accountability and deterrence; as highlighted in the
World Bank's World Development Report 2011, it is
also critical to breaking cycles of violence and
instability. United Nations peacekeeping and special
political missions themselves can play a very key role
in strengthening local capacities.

Fostering accountability in a State is not just
about institutions. It is also about communities and
about building community engagement in the rule of
law. That strengthens local ownership and supports a
culture of long-term protection. Communities need to
be aware of mechanisms available to them, and victims
need to be aware of their rights. Equally important is
ensuring that community views and concerns are fed
into the process. Experience has shown that listening to
communities strengthens the effectiveness of rule of
law work. That has been Australia's own experience in
recent peacekeeping missions we have led in Solomon
Islands and Timor-Leste.

Unfortunately, as we know, there are cases in
which States are unwilling or unable to act. In such
cases, the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
ad-hoc international courts and tribunals have a vital
role to play. The challenge for ad-hoc international
tribunals is to ensure that they leave a real legacy of
strengthened national legal capacity behind them.
Appropriate action must be informed by the facts. The
Secretary-General has recommended, and we agree,
that the Council should systematically request reports
on violations and consider mandating commissions of
inquiry to examine alleged violations.

While we tend to focus on fact-finding
mechanisms deployed during or after a conflict, it is
also important for the Council to consider requesting
such mechanisms in emerging situations of concern, to
complement other prevention tools. It is important to
maximize the speed with which they can deploy. In that
regard, the following three aspects are crucial.

The first is deployable expertise. We hope that
the follow up to the review of civilian capacities will
play an important role in this respect.

The second aspect concerns methodology. While
fact-finding mechanisms need to be situation-specific
and have sufficient flexibility, more work could be
done to standardize fact-finding methods, particularly
in relation to empirical research and field investigation.

Finally, the inevitable issue is that of resources.
Proper financing is obviously key to speed of
deployment, as well as to effectiveness and
independence. It is important that the results of fact-
finding missions are properly considered and followed
up, including, if appropriate, by referral to the ICC.

In conclusion, it is paramount that the Council act
when there is clear evidence of violations of
international law. Victims and affected communities
must be confident that when their own State fails in its
responsibilities, because it is either unwilling or
unable, the Council will act as guardian of their
interests, wherever they happen to live. The Council's
unanimous referral of the situation in Libya to the ICC
signalled a recognition of its important role in ensuring
accountability for serious violations.

Finally, Australia recognizes that in our
lifetime - indeed, over the past 10 years - there have
been great strides in relation to individual
accountability: the establishment of ad-hoc tribunals,
the establishment of the ICC and the recognition by
States of the duty to investigate and prosecute crimes
occurring in their territory. But we still have a very
long way to go. Only by establishing accountability as
the norm and not the exception will we be able to fulfil
the promise of the rule of law.

