Mr. Kim Bonghyun (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, let me thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
an open debate on this important issue. I would also
like to commend the work of the Security Council and
its Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict to
end violations against children and protect their rights.
My delegation takes special note of the adoption of
resolution 1882 (2009) and would also like to
commend Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Special
Representative Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy for their
dedication to alleviating the plight of children in armed
conflict around the world.

The Republic of Korea welcomes the
implementation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism on children and armed conflict, established
by the Council in its resolution 1612 (2005), as
indicated in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/181). In 2009, specific achievements were
made with the action plans to end the recruitment of
child soldiers and to secure their release from armed
forces and groups signed between the United Nations
and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, the Sudan
People's Liberation Army, and the Government of
Nepal and the Unified Communist Party of Nepal-
Maoist.

We are particularly pleased to note some
significant developments in other areas, such as the
release of children through the formal process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR).
During the reporting period, DDR efforts saw
particular success in Burundi, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Sudan. Such programmes should
be expanded wherever possible.

However, despite that progress, we remain
concerned about the continued plight of children
affected by armed conflict. There is still nearly
unhindered impunity for grave crimes perpetrated
against children in many countries covered in the
report. While we note some of the steps in the right
direction, including the investigations, arrests, trials
and prosecutions that Governments have committed to,
the issue of impunity continues to prevail. Thus, the
total number of prosecutions of parties listed in the
annexes of the Secretary-General's reports remains
much too small at this juncture.

The Council must stand resolute and apply
robust, targeted measures to confront those persistent
perpetrators. In that connection, my delegation
supports the Secretary-General's recommendation to
consider including child recruitment and use in the
mandate of all the Council's sanctions committees,
including those that deal with counter-terrorism.
Incorporating more expertise on child protection in the
Council's sanctions committee expert groups and
scaling up reporting on violations against children
would be steps in the right direction.

In addition to child recruitment, many persistent
violators have been responsible for committing other
grave violations against children, such as rape and
sexual violence. In that connection, we welcome the
listing of parties that commit rape and sexual violence
against children in annex II of the Secretary-General's
report, pursuant to resolution 1882 (2009). However,
the limited time allowed for country task forces to
prepare the relevant information resulted in a more
conservative list than necessary, as reflected by the low
number of reported incidents of sexual violence. We
look forward to future lists reflecting the depth and
extent of practices on the ground in a more
comprehensive way through the elaboration of
effective measures to collect and verify information on
sexual violence.

My delegation welcomes the progress made in the
mainstreaming of child protection in United Nations
peacekeeping and political missions. The work of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
the Department of Political Affairs in developing
policy directives and guidance is notable. The full
coordination of all relevant bodies, including the
Security Council, the Office of the Secretary-General,
DPKO, political missions and humanitarian agencies,
such as UNICEF, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and various
non-governmental organizations, is needed. We
encourage the further integration of children's concerns
into all mission planning instruments and processes,
including through the deployment of child protection
advisers to all relevant missions.

The Republic of Korea would also like to
encourage all Member States to implement the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocols and to continue to abide by applicable
international law, while striving to protect children's
rights. Moreover, my delegation would like to reaffirm
our full support for the continued work of the
International Criminal Court in the fight against
impunity.

We hope that today's open debate on children and
armed conflict will pave the way for more meaningful
deliberations in the Security Council. Ensuring the
security and the rights of the next generation is
tantamount to fulfilling the mandate of the Council and
the wider Organization. The Council can count on my
delegation's commitment to that end. We look forward
to a strong presidential statement on this consequential
issue.

