Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for holding this important debate
today and for having come to New York to lend
your personal weight to this important issue. Let
me also warmly thank the Secretary-General, High
Commissioner Pillay and the Director for International
Law and Cooperation of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, Mr. Spoerri, for their valuable briefings.

Civilians continue to account for the vast majority
ofcasualties in armed conflict. That suffering must stop.
The protection of civilians is a pressing responsibility
that must be discharged and that requires action during
armed conflict and in peacetime, and at all stages in
between. States bear the primary responsibility to
protect civilians, and must act strictly in accordance
with their legal obligations and their moral duties. In
addition, we, the United Nations, must provide the
appropriate political, humanitarian and development
support necessary to protect civilians.

Civilians in situations of armed conflict suffer
in a multitude of ways, including through deliberate
targeting, sexual and gender-based violence and
displacement. We must address them all at all stages of
the conflict cycle. The international community cannot
be a passive bystander and idle witness in the face of
gross violations against civilians. It is deeply regrettable
that, since our last debate on this subject, in June oflast
year (see S/PV.6790), there has been limited progress in
addressing certain situations of grave concern.

In particular, we remain appalled by the
deteriorating situation in Syria. Since June, the crisis
has intensified. The depth of suffering of the Syrian
people is truly dreadful and worsening daily. More
than 60,000 Syrians are now believed to have died, and
more than 700,000 have taken refuge in neighbouring
countries. Our objective is clear, that is, we want an
end to the Violence and a process of genuine political
transition, and we want to see the Security Council
apply its collective weight towards those objectives.
That is not just our View; it is the View of the Arab
League and the vast majority of States Members of the
United Nations. We deeply regret that there is still no
end in sight and that the international community has
been unable to address the situation.

The impact of conflict on civilians around the
world remains unacceptably high. The sad truth is that
the perpetrators of appalling, life-shattering crimes
still tend to go unpunished. Without accountability
there is a culture of impunity for which ordinary people
pay the price. Ensuring accountability for the most
serious crimes ofinternational concern lies at the heart
of protecting civilians and is key to delivering global
justice. The International Criminal Court is an essential
tool in promoting and ensuring such accountability.
The United Kingdom also stresses the importance
of international commissions of inquiry and fact-
finding missions to verify and investigate allegations
of serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law. The Security Council must support
such mechanisms. Justice must be delivered.

In tackling the culture of impunity, the Council
must address the range of crimes committed against
civilians in conflict, including rape. We must overturn
the old assumption that rape is somehow an inevitable
byproduct of conflict, and we must confront it. An
effective response to sexual violence should be built
into every aspect of conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development. The United Kingdom
is already taking action to tackle rape as a weapon
of war and to improve support for survivors through
its initiative on preventing sexual violence. That will
involve deploying teams of experts to assist survivors
and support local capacity in, for example, areas
bordering Syria, Libya, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Mali. We are
also working in close collaboration with the Office of
the United Nations Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict to identify additional countries
where our team of experts can helpfully be deployed.

The disproportionate impact of conflict on
children, who are among the most vulnerable, is
shocking. Children should not grow up in a climate
of fear, Violence and suffering. The United Kingdom
condemns all those who target and recruit children in
armed conflict despite international pressure. Civilians
both inside and outside conflict zones are affected by
conflict; refugees and internally displaced persons
fleeing the violence are confronted with a struggle for
their most basic needs. Humanitarian access is essential
for the protection ofcivilians. We regret that we continue
to see humanitarian access to areas in need blocked
or constrained. The continued denial of humanitarian
access to the states of Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan
in the Sudan has created a crisis resulting in nearly
1 million displaced people. The Council has watched
that situation worsen for far too long. Humanitarian
access must be protected and expanded, particularly in
fragile and conflict-affected States.

The protection of civilians is among the Council's
foremost responsibilities. The lives of many depend
on the vigilance with which we discharge that
responsibility. We must continue to take the steps
necessary to protect civilians, and we must use the
Council's authority to ensure that States shoulder
their primary responsibilities to prevent conflict,
minimize suffering and ensure that cycles of conflict
and pain are not repeated. I welcome the fact that the
Council has united around a strong draft presidential
statement - which will be read out shortly - that
upholds our commitment to the protection of civilians.
We must be guided by the principles and contents of
that statement in the months and years ahead.

