Mr. Miiftiioglu (Turkey): We listened to the
briefing by Assistant Secretary-General Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco with great interest. The Middle
East has always been a conflict-prone area throughout
its history. The region is undergoing a structural
reformulation. The issue is by no means confined to the
region; there are repercussions on a wider scale. It is
time that we, the nations of the world, assume our
individual and collective roles to effectively address
the challenges ahead.

Last week, the Security Council was briefed on
the humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories. That briefing can be interpreted as another
call on the international community to immediately
address the Arab-Israeli conflict. The illegal blockade
of Gaza is still in force. Our memories of Israel's
deadly military operation against a civilian
humanitarian aid campaign on the high seas are still
fresh. We sadly note the increase in settlement
activities and settler violence against Palestinians.
Those remain a major obstacle to the resumption of
direct negotiations between the parties. Furthermore,
they seriously endanger the vision of a two-State
solution.

We therefore call on the Israeli Government to
abide by international law and fulfil its responsibilities
to the international community. In any case, resort to
violence by any party cannot be tolerated as a means to
resolve existing disputes. The cornerstone of a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East is
the settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict. The
Palestinian people must as soon as possible be able to
fully exercise their inalienable rights in accordance
with numerous United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the road map and the Arab Peace Initiative.
An independent Palestine should be recognized, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with
Israel in peace.

Last fall, we welcomed the membership of
Palestine in UNESCO. We also wholeheartedly support
the Palestinian application for United Nations
membership, submitted by President Abbas on
23 September 2011. The international community
should encourage the struggle for the long-overdue and
well-deserved right to statehood of the Palestinian
people.

We welcome the recent meetings between
Palestinian and Israeli representatives in Amman. We
call on both parties to conduct the meetings in good
faith, aiming for concrete advances towards a just and
comprehensive settlement. In the meantime, steps
towards national reconciliation in Palestine are of vital
importance. We praise the efforts of President Abbas
and the Palestinian representatives in that regard. We
call on all members of the international community to
support the process without prejudice.

The Palestinian people will prove that, given
viable circumstances, they are capable of performing as
a promising political and economic entity in the region.
We therefore call on the international community to
strengthen its support for the development,
reconstruction and humanitarian projects in Palestine.
The emergency appeal last week by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East for funding for that noble cause rightfully
deserves our attention.

We wish to highlight yet again that the times
ahead will require us to be even more vigilant. The
Middle East is going through a transition that will have
inevitable repercussions on a wider scale. We should

identify the challenges accurately and set our priorities
correctly. We cannot and should not let the prolonged
dispute divert the path of people in search of a bright
and secure future. The Israeli-Palestinian question is
very critical to that path.

