Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We join others in
thanking Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and the
Director of Operations and Advocacy in the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John
Ging, for their comprehensive and very informative
briefings on the matter before us. Current developments
around Idlib province could easily lead to a deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in the region, together
with further human casualties among civilians.

Recalling that the Russian military forces were
invited by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
to counter terrorism in the country, we believe that will
enable the definitive liberation of the entire territory
of the country, with favourable conditions created for
a political settlement on the basis of resolution 2254
(2015).

We encourage the guarantor States of the Astana
process and other stakeholders to continue consultations
on the search for peaceful ways to liberate Idlib province
from terrorist elements. Separating the terrorist groups
from moderate opposition forces that are ready for
peaceful negotiations with Government forces could be
a way forward, as Staffan de Mistura suggests.

We urge the parties to the conflict not to allow a
humanitarian catastrophe to occur. To let the situation
unravel would be to negate all the good efforts to resolve
the Syrian crisis in the framework of the Geneva talks
and the Astana process.

Kazakhstan supports the intention of Mr. De
Mistura to hold meetings on 10 and 11 September within
the framework of the Astana process, especially as the
situation around Idlib is escalating. We appreciate the
constructive role of the United Nations Special Envoy
in the process of seeking a political settlement in Syria.

We hope that the Tehran summit of the Presidents
of the guarantor States of the Astana process - Russia,
Turkey and Iran - will promote a mutually acceptable
decision to restore confidence between the parties
in conflict, facilitate progress on the humanitarian
situation and invigorate the process towards a
political solution.

We also support the efforts of the guarantor States
of the Astana process to assist Syrians in restoring
unity in the country and achieve a political settlement
of the ongoing conflict through inclusive dialogue. That
can be achieved by supporting a constitution backed by
the Syrian people under appropriate United Nations
supervision. Kazakhstan calls for stepping up joint
efforts aimed at implementing the confidence-building
measures arrived at within the framework of the
Astana process, including the release of detainees and
abductees, the handing over ofbodies, the identification
of missing persons and other arrangements.

We believe that the international community
should direct its joint efforts at creating the conditions
for settling the intra-Syrian conflict by exclusively
peaceful means in order to rebuild this ruined country
and address the complex humanitarian situation. We
must also consider creating appropriate conditions for
the return of Syria's numerous refugees. Kazakhstan
believes that the active restoration of Syria must
continue, regardless of jurisdictions. Kazakhstan is
ready to do its utmost to address all issues related to
regional and global security.

