Mr. Kafeero (Uganda): Thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important debate and for the
concept note that was prepared (S/20l2/83, annex),
which has helped to steer today's discussions. We
thank the Secretary-General for his informative
briefing earlier today.

It gives me great pleasure to be here today to
speak about some of the key challenges facing West
Africa and the Sahel region, especially the problem of
transnational organized crime, which has reached
alarming proportions and has become a matter of
international concern.

Uganda is concerned by the impact of
transnational organized crime on the peace, security
and stability of West Africa and the Sahel region.
Transnational organized crime - especially drug
trafficking, the illicit trafficking of small arms and
money laundering - has reached alarming proportions
and is a greater threat than ever before to international
peace and security. The challenge of combating these
crimes is now more formidable, because the networks
are increasingly using advanced information and
communications technology.

As mentioned in the report of the assessment
mission on the impact of the Libyan crisis on the Sahel
region (see S/2012/42):

"The Libyan crisis further exacerbated an
already precarious security situation in the Sahel
region." (ibid., para. 32)

"Over night, the Governments of the region
had to contend with the impact of the crisis on an
already challenging humanitarian, development
and security situation." (ibia'., para. 64)

West Africa and the Sahel region have proven to
be fertile ground for international trafficking networks,
which have taken advantage of porous borders and
weak law enforcement capacities. Challenges relating
to economic development and unemployment -
especially among young people - together with

poverty, have only served to exacerbate the situation. If
not addressed properly and immediately, the surge in
transnational organized crime could jeopardize
democratic governance in the region, support the
expansion of criminal gangs and terrorist networks and
further threaten peace, security and development across
the entire continent. In our view, those threats require a
comprehensive and integral approach.

Uganda therefore commends and supports the
efforts by the countries in the region and the African
Union, working together, to address these threats. We
are convinced that in order to deal effectively with
these challenges and to have a long-lasting impact,
there is need for a mechanism that brings together all
affected countries and external actors in a coordinated
fashion to discuss issues, but with an emphasis on
devising solutions and implementing them.

It is also essential to strengthen national
institutions and cooperation among Member States
through organizations such as the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). In this
regard, we welcome the support of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the Department of Political
Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
INTERPOL and other partners for the ECOWAS
regional action plan. That partnership is crucial
because it supports national initiatives, which
constitute the pillars of any long-lasting regional
response.

The relevant international conventions, including
the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs and the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocols, also provide a firm
legal framework for international action against
organized crime. What is needed is intensified efforts
to implement the provisions of those conventions by
Member States. The international community's
collective response to organized crime can be more
effective through universal participation in those
instruments.

Finally, the proliferation of transnational
organized crime is a deterrent to investment and has a
negative impact on the economies of afflicted
countries. Those countries will find it difficult to
overcome the combined effect of the impact of the
various threats unless there is sustained vigilance,
information sharing and comprehensive enforcement
measures, with support from the international
community. It is therefore critical that the actions and
responses to counter these threats, at the national,
subregional and regional levels, as well as by the
United Nations system and the wider international
community, be comprehensive and well coordinated.

