Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I, in
turn, would like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sierra Leone for her statement, as well as
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg, Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General for Sierra
Leone, and Ambassador McNee for their very
instructive briefings on the work of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL) and of the Sierra Leone configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission.

The situation in Sierra Leone remains fragile but
is under control. Like the Secretary-General in his
report (S/2009/267), we welcome the fruitful efforts of
President Koroma and the Sierra Leonean political
parties to overcome their differences and to put an end
to the cycle of violence. The signing of the 2 April
joint communique is for us a key step in the
relationship between the ruling All People's Congress
and the Sierra Leone People's Party. That outcome is a
further example of the resolve of the people of Sierra
Leone to continue along the path of peace and
democracy.

We remain seriously concerned by the growing
drug-trafficking in the subregion and by its
destabilizing effect on the most fragile States. In that
regard, France welcomes the progress made by Sierra
Leone to strengthen its fight against that traffic and the
significant subsequent convictions. We would like to
see stronger cooperation in that area. France is ready to
support United Nations action to that end, which could
make good use of the expertise and assistance of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in fighting
drug trafficking in West Africa. Progress has also been
made in strengthening good governance, which is
crucial to the economic and social development of the
country. However, we remain concerned about the
issue of sexual violence.

The international community must remain
mobilized in support of the peacebuilding effort in
Sierra Leone. We welcome the fruitful cooperation of
the Government with the Peacebuilding Commission
and, in that regard, await with interest the outcome of
the special session to be held in two days. We
encourage Sierra Leone's partners to maintain their
commitment to supporting the implementation of
President Koroma's Agenda for Change and of the
United Nations Joint Vision for Sierra Leone, which
identifies the key objectives of the peacebuilding
process. In that regard, we welcome the development
of a range of benchmarks and criteria for the
implementation of that document.

In conclusion, we urge UNIPSIL to continue
along the path of implementing its mandate.

