Mr. Okamura (Japan): Allow me to express my
gratitude to Malaysia for convening this important
meeting. I would like to extend my sincere appreciation
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his comprehensive briefing.
We are grateful to him and his dedicated team for
the laudable work they carry out under difficult
circumstances. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Zahir Tanin of Afghanistan for his statement.

We strongly condemn the attack on the Afghan
Parliament this morning. We reiterate our solidarity
with the people of Afghanistan and express our
heartfelt sympathies to the Victims of that crime and
their families.

When tens of millions of Afghan men and women
took to the polls last year, we knew that Afghanistan's
path to self-reliance would present vast opportunities
and important challenges. As we approach the half-year
mark of Afghanistan's Transformation Decade, we see
signs of both.

The National Unity Government is near completion
and is strengthening economic and political ties with
regional and international partners. On the other
hand, economic growth remains weak. We are also
witnessing an alarming uptick in violence, which has
claimed the lives of a record number of civilians. A
strong and inclusive political leadership is needed to
overcome these security challenges and pave the way
for economic sustainability.

In the light of that situation, we are concerned that
electoral reform has not yet commenced. Furthermore,
it is disconcerting that the schedule of parliamentary
elections, which were to take place before 21 May,
according to the Afghan Constitution, has yet to be
decided on.

Cognizant of the fact that political certainty
underpins security and economic growth, we call
for the timely implementation of electoral reforms
and parliamentary elections. We likewise look to
the Government led by President Ghani and Chief
Executive Officer Abdullah to accelerate its reform
process and address the immediate challenges,
including corruption, security and the economy. As
Afghanistan works towards peace, prosperity and
self-reliance, we consider the following issues to be
of continued importance: strengthening governance,
advancing political reconciliation and cementing the
foundations of a sustainable economy.

First, as Afghanistan takes its first steps towards
self-reliance, we see that the resolve and capabilities
of the Government are being tested. To that effect, we
welcome the fact that Afghanistan is making efforts to
strengthen governance. Of particular relevance is the
fight against corruption, which includes the judiciary
and local governments. As the Afghan Government has
rightly noted, corruption raises the costs of development
and damages its credibility in the eyes of its people.

We are also alarmed by the security situation and

the record high number of civilian casualties on the
ground, including in the northern provinces of Kunduz
and Badakhstan. We likewise note with concern the
presence of foreign fighters in the country. However, we
remain confident that Afghanistan's law-enforcement
and security forces are up to the task. To that end, Japan
will continue to assist Afghanistan to strengthen its
law-enforcement capacity, principally through the Law
and Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan, to which Japan
has hitherto contributed more than $1 billion. Our
assistance has helped Afghanistan double the size of its
police force in four years. Furthermore, knowing that
effective law enforcement is contingent upon capable
and dedicated individuals, Japan has been providing
capacity-building in fields as diverse as literacy
education and legal training. For example, Japan,
in cooperation with Turkey and NATO, is currently
providing assistance for the training of 325 female
police officers in Turkey, in the light of the importance
of protecting women's rights.

Secondly, political reconciliation is part and parcel
of Afghanistan's long-term stability. In that regard, we
welcome the Government's engagement with national
and regional actors in promoting reconciliation.
Furthermore, we welcome the facilitation by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan of civil
society-led dialogue towards that end. Japan, for its
part, has been supporting the peaceful reintegration
of ex-combatants into Afghan society. As a leading
contributor to the Afghanistan peace and reintegration
programme and other efforts, Japan has contributed to
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
approximately 60,000 ex-combatants, the disbandment
of 737 armed groups and the collection of 276,000
weapons. Japan looks forward to further progress and
to the consolidation of Afghanistan's democratic path
to peace and prosperity.

Thirdly, economic opportunity and growth are
legitimate aspirations for all Afghans. We are therefore
concerned by the economic slowdown, which, among
other factors, has been attributed to political and
security uncertainties. Nonetheless, the long-term
drivers of growth, particularly human capital and
economic connectivity, are encouraging. Through
assistance from Japan and the international community,
the number of schoolchildren has increased nine-fold,
to 9.2 million in 12 years. Concerning economic
connectivity, we have helped lay more than 700
kilometres of new trunk roads that stretch throughout
the country. Kabul International Airport, rehabilitated
with Japan's assistance, has increased passenger traffic
by 150 per cent in a span of five years. Furthermore, on
2 June, quite recently, Japan approved the disbursement
of $25 million in counterpart funds to help the Afghan
Government to conclude a civil airspace management
contract. Furthermore, Japan, in cooperation with
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, among others, is also working to strengthen
productivity in agriculture, which is the largest source
of employment in the country. In order to maximize
the economic potential with which Afghanistan is
endowed, we look to the Government to implement its
reform programme entitled "Realizing self-reliance" to
address fiscal vulnerabilities and improve security and
political stability.

To conclude, Japan and the international community
will stand by Afghanistan as it overcomes its initial
challenges and cements its foundations towards self-
reliance. We acknowledge and welcome the fact that
a Tripartite Commission with the participation of
donor countries has been set up to examine the role,
structure and activities of all United Nations entities in
Afghanistan. Regardless of its form, Japan would like
to reaffirm its strong solidarity with the Afghan people
and its firm commitment to assisting that country on its
path towards peace, prosperity and self-reliance under
the principle of mutual accountability.

