Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this meeting. I also thank Mr. Abou Moussa,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa, for his briefing.

The situation in the Central African region
has deteriorated in the past month, mainly due to
the conflicts in the Central African Republic and
in South Sudan. This has put the whole region at
risk, with unprecedented security and humanitarian
consequences, which could have a negative impact on
the progress achieved so far, such as in the fight against
the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) and other negative
forces. Despite those crises and the threat ofinstability,
several countries in the Central African region have
registered tremendous economic growth. This shows
that the Central African region has the potential to
escape the current negative spiral and should therefore
be further supported.

We welcome the progress achieved in weakening
the LRA, including through the success registered on
the ground by the African Union (AU) Regional Task
Force, supported by the United States. The reported
number of LRA attacks, abductions and killings
during the first quarter of 2014 in the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has decreased as compared to previous years, not to
mention that the LRA has been further weakened due
to defection and military pressure, leading it to operate
in survival mode and in small groups. Nevertheless,
that terrorist organization still possesses the capacity to
destabilize the subregion. It is therefore important that
the international community maintain this momentum
so as to ensure that the LRA is eradicated once and for
all.

As we commend the fruitful cooperation between
the AU, the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA), the United States and the European
Union in the fight against the LRA, we believe that
coordination and information-sharing between the AU
Regional Task Force and the United Nations missions
deployed in countries of the region - mainly the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, the African-led
International Support Mission for the Central African
Republic, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur - are critical to ending the threat
posed by the LRA.

In addition to military operations, it is also
important to sustain the progress achieved so far by
stepping up support to peacebuilding activities and
by improving national capacities. This would include
financial support to the United Nations regional
strategy, which provides a comprehensive anti-LRA
strategy for the LRA-affected areas. In the same vein,
financial support for the AU Regional Task Force is
very critical to ending the threat posed by the LRA.

Last month, the world was shocked by the abduction
of more than 200 schoolgirls in Chibok, Nigeria, by
Boko Haram. This terrorist organization also kidnapped
eight girls last week in Warabe, Nigeria. We strongly
condemn these abductions, and we extend our solidarity
to the affected families and to the Government and the
people of Nigeria. We shall all remain committed to
supporting Nigeria in its efforts to bring back our girls.

In that context, as Boko Haram expands its
activities into several Central African countries, it is
important to further strengthen regional cooperation in
security and cross-border issues. We welcome in this
regard the meeting of the six members of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission - Cameroon, the Central African
Republic, Chad, Libya, Niger and Nigeria - that
took place in Cameroon in March to establish the
Multinational Joint Task Force, aimed at addressing
the security threat posed by terrorism in the region.
We also commend the invitation extended by President
Hollande to a meeting to be held on 17 May in Paris.

Terrorist piracy and armed robbery at sea, as well as
organized crime, constitute critical security challenges
in the region, with a negative impact on the economy,
as these threats deprive the region of investment,
viable economic activities and related fiscal revenue.
We commend the efforts of the region and the progress
achieved since the holding of the Yaounde summit
in June 2013, which yielded the establishment of the
Interregional Coordination Centre and the elaboration
of a concrete 2014-2016 action plan.

The efforts of UNOCA in preventing conflicts in
the Central African region should be commended and
supported. With six countries of the region holding
elections in 2015, and more in 2016, we believe that
UNOCA should be given proper and adequate resources
to ensure that those elections are held smoothly. In
addition, given the security situation in the Central
African Republic and the rise of terrorism in some
countries of the region, UNOCA needs to be allocated
the necessary resources to fulfil its mandate.

In conclusion, Rwanda wishes to express its
appreciation to UNOCA for the work done since 2011
under the remarkable leadership of outgoing Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Abou Moussa.
We pay tribute to him on his achievements and wish
him all the best in his future endeavours. We also take
this opportunity to welcome the incoming Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Abdoulaye
Bathily. We assure him of our full support.

Lastly, Rwanda supports the draft presidential
statement that the Council will adopt later today.

