Mrs. Ratsifandrihamanana (spoke in French): I
wish to echo all previous speakers who have spoken on
this essential issue since this morning in commending
the Vietnamese presidency on its initiative for
convening this meeting. I would also like to pay tribute
to the outstanding work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, and to the valuable contributions
made to today's debate by Ms. Ann Veneman,
Ms. Kathleen Hunt and Mr. Edmond Mulet.

Much has been said since we began the
discussion this morning, and all representatives of
African countries have stressed, with particular
reference to Africa, the crucial importance of the issue
of children in armed conflict. The policy of zero
tolerance for the recruitment of child soldiers and the
abuse and atrocities that children suffer has been
advocated since the adoption of resolution 1659
(LXIV) by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity in 1996. Moreover, the
provisions of that resolution have been taken up once
again in various other key texts of the African Union.
The commitment of the leaders of the African Union
rests, above all, on the protection of children in armed
conflicts, the appeal for assistance from the
international community, the non-recruitment of
children under 18 as soldiers, the education of and
assistance to former child soldiers, regional training
programmes for members of the armed forces and the
establishment of peace corridors during armed
conflicts for the protection of children and for
humanitarian assistance.

(spoke in English)

Africa was the first region to adopt a
comprehensive instrument on the rights of children,
namely, the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare
of the Child adopted in 1990, a year after the adoption
of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the
Child.

The member States of the African Union also
endorsed the African common position entitled Africa
Fit for Children, which articulated priorities aimed at
improving the lives of children, including the right to
protection in situations of armed conflict and foreign
occupation. In 2007, a conference was organized in
Egypt to adopt a call for accelerated action on the
implementation of the Plan of Action for Africa Fit for
Children 2008-2012. Under that document member
States agreed to protect children from all forms of
abuse, neglect, exploitation and violence. The plan of
action focuses on the legislative and policy framework,
the institutional framework, mobilizing and leveraging
resources for Africa Fit for Children, and realizing the
right to an education and to protection.

Other African Union organs and bodies, such as
the Peace and Security Council, the Pan-African
Parliament, the African Court on Human and Peoples'
Rights and the African Commission on Human and
People's Rights, as well as all regional economic
communities, are actively engaged with respect to the
question of children in armed conflict.

However, despite those efforts, pockets of
resistance to the zero-tolerance policy of the African
Union on the use and abuse of children in armed
conflict can be observed in various conflict situations
around the continent.

The question of children and armed conflict is
certainly one that receives unanimous condemnation
and entails our shared responsibility in order to
strengthen responses for its total eradication. In that
regard, I would like to make a few points.

First, in Africa and other parts of the world,
illegal armed rebel groups are solely responsible for
the use and abuse of children in armed conflict. Our
response must thus include the strengthening of
strategies towards specifically targeting them.

Secondly, the question of children in armed
conflict is linked to the vulnerability and the
weakening of families owing to poverty. It would
therefore be crucial for the Security Council to lend its
full support to the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals and other global commitments to
the eradication of poverty.

Thirdly, the impact of the involvement and abuse
of children in armed conflict extends far beyond the
person of the victim. It would thus be crucial to

support the efforts of Governments and regional
organizations, such as the African Union, which are
first in the line of responsibility towards the
rehabilitation and reintegration of victims.

Fourthly, as provided in the Council's presidential
statement (S/PRST/2008/6), the mobilization of
necessary resources and access to them by parties
would be crucial to facilitate the implementation of all
recommendations by the Security Council and the
international community as a whole.

(spoke in French)

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the resolve
of the African Union to work with the whole of the
international community to ensure that the zero-
tolerance policy towards the recruitment of child
soldiers and the abuses to which they are subjected
becomes a reality in Africa and all over the world.

