The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Italy, in which they request to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Prica
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the
Council table; Mr. Spatafora (Italy) took the seat
reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Lord Paddy
Ashdown, High Representative for the Implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Lord Ashdown to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/706, which contains a letter dated
7November 2005 from the Secretary-General
transmitting the twenty-eighth report of the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
At this morning's meeting, the Security Council
will hear a briefing by Lord Paddy Ashdown, High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina. As this is the
last briefing that Lord Ashdown will make to the
Council in his capacity as the High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina, I would like, on behalf of the
members of the Council, to express our appreciation to
Lord Ashdown for his important contribution to
strengthening peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I now give the floor to Lord Ashdown.


