Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): My
delegation associates itself with the statement to be
made later in the debate by the Danish presidency of
the European Union.

I welcome the presence of Mr. Jacques Paul Klein
and Lord Ashdown in the Council today and thank
them for their briefings. I would also like to thank Mr.
Jacques Paul Klein for the extraordinary job that he has
done in Bosnia and Herzegovina in placing his
experience, energy and dedication at the service of the
United Nations. Bulgaria thanks him for the results that
he has achieved. We would also like to thank Lord
Ashdown, a prominent figure on the European scene,
whose stature and charisma reflect the continued
concern of the international community and in
particular the European Union for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, a country in South-East Europe with
which Bulgaria has close ties and whose destiny is of
crucial importance for the future of the whole of that
region.

With regard to the results of the recent elections
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, our thinking very much
concurs with that of Lord Ashdown. It is important for
the Bosnian political classes to acknowledge the fact
that Bosnians want further reform. The reality check
that some of those in power at various levels have
experienced will compel them to be pragmatic. In that
context, Lord Ashdown's comments were somewhat
reassuring. Some pragmatism is emerging, and it is
important to encourage it.

At the same time, the results of the election,
which reflect the democracy fatigue that we have
perceived in other democracies, is nonetheless a sign
that Bosnians are somewhat discouraged, and we must
take note of that fact. It is yet another reason why there
should be a continued, strong international presence in
Bosnia and Herzegovina for some years.

Having said that, I believe that the future of
Bosnia and Herzegovina lies in the hands of the
Bosnians themselves, particularly in the area of the
economy, where there has been a certain paralysis in
the past few years that has impeded significant
progress. Speaking as a representative of a country that
has undertaken such reforms in the past and is
continuing to do so, I would like to recall a comparison
that was made in Bulgaria and elsewhere at the start of
our economic reform effort: "If you must cut the tail
off a cat", it was said, "do it with one stroke; it might
be painful, but it is over quickly, and it is effective.
Cutting it off in several pieces is much more painful
and much less effective". I think it is very important
for the cat's tail to be cut off in one go; the Bosnians
should opt for that approach.

Bulgaria unreservedly supports the strategy
developed by the High Representative concerning the
rule of law and administrative reform. It is true that
justice is the chief priority, and in that respect he will
be able to build on the outstanding work of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The problem of the customs service is an urgent
one. It is also important in the regional context.
Equally important is the problem of trafficking in
human beings. I thank Jacques Paul Klein for
addressing that in detail. I will take this opportunity to
ask Lord Ashdown a question. What place does this
problem occupy in his strategy for the rule of law in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, given that this problem has a
regional dimension?

The return of refugees should be welcomed. It is
a process that we hope will now be irreversible. We are
very sympathetic to Lord Ashdown's appeal for greater
financial support. It is vital for the stability of Bosnia
and Herzegovina that this process be carried out
successfully. Bulgaria associates itself with all those
who have called for more understanding with respect to
this problem.

I could not conclude my remarks without
recalling that despite all the positive elements that I
have mentioned, there are still forces in Bosnia and
Herzegovina that are not ready to cooperate with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia. The very fact that emblematic figures, such
as Karadzic and Mladic, are still at large, is not
something that will make the job of the European
Union and Lord Ashdown any easier. It is important
that all those accused of war crimes be brought to trial.
They belong at the Hague. We appeal once again to all
those in a position to do so to ensure that there is
complete cooperation with the Tribunal.

The regional context is positive, as earlier
speakers have said, in particular the Russian
delegation. Bulgaria welcomes that. The authorities in
Zagreb and Belgrade are doing what is necessary.
Bulgaria is working on a regional plan with those
friendly countries and, of course, with the Bosnian
authorities on the regional level to make that process
irreversible in the context of greater regional
cooperation, especially in the framework of the
Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe.

I would like to conclude by expressing our best
wishes to Lord Ashdown and to reiterate Bulgaria's
support for him as he carries out his duties.

