Mr. Matussek (Germany): I have the honour
today to take the floor on behalf of the European Union
(EU). The candidate countries Turkey and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Montenegro and Serbia, and the
European Free Trade Association countries Iceland and
Norway, members of the European Economic Area, as
well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, align
themselves with this statement.

At the outset, I would like to thank President
King and the Prosecutor, Mr. Rapp, for their
presentations of the work of the Special Court - of its
achievements and of the challenges that still lie ahead.

The European Union is strongly supportive of the
work of the Special Court for Sierra Leone, which is
making an invaluable contribution to the restoration of
peace and stability in Sierra Leone. Through the
Court's work those most responsible for serious crimes
during Sierra Leone's brutal civil war are being held
accountable for their deeds. In this respect, the EU has
noted with satisfaction that the most prominent case on
the agenda of the Court - the trial of former Liberian
President Charles Taylor - has commenced this very
week in The Hague. Other cases are well under way in
Freetown, and on the whole it seems that the goals of
the completion strategy can be met.

The Court has also contributed significantly to
the development of international criminal law. It has,
for example, instituted landmark proceedings to
investigate the use of child soldiers and forced
marriage. It has also taken important decisions on
criminal procedure. In addition, the Court has
developed a whole body of rules and regulations on
how to get the institution as such up and running. All
of this deserves very careful study and analysis as we
consider the further development of international
criminal law. We call on the Court and all concerned to
make every effort to preserve and render accessible this
wealth of practical and legal experience.
The European Union has also noted with
satisfaction that the new budget submitted by the Court
covers the entire completion period, from 2007 to
2009. It is a clear indication of the determination of the
Court to base its financial and administrative planning
on the completion strategy. It sends a political message
to the international community that the Court is indeed
on track and has taken all necessary measures to
achieve its goals within the established time frame. It
makes equally clear, however, that for the Court to
complete its work, ongoing support from Member
States for the remaining years is needed. I should like
to recall in this context that since the start of
proceedings in 2002 European Union member States
alone have provided more than 56 per cent of the
Court's entire expenditures. In addition, several of the
Court's projects were funded by the European
Community. The European Union will not fail to
continue its support of the Court's work.

Justice King's presentation, however, also
contained a number of important messages that in the
view of the European Union went far beyond the facts
and figures. Let me point out just a few key features of
the work of the Special Court which in our view offer
important lessons of interest to the Security Council
and the wider United Nations membership when we
look at other situations.

Through its unprecedented and innovative
outreach programme and its efforts to explain its work
to the people concerned in Sierra Leone and beyond,
the Court has almost become a household word, of
which even schoolchildren have heard. This has greatly
bolstered the acceptance of this body and its role in and
for Sierra Leone. Current efforts to make the
proceedings against Charles Taylor far away in The
Hague as transparent as possible for the people of
Sierra Leone will certainly add to this. It is essential
that the people in the region be accurately informed
about, and understand, the serious charges brought
against him and the way in which the proceedings will
be carried forward.

Another important feature in terms of ownership
is that the Court has made great efforts to draw as
many local staff as possible - including legal
professionals in all spheres of criminal justice - into
the work of the Court. Today, half of its staff are Sierra
Leonean nationals. This again has helped to win the
trust and confidence of the people in the region.
Both factors will in our view contribute to the
development of the judicial institutions in Sierra
Leone. We trust that the work of the Court will help to
re-establish the rule of law for society at large well
beyond the day on which the last trial is concluded.

Beyond the immediate local context, the Special
Court has given a strong boost to what former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan called the culture of the
rule of law, for which the United Nations as a whole
should stand. The work of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone signals that in today's world serious crimes
against humanity, genocide and war crimes will no
longer go unpunished. Not even the highest officials,
including heads of State or Government, can count on
impunity for their deeds. The international community
will react - and, in keeping with the principles of the
rule of law, will react through legal means: criminal
proceedings that bring perpetrators to justice swiftly
and effectively and strictly in accordance with all
international standards. This Court proves that that is
possible. It is possible because the people want it, and
it is necessary because they deserve nothing less. This
message will also give a strong boost to the growing
international support for the International Criminal
Court. It adds proof to our understanding that there is
no dichotomy between peace on the one hand and
justice on the other. Any society and, in particular, the
victims who fall prey to ruthless oppressors have a
right to claim both. The experience of the people of
Sierra Leone shows that there is no rule that one has to
be sacrificed in favour of the other.

"Completion" is a tempting term but, as we all
know, in this context it is somewhat misleading. Even
if all actual proceedings are completed and the cases
tried, this is not the end of the story. The judgements
will have to be enforced and those who have been
convicted need to serve their sentences - and in that
they have rights and in that they have status. The
protection of witnesses may be needed for an extended
period after a given trial is over. Long after the
completion date new facts may become known which
may necessitate certain decisions to be taken. And for
all these and other purposes the Court's files have to be
kept intact and accessible. In our national judicial
systems, we can take it for granted that a court to
decide on all of this is always there. Here it is not, and
that is why the international community has to address
what are commonly referred to as residual issues as a
matter of urgency, just as in the cases of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. The European Union trusts that work on
these issues is now under way.

