Mr. Pace (Malta): Allow me to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. Our congratulations also go to the outgoing
President for the excellent manner in which he presided
over the Council.

Peace has been the long-desired goal of the
international community. It requires of us all a
demonstrable commitment to the ideals enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and respect for the various
proclamations by both the Security Council and the General
Assembly on the various items which have been the subject
of deliberations in this Organization.

The issue under consideration today is not new; nor is
it one to which the international community has failed to
respond. It touches on the very nerve of a process which
has taken root in recent years; it threatens to undermine the
arduous path to peace, The Middle East has been blessed
with hope for a different future, one in which communities
and generations can live together in confidence and mutual
trust.

Actions which contravene the very spirit on which the
peace process has embarked cannot but be strongly
deplored. The recent decision by the Government of Israel

10 -
to undertake the construction of new housing units in the
Har Home/Jabal Abu Ghneim area of East Jerusalem not
only impacts on the more immediate consequences arising
from such actions, but will have long-lasting
repercussions on the ability to achieve a just and lasting
peace in the region.

The recent Hebron accord is a signal by the parties
of their willingness to build peace. As stated by my
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
in a letter to Prime Minister Netanyahu and President
Arafat on the signing of the accord,

"This historic accord is yet another
manifestation of the fact that quiet diplomacy
succeeds Where other measures, in failing, leave only
pain, disappointment and bitterness".

The decision taken on the construction of new
housing units stands in stark contradiction to this spirit. It
contravenes the relevant resolutions {of the Security
Council and the General Assembly, as it seeks to change
the physical character, demographic composition,
institutional structure or status of the Palestinian and other
Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem,
and it contravenes the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.
The status of East Jerusalem remains subject to the
principles enshrined in Security Council resolution 242
(1967), notably the inadmissibility cf the acquisition of
territory by force.

The Government of Malta joins the rest of the
international community in calling on Israel to
demonstrate the resolve required in sustaining the
momentum achieved in the past years and days, and to
rescind its decision. Any change to the status of
Jerusalem prejudges the final status negotiations and
could lead to the reversal of a process of peace.

Malta joins others who have called on the leaders in
the region and beyond for a recommitment to the
objectives of peace. It is through the committed courage
of leaders that peoples may come to reap the benefits of
peace -»- a peace which we hope can become a reality for
the generations of Israelis and Palestinians who have lived
under the shadow of mistrust for too long.

