Mr. Deng (South Sudan): It gives me great pleasure
to address the Security Council once again during the
presidency of the Republic of Korea. I would like to
assure you, Madam, and the members of the Security
Council of our sincere appreciation for the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS). My statement today will be a very
brief message of gratitude.

There is no question that, despite our shared
interest in the continuation of UNMISS, we are faced
with challenges that call for constructive engagement
to promote mutual understanding cooperation. For
many of us who know the background to the UNMISS
presence in our country as an agent of good will and
support, it was indeed a source of discomfort to witness
anti-United Nations demonstrations. As I have said on
previous occasions, the demonstrations were due in part
to misunderstandings and in part to genuine concerns
about specific issues that I have discussed in depth and
with candour with both sides.

The demonstrations were also a reaction to the gap
between the ambitious objectives of the Mission as
originally articulated and the shortcomings in delivery
on the ground, due to the limitations of the resources
available to UNMISS. This disappointment has never
detracted from the Government's appreciation of
the role played by UNMISS and its leadership in the
country or from our commitment to cooperation, as
President Salva Kiir assured Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon during his most recent visit to Juba.

The Security Council, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Government of
South Sudan have worked closely together to resolve
our differences and misunderstandings in the new
configuration of UNMISS. Although our Government
has had some reservations about some of the elements
of the renewed mandate, we hope that, with our shared
concerns and better communications, our cooperation
will be enhanced.

I have repeatedly stated that the Government
of South Sudan is well aware of the limitations in
its capacity to meet fully its commitments to and
aspirations for the protection of its citizens, and that the
legacy of the long war, stretching over half a century,
has left deep wounds that will take long to heal. That is
why we believe that despite the understandable need for
the United Nations to reconsider its priorities in light of
the crisis that South Sudan is undergoing, building State
capacity should remain high on the list of priorities.

The objective of capacity-building is to help
create a State that is capable, responsible and
responsive - not a State that is oppressive. Failure
to help build a functioning State could lead to serious
problems that the United Nations and the international
community might be later called upon to help address.
Capacity-building should therefore be seen as a form
of preventive strategy. We therefore hope that it will
be given serious consideration and included in the next
extension of the UNMISS mandate.
The Government of South Sudan appreciates
the fact that greater attention is being focused on the
protection of civilians, given the gravity of the crisis
that the country is going through. It is our hope,
however, that there will be no more tragic crises of
the kind the world has so painfully witnessed as the
parties strive to restore peace and reconciliation, with
accountability, through the negotiations led by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development. It is also
our hope that, with the refocusing of the mandate and
the lessons learned from prior experience, UNMISS
peacekeepers - who have at times put their own lives
at risk to protect civilians - will be better prepared
and equipped to respond more effectively in protecting
civilians, themselves and their installations.

As we move forward into the future, we should
modestly admit that mistakes have been made by both
sides and that we should work in close cooperation to
address those past mistakes and forge an even closer
partnership in pursuing our shared objectives. South
Sudan will forever be grateful for the support we
received in achieving our independence and in our
efforts to build a sustainable, post-conflict State. We
should not allow the challenges we are currently facing
to undermine this solid foundation.

