Mr. Lambertini (Italy) (spoke in French): I am
very happy to take the floor under your presidency, Sir.
Unfortunately I am not able to do so in French. I will
therefore speak in English today and perhaps next time
I will speak in French.
(spoke in English)

I wish to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haysom and Ambassador Tanin for
their statements. I also stress that Italy aligns itself with
the statement just made by the observer of the European
Union and wishes to add some remarks in its national
capacity.

Allow me to begin by expressing our appreciation,
as others have done, for the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
and by voicing Italy's support for the renewal of its
mandate, because of the actions it has carried out and
its fundamental contribution towards coordinating
the international community's actions in support of
Afghanistan and the common goal of achieving peace
and sustainable development in the country.

I wish to underline the precious added value
provided by UNAMA during the troubled election
season of last year, which concluded with the formation
of a national unity Government and the first democratic
transfer of power in Afghan history.

The completion of the International Security
Assistance Force's mission and the hand-over of
responsibility for security to the Afghan forces - in
the framework of a fruitful collaboration with NATO
and other countries, which continues today through the
Resolute Support Mission - confirm the importance
of UNAMA's future role and activities.

The challenges facing Afghanistan remain
considerable, in particular as regards the security
situation. We cannot, in fact, ignore the gravity of the
situation revealed by the report prepared by UNAMA,
in collaboration with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. The report indicates a
22 per cent increase in civilian victims in Afghanistan
in 2014 over the previous year. Those are extremely
disturbing figures that make it imperative to achieve
peace in the country.

In that perspective, the developments in the
relations between Afghanistan and other regional
players are positive. The close collaboration among the
countries of the area is decisive in attaining peace and
stability, not only in Afghanistan, but throughout the
region.

But the focus on the hoped-for process of domestic
reconciliation, in its Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
dimension, should not lead to any backtracking on the
gains made in democracy and civil rights, particularly
the civil rights of women, or to any concessions to
terrorism. These gains represent a legacy that must not
only be defended but also further consolidated.

Italy stands alongside the national unity Government
and its leadership, to which we lend our full support,
and we back its efforts to ensure peace, security
and prosperity for the country and the people. That
is what inspires our participation in the Resolute
Support Mission, in particular in the western region
of the country, and that is the goal of our cooperation
assistance, in the framework of a long-term commitment
on the part of Italy and the international community as
a whole to benefit Afghanistan.

This partnership is based on the principle of
reciprocal commitments, as affirmed in Tokyo and
reiterated last December in London, which require
a resolute pursuit of reforms in the country in the
areas of the democratic and electoral processes, the
fight against corruption, administrative and economic
governance, and human rights, particularly the human
rights of women, which are prerequisites to enabling
Afghanistan to progress resolutely on the road to
democratic consolidation and self-sustainable social
and economic development.

This is a challenging responsibility, but it is also
unavoidable. That is why it is so important to complete
the Government team at the central and local levels.
We hope that this will take place soon, so as to enable
the Government to effectively deploy its efforts to
concretely implement reforms and achieve the hoped-
for results. We are convinced that, for this action to
be successful, the role of UNAMA continues to be
crucial. That is yet another reason why Italy supports
the renewal of its mandate.

