Mr. Mladenov: I am honoured indeed to address
the Security Council in my new capacity as the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General to the
Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority.

At the outset, allow me to thank President Abbas
and his Government for their warm welcome and
genuine interest in working with the United Nations
in advancing the just cause of peace. I would like to
also express my gratitude to the Government of Israel
for its warm reception and for engaging on a host of
important issues related to the situation on the ground.
Since taking up my assignment, I have engaged with
Palestinian and Israeli leaders. I have also met with
political, civil society and business stakeholders in
the West Bank and Gaza and with key partners in
Egypt and Jordan in order to begin developing a better
understanding of the reality on the ground and the
prospects for the future.

The Middle East faces a Vicious tide of terror and
extremism that presents a serious challenge not just to
the region, but also to international peace and security.
However, the inability to respond for over 60 years now,
both to the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian
people for a State and to Israel's quest for security, has
fuelled a situation that is becoming more dangerous by
the day. Generations of Palestinians and Israelis have
come to realize that sustainable and just peace cannot
be reached through conflict, but must be the result of
negotiations. Thousands of people have died so that
today we may hold this truth - that peace cannot
be achieved through violence, but at the negotiating
table - to be self-evident.
This hard-earned belief in peace and negotiations
must not be allowed to wither away. If it does, it could
further destabilize the Middle East for decades. To
save it, to give hope back to people, we must act to
advance the prospect of a two-State solution: Israel
and Palestine living side by side in peace and security.
How to do this is not an academic question, but one
that must be addressed by the parties on the ground,
the international community and the United Nations as
well.

I do not underestimate the difficult decisions
that both parties will have to take. Nor should we
underestimate the domestic challenges that Israeli
and Palestinian leaders alike will have to overcome.
The region is facing a complicated security threat.
However, it is precisely because of the dangers that
lurk in the Middle East today that both sides must show
historic leadership and personal commitment to peace
and negotiations.

I take this opportunity to call on the new
Government of Israel to take credible steps, including
a freeze of settlement activity, in order to promote the
resumption of meaningful negotiations. Continued
security cooperation between Palestinian and Israeli
authorities remains a cornerstone of a peaceful
resolution. Both parties must make every effort to
build upon existing agreements, including the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the road map and the Arab
Peace Initiative, in order to gain momentum towards a
final status agreement.vThe Secretary-General stands
ready to work with all in order to encourage a return to
negotiations on the basis of an agreed framework.

On 14 May, the Israeli Knesset confirmed Prime
Minister Netanyahu's new coalition Government. Its
guidelines state that it will "strive for peace with the
Palestinians and all our neighbours, while safeguarding
the security, historical and national interests of Israel".

The Secretary-General and I will be engaging with
the new Government to explore realistic options for a
return to meaningful negotiations towards a two-State
solution within a reasonable time frame. However, this
goal is increasingly threatened by actions on the ground
that exacerbate the divisions that exist between the two
sides.

We are deeply concerned to see the advancement
of settlement activities in East Jerusalem and the West
Bank on three occasions in the past month. On 14 May,
tenders were issued for 85 housing units in Givat Ze'ev,
south of Ramallah. On 6 May, the District Planning
and Building Committee approved permits for 400 new
residential units in the settlement of Ramat Shlomo,
and, on 27 April, 77 tenders were issued for residential
units in two other East Jerusalem settlements.

These announcements come at a sensitive time
in which the international community is looking to
Israel to demonstrate its readiness to engage with the
Palestinians on building peace. There should be no
illusions about the impact of these unilateral actions.
They not only undermine the collective hopes of those
longing for a just resolution of the conflict, but they
again call into question the viability of achieving peace
based on the vision of two States. Settlement activity
is illegal under international law, and I urge the new
Israeli Government to reverse these decisions and
refrain from such action in future.

IntheoccupiedWestBank,includingEastJerusalem,
tensions continued as Israeli security forces conducted
some 265 search-and-arrest operations, resulting in
the arrests of 294 Palestinians. In separate incidents in
late April, three Palestinian men, including a 17-year-
old boy, were shot and killed after reportedly stabbing
and injuring Israeli security officers at checkpoints in
Hebron and Ma'ale Adumin. On 25 April, a Palestinian
man was suspected of intentionally ramming his car
into a group of Israeli policemen in East Jerusalem,
injuring four. On 11 May, an Israeli was injured in a
reported stabbing attack near a West Bank checkpoint.
And on 14 May, three Israeli youths were struck by a
car driven by a Palestinian man close to Gush Etzion.

Despite repeated objections, the Israeli Government
continues to demolish Palestinian homes and structures.
During the reporting period, a total of 15 structures,
which contained 33 residences, were demolished,
leading to the displacement of 25 people, including 14
children. On 4 May, the Israeli High Court of Justice
rejected a request by Palestinians from the Area C
village of Susiya to freeze demolitions in the village.
And on 10 May, an Israeli court ordered the demolition
of eight buildings in the East Jerusalem neighbourhood
of Semiramis. The United Nations once again urges
Israel to cease such demolitions and displacements.

The United Nations also remains concerned about
the recent moves to relocate Bedouin communities
near Abu Nwar in the politically sensitive El area of
the West Bank that may be linked to further settlement
construction.
Turning to Gaza, I cannot but recall the shock of my
first, very brief tour of the destruction of the Shujaiya
neighbourhood. No one - I repeat, no one - can
remain untouched by the scale of devastation, the slow
pace of reconstruction, and the vast needs that exist in
order to rebuild lives and livelihoods. Gaza is desperate
and Gaza is angry: angry at the blockade; angry at
the closure of the Rafah crossing; angry at Hamas,
including for imposing an illegal "solidarity tax"; angry
at the donors for not honouring their commitments to
reconstruction - at everyone. There is a clear moral
and humanitarian imperative not just for the United
Nations and the international community, but primarily
for the Israeli and the Palestinian authorities to prevent
the implosion of Gaza. I particularly call on the factions
on the ground to ensure that Gaza remains peaceful.

Despite the fact that the agreed ceasefire, brokered
by Egypt, continues to hold, some security incidents
have persisted during the reporting period. Three
rockets were fired at Israel from Gaza on 23 April: one
exploded in an open area in Israel and the other two fell
short and exploded inside Gaza. On 3 May, militants
fired another rocket which hit inside Gaza near the
security fence, and Palestinian militants also test-fired
19 rockets at the sea. Thankfully, no injuries or damage
were reported in any of these incidents, all of which we
condemn.

In response to the rocket firing, the Israel Defense
Forces (IDF) conducted an airstrike in Gaza that
damaged a Hamas military site, but no casualties were
reported. The IDF also reportedly shot and injured
nine Palestinians in Gaza: three fishermen whose boats
were fired upon by the Israeli navy and six Palestinians
shot while approaching the Gaza border fence. Three
militants were also killed in separate incidents where
smuggling tunnels collapsed.

Without genuine Palestinian reconciliation and
unity, all efforts to improve the situation in Gaza
will face major difficulties. On 19 April, a delegation
of Palestinian ministers travelled to Gaza to begin a
process to reintegrate public-sector employees, tens of
thousands of whom have not received salaries for over
a year. Discussions, however, broke down the following
day.

Despite this setback, I welcome the determination
of Prime Minister Hamdallah and his efforts to find a
solution to the problem of public-sector employees in
Gaza. His commitment that no one will be left behind
is an important guarantee. I encourage all factions to
support these efforts. The United Nations also stands
ready to work with all stakeholders and support the
Government in mobilizing the necessary resources for
this process.

A comprehensive reconciliation must include the
Government of national consensus resuming control
over the crossings of Gaza into Israel and Egypt. This
is key to allowing more movement of goods and people
and to the eventual reopening of the crossings. The
responsibility for addressing these issues lies first and
foremost with the Palestinian authorities. But it also
rests partly with the United Nations and the international
community, which must empower the Government to
take up its leadership role in Gaza, including through
the fulfilment of the donor pledges made in Cairo last
October.

What is clear is that no approach that divides Gaza
and the West Bank should be supported. Palestine is one,
and the United Nations will work with determination to
advance unity through its legitimate institutions.

The ultimate objective of the United Nations in Gaza
is to see the lifting of all closures within the framework
of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009). In the
absence of such a fundamental change, the temporary
Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism is the only option
currently available to facilitate the entry of material
and to enable the implementation of large-scale projects
that can bring reconstruction, jobs and stability.

I can report that, as at 19 May, close to 85,000 ofthe
100,000 households in need of construction materials
to repair their homes had received them. In addition,
85 of the 167 projects submitted and funded by the
international community and the private sector have
been approved; eight of those projects are currently
under way.

All of these developments are positive but far from
sufficient to address Gaza's reconstruction needs. The
United Nations is working closely with the Israeli
Ministry of Defence's Coordinator of Government
Activities in the Territories, the Palestinian Minister
of Civil Affairs and donors to finalize arrangements to
speed up reconstruction. I take this opportunity to thank
all counterparts for their constructive engagement on
these matters.

Turning briefly to Lebanon, Special Coordinator
Kaag and members of the International Support Group
for Lebanon met today in Beirut with Prime Minister
Tammam Salam to discuss the current situation
in the country. As of 25 May, the country will have
been without a president for one year. This vacuum
undermines Lebanon's ability to address the challenges
it faces and jeopardizes the functioning of State
institutions. Members of Parliament should fulfil their
constitutional obligation to elect a President without
further delay.

With almost 1.2 million registered Syrian refugees in
Lebanon forming the highest per capita concentration of
refugees in the world, we again call on the international
community to urgently fulfil existing pledges and
increase and expedite support to Lebanon as a matter
of priority. It is important that the Government and
United Nations counterparts work together to promote
effective management of the refugee presence in line
with international humanitarian and human rights law.

The Lebanese-Syrian border remains impacted by
incidents and infiltration attempts by armed extremist
groups, particularly as a result of the fighting in the
Qalamoun region. The Lebanese Armed Forces
have made considerable efforts to secure the border,
with support from the international community. On
20 April, Lebanon received its first shipment ofmilitary
equipment from France, financed by a $3 billion grant
from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. This and other
contributions by Member States are both necessary and
welcome.

The area of operations of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) remained generally calm
despite the volatile situation in the Golan Heights. In
their ongoing engagement with UNIFIL, both parties
maintained their commitment to the cessation of
hostilities and to the stability of the Blue Line. Israeli
violations of Lebanese airspace continued on an almost
daily basis.

On the Golan, clashes occurred between the Syrian
armed forces and armed members of the opposition, as
did heavy fighting between the different armed groups
in the area of separation. Between 24 April and 5 May,
fire from the Bravo side as a result of such fighting
impacted across the ceasefire line. On 24 April, an
Israeli Defence Forces (IDF) missile-launching unit
fired four missiles eastwards, one of which crossed the
ceasefire line. A couple of days later, the IDF informed
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
that four persons carrying equipment had crossed
the ceasefire line from the Bravo side and had been
killed by Israeli security forces as they approached the
technical fence. Those developments have the potential
to heighten tensions and jeopardize the ceasefire
between the two countries.

In conclusion, let me return briefly to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, as the coming period will be
critical to the future of the peace process. The United
Nations has repeatedly warned that maintaining the
status quo is not tenable. It will inexorably lead to the
continued erosion of living conditions for Palestinians
and Israelis alike, and it will undermine the security
and stability of all. My introductory meetings clearly
demonstrated that, despite the prolonged absence of a
political horizon, the sometimes poisonous rhetoric of
incitement and the destructive actions of those seeking
to undermine a return to talks, there remains a steadfast
desire and determination to achieve an enduring
agreement. Any resolution will require a comprehensive
regional solution - conceivably with support from
the reinvigorated Quartet - that includes greater
engagement with key Arab states. However, while the
international community has a critical responsibility
to support a peace process, a lasting solution can be
achieved only by the parties themselves.

I thank you, Madam President, for this opportunity
to address the Council. I look forward to working with
you, and to your guidance on the way forward. Allow
me to place on record my gratitude to my predecessor,
Robert Serry, for his tireless efforts in this position. I
also want to thank the excellent team at the Office of
the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and here in the Secretariat, without
whom our work in the field would not be possible.

