Mr. Mercado (Philippines): My delegation joins
other delegations in thanking Lord Paddy Ashdown for
his comprehensive briefing on the developments
relating to the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We also welcome the presence this
morning of the Deputy Chairman of the Council of
Ministers and Minister of Security of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

The Philippines is encouraged to hear that much
has been accomplished since the international
community stepped in a decade ago to put an end to the
senseless bloodshed in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has come a long way. We
were also pleased to hear from Lord Ashdown of the
successful transition of authority from NATO's
Stabilization Force (SFOR) to the European Union
(EU) multinational Stabilization Force (EUFOR).

The significant progress made in achieving
political and economic structural reforms, particularly
as concerns the rule of law, legislation and defence, has
brought about a promising future for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which is moving towards being a
peaceful and viable State on the path to its integration
in Europe.

As concerns institutional reforms, we believe that
Bosnia and Herzegovina is on the right course towards
peace and stability with the creation of the War Crimes
Chamber within the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to prosecute war crimes and organized crime through
its own judicial system. The appointment of the first
group of judges and prosecutors represented a big leap
towards instituting reforms in the judiciary. On this
point, we particularly welcome the statement made by
the Minister of Security of Bosnia and Herzegovina
that the most important pillar of every democracy is an
independent judiciary.

The establishment of a fully fledged State-level
police agency to combat organized and international
crime, corruption and terrorism, and of a Police
Restructuring Commission is also important. The
holding of the first municipal elections last October is
another accomplishment in the context of instituting
political reforms.

We are pleased to note that there has been
progress in the economic reform agenda of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The successful rebalancing of the
Government's budgets and the significant advancement
made in the implementation of a single set of tax rules
throughout the country are decisive steps towards
moving economic reform forward. The establishment
of a single economic space and the creation of a level
playing field for all businesses is evidence of the
commitment of Bosnia and Herzegovina to pursue a
sound fiscal foundation to secure stable funding for its
requirements. We hope that the steps taken by Bosnia
and Herzegovina to reform its economy will address
the expected financial deficits reported by Lord
Ashdown this morning.

My delegation also welcomes the progress made
in the process of the return of refugees and displaced
persons. The recent signing of the memorandum of
understanding between the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the Council of Europe
Development Bank to bring more development funding
to help refugees and displaced people of concern to
resettle on their land is another major realization in the
process of bringing normalcy to the country.

It is therefore unfortunate that those positive
accomplishments are being clouded by the inability of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to overcome the remaining
obstacle to its Euro-Atlantic integration, namely, its
lack of cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). Despite
the remarkable progress it has made on the defence
reform front, that hampers its application to join
NATO's Partnership for Peace. The authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina should remain seriously
committed to bringing to justice those who committed
war crimes, as well as to continuing efforts to
investigate and prosecute other war crimes, so that the
country can emerge from this bloody chapter in its
history.

While recent steps taken by Republika Srpska to
turn in indictees and the recent transfer of five major
Hague indictees do not yet constitute full cooperation,
we hope that the steps taken by Bosnia and
Herzegovina, along with the establishment of the War
Crimes Chamber within its State Court, are positive
steps that will eventually lead to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's full cooperation with the ICTY.

Much has been achieved in rebuilding Bosnia and
Herzegovina since it emerged from the devastation of
war. We are hopeful that, in the next report of the High
Representative, next August, there will be positive
developments related to cooperation with the ICTY on
the part of the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

