The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Heads of State and Government, the Secretary-General,
Ministers and other distinguished representatives
present in the Chamber. Their participation is an
affirmation of the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedures, I invite the
representatives of Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Australia, the Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Botswana,
Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cyprus, the Dominican
Republic, Estonia, Egypt, Fiji, Georgia, Germany,
Haiti, India, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Luxembourg, Maldives, the
Marshall Islands, Mexico, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Morocco, Nauru, the Netherlands, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Poland, the Republic
of Korea, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Senegal, Seychelles, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Sweden, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine and
Uruguay to participate in this meeting.

I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Tuilaepa Sailele Malielegaoi, Prime
Minister of Samoa, to his seat at the Council table.

Mr. Tuilaepa Sailele Malielegaoi, Prime Minister
of Samoa, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.

The President: I request the Protocol Officer to
escort Her Excellency Mrs. Portia Simpson Miller,
Prime Minister of Jamaica, to her seat at the Council
table.

Mrs. Portia Simpson Miller, Prime Minister of

Jamaica, was escorted to a seat at the Council

table.


The President: On behalfofthe Council, I welcome
His Excellency Mr. Tuilaepa Sailele Malielegaoi and
Her Excellency Mrs. Portia Simpson Miller.

On behalf of the Council, I also welcome His
Excellency Mr. Jean-Paul Adam, Minister of Finance
of the Seychelles.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Toke Talagi, the Premier of Niue, and His
Excellency Mr. Mark Brown, Minister of Finance of the
Cook Islands, to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/543, which contains a letter dated
15 July 2015 from the Permanent Representative of
New Zealand to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.


