Mr. Wais: First of all, allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your able leadership of the work
of the Security Council during this month.

It is with great pleasure that I brief the Security
Council today on the status of the ongoing High-
Level Revitalization Forum on the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, led by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). The briefing is aimed at keeping
the Council abreast of the status of implementation of
the Revitalization Forum. It will include a review of the
mandate of the Forum, the achievements attained during
its recent phase, key observations and recommendations
for the attention of the Security Council.

The Council will recall that since the July 2016
fighting in Juba, South Sudan, the political, economic
and security situation in South Sudan has significantly
changed. The emergent realities in the country's political
landscape have impeded the effective implementation
of the 2015 peace agreement. The Council will further
recall that, as a result, at its thirty-first Extraordinary
Summit, held in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, on 12 June 2017,
the IGAD Assembly of Heads of State and Government
decided that the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan should be
urgently revitalized.

The stated objectives of the revitalization are
threefold, namely, to restore the permanent ceasefire, to
resume the full and inclusive implementation of the 2015
peace agreement, and to develop revised and realistic
timelines and an implementation schedule towards a
democratic election at the end of the transitional period.

At the launch of the Revitalization Forum, we sought
to pursue the directives of the IGAD leaders highlighted
above, including a review of the implementation and
oversight mechanism for a revised peace agreement, as
well as resource mobilization for its implementation.
The latter are consequential issues pertaining to
the effective implementation of the revitalized 2015
peace agreement.

IGAD successfully launched and concluded the first
phase of the Revitalization Forum, which was convened
from 18 to 22 December 2017. The parties deliberated
and eventually signed the Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and Humanitarian
Access on 21 December 2017. As a follow-up, aworkshop
on the cessation of hostilities was convened in Addis
Ababa from 24 to 25 January to assist the parties and
the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism (CTSAMM) with the requisite
tools to implement the critical provisions of the
Agreement. To that end, specific modalities that would
enable the full implementation of the Agreement on
Cessation of Hostilities were developed.

The guiding principle of silencing the guns ahead
of the commencement of the talks of the second phase
was to establish the necessary conditions for the South
Sudanese stakeholders to discuss substantive issues of
the revitalization. It was also intended to contribute to
confidence-building among the parties to the Agreement
on the Cessation of Hostilities, on the one hand, and the
South Sudanese citizenry awaiting the return of peace
to their beloved country, on the other hand.

The second phase of the Revitalization Forum was

convened from 5 to 16 February at the headquarters of
the Economic Commission for Africa in Addis Ababa.
Its main goal was to deliberate and to agree on ways
to restore the permanent ceasefire, to resume the full
implementation of the peace agreement, and to develop
revised and realistic implementation schedules towards
a democratic election at the end of the transitional
period. In the course of the 11 days, however, the
Forum focused on a declaration of principles and on
revitalizing chapters I and II of the peace agreement,
and achieved the following outcomes.

The parties constructively deliberated on a
declaration of principles intended to guide the discussion
on the revitalization of the 2015 peace agreement.
The declaration of principles was signed by all the
parties except the Transitional Government of National
Unity. The parties also constructively deliberated and
agreed on some provisions of governance during a new
transitional period and on most of the provisions of the
chapter on the permanent ceasefire and transitional
security arrangements. Where the parties achieved
consensus on the provisions of chapters I and II of the
2015 peace agreement, the heads of delegation duly
initialled those articles.

Although the majority of the issues on governance
discussed within the specific articles were agreed
upon, there were divergent views on the sharing
of responsibilities in the revitalized Transitional
Government of National Unity, particularly in
the executive, legislature and judiciary, including
governance arrangements at the State level.

On the permanent ceasefire and transitional security
arrangements, the parties agreed on several articles,
including the permanent ceasefire, the composition and
restructuring of the Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism, and the new
structure for the command and control of forces during
the transitional period. However, the parties had
significant differences on articles 5 and 7, regarding
transitional security arrangements and the unification
of forces, respectively. The opposition groups would
like to see practical measures that guarantee their
security if they return to Juba even if that security is
provided by a third party.

Despite the facilitation's best efforts, in view of
the divergent opinions put forward by the parties and
the inability to achieve consensus on some articles, the
facilitation suspended the adoption of the outstanding
issues to allow the parties more time to consult and to
re-evaluate their respective positons. The facilitation
will continue to engage the parties bilaterally to
ensure that they reach some realistic consensus sooner
rather than later. As for the pending provisions of
the contentious articles, including on the sharing of
responsibilities, the facilitation will present them for
further deliberation and agreement in the next phase
of the Forum.

On the status of adherence to the Agreement
on Cessation of Hostilities, Civilian Protection and
Humanitarian Access, I regret to inform the Council
that fighting incidents have continued to be reported
in South Sudan, even as the second phase of the
Revitalization Forum was ongoing. Worse still, those
incidents disrupted the Forum for a day, as one of the
parties protested the continued alleged violations of the
Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities by walking away
from the talks.

Related, provocative statements also continued to
be made against the ceasefire monitoring body and its
personnel. Those incidents are unacceptable and clearly
demonstrate the lack of good will and compliance with
the agreement by the individuals and parties involved
in those violations. Although those incidents are
being investigated by CTSAMM. to identify violators,
it is imperative that the Council, in cooperation with
the region and the African Union Peace and Security
Council, consider urgently needed and appropriate
measures for holding accountable violators and spoilers
ofthe Cessation ofHostilities Agreement whose identity
has been verified by CTSAMM. Such measures would
be in line with and include the decision of the twenty-
eighth Extraordinary Summit of IGAD Heads of State
and Government of 7 November 2014, which clearly
spelled out consequences for violating the Cessation of
Hostilities Agreement. The Council may recall the third
IGAD Assembly resolution, which prescribes penalties
for such violators. It states that:

"Any violation of the cessation of the hostilities
by any party will invite the following collective
action by the IGAD region against those responsible
for such violations, which will include, but are not
limited to: (a) the enactment of asset freezes; (b) the
enactment of travel bans within the region; and (c)
[the] denial of the supply of arms and ammunition,
and any other material that could be used in war."

I commend the Council for demonstrating its
unwavering support to the ongoing revitalization
process and for the strong statements that it has issued
in the quest for sustainable peace in South Sudan. As I
conclude, I would like to pose the following questions

for the Council's consideration: How can the Council
make non-compliance with the Cessation of Hostilities
Agreement and implementation of the revitalized peace
agreement costly to the spoilers and violators; How
can we guarantee the security of the opposition in Juba
upon its return and the inclusive implementation of the
peace agreement; and how can we avoid a repetition of
the July 16 fighting in Juba? Those questions demand
policy decisions that would prevent a relapse into armed
conflict in South Sudan.

Lastly, I reiterate my appeal to the Council for its
continuous support for both the region and the continent
in ensuring that the Revitalization Forum process
reaches a successful conclusion that restores peace and
stability in the Republic of South Sudan.
