Ms. Durrant (Jamaica): On behalf of the
Jamaican delegation, I wish to welcome Mr. Ruud
Lubbers, United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, to the Security Council today. I wish to
thank him for his very comprehensive briefing on the
humanitarian situation in West Africa and for
presenting the findings of his mission to Sierra Leone,
Guinea and Liberia, as well as for giving us some food
for thought.

He began with the recognition of today as
International Women's Day, and I wish to thank him
for focusing on refugee women.

Women have become, with children, the largest
group of persons affected by armed conflict. And,
within the framework of the Security Council's
responsibility for international peace and security, the
question of the protection of civilians has become a
very important problem. In fact, yesterday when we
were discussing in the Council the follow-up to the
Millennium Declaration by the heads of State and
Government, I drew attention to the fact that we would
be meeting with Mr. Lubbers today to explore just how
the international community could assist with the
situation in West Africa - particularly the situation in
the "parrot's beak" area of Guinea, where some
135,000 persons are facing a severe risk to their lives.

The Security Council's mission to the region last
October and its meeting with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
ministers on 12 February emphasize that a regional
approach to the crisis, entailing specific criteria for
action, has to be a priority. We are pleased that the
High Commissioner has adopted a similar approach.
The flow of refugees across the Guinea, Liberia and
Sierra Leone borders has fuelled what he himself
described as the most serious refugee situation in the
world, with some half a million refugees caught up in a
spiral of violence, insecurity, inaccessibility and
poverty.

The indiscriminate attacks, looting and the
destruction and burning of civilian property have also
affected the ability to distribute food aid in the affected
areas. Moreover, the frequency of cross-border attacks
poses a constant threat to the security of refugees and
internally displaced persons, as well as humanitarian
workers.

The High Commissioner pointed out to us that we
needed to look at this matter in two phases. First of all,
we must look at the emergency situation, which is part
of the mandate of the High Commissioner for Refugees
to protect refugees. That is the most important part of
mandate of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). We would also
need to look at the long-term solution, and, as the High
Commissioner pointed out, peace and security can only
be brought to the region if we are able to provide a
political solution. Therefore, we wish to thank him for
the ideas that he has put forward for consideration by
the Council and the meetings that he has had with the
Presidents of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, as well
as with President Konare of Mali, the Chair of
ECOWAS, because again we wish to emphasize that a
solution will have to come with the full cooperation of
the regional organization and the countries concerned.

As far as the emergency situation is concerned,
we have taken note of the paper provided by the High
Commissioner on the relocation exercise and the
relocation sites. But, we are concerned particularly
about the fact that the paper states that relocating the
estimated 135,000 refugees currently in the Languette
region will take considerable time and that the UNHCR
is looking into various possibilities, including having
the most able walk in an organized manner up to
Kenema.

The paper says that they would use way stations
along the way, provided that the security situation
remains calm. To us, this is of very serious concern
because all reports indicate that the fighting is
continuing and that these refugees are at risk. So, we
would wish to ask the High Commissioner exactly
what time-frame he expects he will need in order to be
able to address the removal and relocation of these
refugees.

It seems to my delegation that we might again
have to call on the good offices and the support of the
Guinean authorities to again provide safe havens for
these persons further inland. We recognize that for
many years Guinea has provided refugees with safe
havens, refugees fleeing conflict in neighbouring
countries, and that today the situation has worsened
and the fighting has intruded into Guinea itself. But,
we are concerned that if time is of the essence and if
something is not done quickly and speedily, the
refugees in the Languette will become more statistics.
We therefore urge the High Commissioner to develop
an emergency plan for the relocation of these refugees.

As far as a long-term solution is concerned, the
fact that the Security Council has not been able to
expand the numbers of persons and the troops needed
to strengthen the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) is a matter of concern for us. We
agree with the High Commissioner that the key for
stability and the future of Sierra Leone is to bring the
activities of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) to
an end. We therefore agree with him that it is very
important for the Security Council, with ECOWAS and
with UNAMSIL, to seek to have the RUF fulfil the
terms of the Security Council resolutions. We are also
concerned that when the refugees return to Sierra
Leone and become internally displaced persons there
will have to be reception facilities and assistance
provided for them so that they can be reintegrated into
their communities. We recognize that, as Mr. Lubbers
said, refugees will not return to areas dominated by the
RUF.

In conclusion, I wish again to thank the High
Commissioner for bringing us this report, for
describing his meetings and for providing suggestions
for action by the Council. We look forward to working
with him as he seeks to carry out his mandate to protect
civilians affected by armed conflict.

