Mr. Ipo (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, and Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, for
their detailed briefings on the activities of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF).

My delegation remains concerned about the
escalation of tensions caused by numerous Violations of
the 1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement, despite
the ceasefire being upheld. The continuation of military
activities, the ongoing presence of armed forces in the
area of separation on the Bravo side, the shots fired
over the ceasefire line, as well as the ongoing presence
of unauthorized weapons and equipment in the area of
limitation on the Alpha side are acts that undermine
the fragile calm and undermine efforts to stabilize
the region.

In that context, C6te d' Ivoire calls on all parties to
uphold the spirit and letter of resolution 2450 (2018) and
urges them therefore to cease their operations in the
area of separation and withdraw all military equipment
and armed personnel. We remain convinced that all
the issues emanating from the underlying tensions in
the region could be resolved through comprehensive
negotiations, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

Cote d'Ivoire also underscores the importance
of stakeholders maintaining close collaboration with
UNDOF in order to avoid an exacerbation of the
situation along the ceasefire line and to create the
conditions for the return of the Force to the positions
it abandoned in 2014, so as to better carry out its
mandate. In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
support of all parties for UNDOF's efforts to return
gradually to the Bravo side, thereby enabling it to
intensify its operations in the area of separation. Cote
d' Ivoire encourages the various parties to enhance
their collaboration to ensure that UNDOF has all the
necessary means and resources to carry out its mandate.
It urges them to uphold their commitments by working
to lift the restrictions imposed on the Force's movement
and promoting immediate and unhindered access for
United Nations personnel to the area of separation.

We stress the need for UNDOF to carry out its
mandate in a secure environment. Accordingly country
remains concerned about the security threatposed by the
presence of unexploded ordnance, explosive remnants
of war and mines in its area of operation. We therefore
urge the parties involved to closely cooperate with the
United Nations mission in carrying out demining and
clearance operations in the area concerned in complete
safety and security.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to pay
tribute to all UNDOF military and civilian personnel
for their deep sense of responsibility, courage and
dedication to their task, despite a difficult security
environment. We also acknowledge the fundamental
and crucial role played by UNDOF in promoting peace
and stability in the Golan Heights. We call on the
Council and the international community to support
those efforts.

