The President: I thank Ms. Haq for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Da Costa.

Mr. Da Costa (Timor-Leste) (Spoke in Portuguese; English interpretation provided by the
delegation): It is with great satisfaction that I return
today to the Security Council to participate in this
debate on Timor-Leste. The relationship of the
Timorese with the United Nations dates back 36 years,
to the General Assembly's adoption of its first
resolution on my country, on 12 December 1975. Since
then, that relationship has grown even closer and has
come to include the Security Council, which has been
decisive in safeguarding our sovereignty and
independence. For those reasons, on behalf of the
Timorese people and Government, of which I am a
member, I would like first of all to thank the members
of the Council profoundly and sincerely for their
attention and generosity towards Timor-Leste and its
people.

I would also like to mention the effort and
dedication of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Her Excellency Ms. Ameerah Haq,
who is present here. Her commitment has greatly
contributed to the evolution of the situation in Timor-
Leste and to our country's excellent relationship with
the United Nations.

On 22 February, His Excellency Prime Minister
Kay Rala Xanana Gusmao gave a speech in the
Chamber (see S/PV.6485) in which he described
completely and transparently the path that Timor-Leste
has travelled during our Government and since the
United Nations Integration Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) was authorized and established under
circumstances that we all know. Political and social
stability, along with economic development, are a
reality in our country; they are the fruit of significant
public investment that has been directed to that end.
The path has been long, but we have overcome many
obstacles. Nonetheless, we humbly acknowledge that
other, even more difficult, obstacles still lie ahead of
us. We are aware of them, but it is important to note
that in 2012 Timor-Leste will celebrate just 10 years
since the restoration of its independence.

We also believe that the country is on a far more
stable foundation than it was five years ago. We know
that things overall have gone very well, but we must
also recognize that highly significant steps have been
taken in virtually all areas. As evidence of that, the
most recent United Nations Development Programme
Human Development Report ranks Timor-Leste on its
Human Development Index just five places above the
last medium-development country, and above many
others that have been independent for decades and have
not experienced conflict.

The strong economic growth that has been
registered over the past several years - including with
regard to retirement, disability and old-age pensions, as
well as merit compensation for former combatants, and
infrastructure rehabilitation projects undertaken at the
level of districts and villages - has decisively
contributed to a period of social peace unprecedented
since the restoration of our independence.

There has also been concrete progress in
reforming the defence and security sectors, thanks to
both bilateral and multilateral support. UNMIT has
been a useful and valuable partner in that effort,
particularly since the PNTL assumed complete
responsibility for executive control of internal security,
which took effect on 28 March. Since then, the PNTL
has invested heavily in the training of its forces, as
well as in strengthening its logistics and infrastructure
in order to ensure the quality of its operational
activities. Next year, we expect the Prime Minister and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Timor-Leste to grant final certification to the PNTL,

which will signal the completion of that phase, which
will also be affirmed during the next presidential and
legislative elections.

The Government's commitment to professional
training, logistics and operations for the PNTL is
clearly reflected in the national budget, which allocated
$20 million to that end and was approved by
Parliament last week. In addition to the budget, the
PNTL has strong support in this area through UNMIT's
training and development programme in the context of
the joint development plan signed in February, and
through bilateral cooperation with Australia, New
Zealand, Portugal, Japan and the United States. In
addition to the reinforcements foreseen in the budget,
the PNTL is also committed to recruiting 250 new
members, who will begin training in January for
integration into the police force in the third quarter of
2012.

Finally, with respect to professional development
to ensure the excellence and professionalism of the
national police, the commission for monitoring the
PNTL promotions process has also focused on the area
of discipline. The new disciplinary regulations, which
were approved recently in the Council of Ministers and
are awaiting adoption, will help fill gaps in this area,
with training seminars and workshops to be conducted
with the support of United Nations police. We are
firmly committed to advancing the proceedings in the
199 cases of PNTL officers mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report. I would like to inform the Council
that 195 of the cases are under investigation or
awaiting sentencing. Two were resolved through
dismissal and one through exoneration.

I am very pleased to be able to say that Timor-
Leste has the largest percentage of women in its police
service in the entire region; this is testimony to our
commitment to promoting gender equality and
opportunities to participate in the social, political and
economic life of our young democracy. The new
election law, enacted in June, mandates a quota of one
woman in every three candidates. Through its
Department for the Promotion of Equality and together
with civil society organizations, in partnership with
UN-Women, the Government is working to maximize
women's participation in the 2012 elections. I would
also like to mention that the contribution of women is
broadly recognized at the national level - a Timorese
woman, Filomena Barros dos Reis, was recently
awarded an N-Peace Award for her contribution to
peace - particularly in the border regions, through
cultural exchange and capacity-building in local
communities as conflict mediators and agents of peace
and economic development.

With regard to human rights, Timor-Leste
recently participated in October in a constructive
dialogue in the Human Rights Council on its first
Universal Periodic Review. I assure the Council of our
full commitment to implementing the
recommendations we received. We have also taken
significant steps to discipline the martial arts groups
that have been active outside the sporting spirit of their
activities. We have enacted legislation on such groups'
activities and established a code of conduct. The
Secretary of State for Youth and Sports is actively
promoting all measures necessary to avoid future
incidents among these groups. The isolated incidents of
violence that occurred in some places, such as
Zumalai, are the result of old issues among the
populations of neighbouring villages, involving
elements connected to the martial arts groups. Through
the Ministry of Social Solidarity, the Government has
restored normality among the affected families and
concluded an investigation that resulted in the
imprisonment of all the implicated parties.

Concerning the Falintil-Forcas de Defesa de
Timor-Leste (F-FDTL), we continue to consolidate that
military institution. Last month, Major General Taur
Matan Ruak asked to retire and passed the baton to
Major General Lere Anan Timor. That in itself
demonstrates the maturity that the higher command of
the F-FDTL has attained with a peaceful, voluntary
transfer of command of our armed forces.

The defence cooperation agreements that have
been signed with New Zealand and Indonesia and are
to be signed with the United States and Australia are
examples of Timor-Leste's commitment to working
within a new framework of relationships after the exit
of the international stabilization forces. On 17 January
2012, 12 members of the armed forces will participate
in a United Nations peacekeeping mission for the first
time as members of the Portuguese contingent of
engineers in the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, and Timor-Leste begins its contribution to
peacekeeping with great pride. I note that two PNTL
officers are part of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau and one
member of F-FDTL is a military observer in the
youngest country in the world, South Sudan.

Today, Timor-Leste is unquestionably better
prepared to face its future than it was five years ago.
Many State institutions have been strengthened and
control mechanisms established to monitor State
employees' activities, including the establishment of
the Anti-Corruption Commission, the Audit Chamber
and continued improvement in the justice sector as
pillars of a more just and reliable society. The progress
that has been made in these areas is of necessity for the
medium and long terms, and cannot be measured in
months or even years, as is also the case with the civic
education of a people who lived for 24 years under
oppression and violence. The traumatic consequences
of those practices at all levels do not disappear of
themselves overnight. We recognize that, while some
issues persist, we know that they do not have the same
social impact.

In that context, it is important to note that the
mechanisms created have been designed to grow
progressively stronger and to contribute to better
Government administration. Timor-Leste is the first
Asian country and only the third in the world to meet
the transparency criteria of the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative and has created an online portal
enabling free real-time access to the State's budget
accounts. Social justice for the people of Timor-Leste
starts with the ambitious goals for sustained
development established in the Strategic Development
Plan approved by Parliament. The Plan defines
development directions through 2030 that involve
investing in human capital, infrastructure and the
economy, and in transforming Timor-Leste's economy
from one essentially tied to oil into one that is non-oil-
based.

We believe that 2012 will be a special year in the
life of Timor-Leste and the Timorese. We will hold
presidential elections in the first quarter. On 20 May,
we will celebrate the tenth anniversary of the
restoration of independence, and parliamentary
elections may be held at the end of June. We will also
celebrate the centenary of the Manufahi revolt, which
took place during the Portuguese occupation of Timor,
and, finally, the 500th anniversary of the arrival of the
first Portuguese on the island of Timor, which we will
celebrate in the enclave of Oecussi. We want our
elections to take place in a climate of peace, stability
and celebration. We know how important they are as
determinants of the consolidation of our young
democracy.

There are positive signs that political leaders on
all sides will be committed to acting with mutual
respect in the promotion of peace and in defence of the
democratic values of liberty and tolerance. I would also
like to take this opportunity to thank UNMIT, the
United Nations Development Programme and bilateral
partners, including Portugal, Japan, South Korea,
Brazil and Mexico, for their important contributions to
the success of our elections.

This climate must continue to prevail as UNMIT
draws down at the end of next year. I commend the
joint work that has been done in the preparation of the
transition plan for UNMIT. Learning from our errors in
the past, which had a grave social, economic and
political impact on the country's security and stability,
we must also pay special attention to monitoring the
evolution of the transition based on quarterly reports
submitted to the High-level Committee. As Prime
Minister Xanana Gusmao noted when he signed the
Plan, it is a living document that can and must be
adapted from moment to moment to ensure its efficacy
and full completion.

At the regional level, Timor-Leste has made
major strides towards regional integration. In April, we
became an observer member of the Melanesian group.
We also welcomed with great satisfaction the decision
taken at the recent summit of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in Bali to consider
the membership application of Timor-Leste under the
criteria established in a letter from ASEAN. We
welcome the commitment and the full support of
Indonesia, among the various members of ASEAN, as
well as the friendly nations of the region and the world,
throughout the entire process of Timor-Leste's
application to join that important regional organization.

We are sure that Timor-Leste will earn the
confidence and trust of the countries of the region and
join the great ASEAN family in a good time. We are
also confident that stability and security will continue
to prevail in Timor-Leste and that the coming elections
will take place in an atmosphere of liberty and
tranquillity and in accordance with international
standards. Thus, after the elections in 2012, we will be
able to begin a new phase with the gradual withdrawal
of the United Nations Mission and the gradual process
of integration into ASEAN.

In conclusion, I commend the members of the
Security Council and thank them for their support.

The President: I now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.


