Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, since this is the last Council
meeting in which you are participating in your capacity
as the Permanent Representative of your brotherly
country, permit me to add my voice to the colleagues
who have preceded me and commend the laudable
qualities that you have demonstrated and the
constructive cooperation that have prevailed in the
course of your leadership of your delegation. We also
laud your positive contribution to the work of the
Council. By the same token, I would like to thank you
for the excellent manner with which you have steered
the deliberations of the Council. On my behalf and on
behalf of other members of the Council, I wish you
health, happiness and success in your future activities.

I would also like to extend my thanks to Mr. Kai
Eide for his comprehensive briefing and commend the
efforts he and all the members of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) are
expending to assist the Afghan people despite all the
difficulties and challenges that they are facing. I wish
also to welcome the statement made by His Excellency
Ambassador Tanin, the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan.

The reports of the Secretary-General since 2005
have predicted the deterioration of the security
situation in Afghanistan year in and year out. This past
year has been no exception. The report of the
Secretary-General before us (S/2009/323) makes
numerous references to new record numbers of
incidents since the beginning of this year. In paragraph
18, for example, the report indicates that the number of
security incidents rose by 43 per cent. The number of
such incidents rose above the 1,000 mark in last May
alone. The report also predicts the possibility of
increasing levels of violence in the forthcoming period.

Meanwhile, international pledges and promises to
Afghanistan have, unfortunately, been declining,
particularly with regard to the implementation of the
Afghan National Development Strategy, which is made
clear in paragraph 25 of the report. We are gravely
concerned that the day will come when the
international community will turn its back once again
on Afghanistan. We hope that that will not happen.

Once again, we would like to state that the use of
force alone will not lead to security and stability in
Afghanistan. We believe that the proposal calling for
increasing the number of civilian experts to support the
Afghan Government and build Afghan capacity is a
step in the right direction and must be carried out as
soon as possible.

We also look forward to more inclusive reviews
of peace and broader strategies in Afghanistan based on
the principle of comprehensive dialogue with all those
who accept dialogue as a means of promoting national
reconciliation, achieving understanding among all
sectors of the Afghan people, and realizing
development.

On the other hand, there is a pressing need for to
strengthen the role and mandate of UNAMA and make
the necessary resources available to it. It is also
necessary to support the wider presence and ensure
effective contributions by United Nations agencies, in
particular in development and reconstruction projects
in Afghanistan, with a view to paving the way for the
withdrawal of foreign troops, which is a sine qua non
for achieving national reconciliation.
We would like to express our satisfaction at the
statement made by the representative of Afghanistan
regarding the progress made in the areas of
infrastructure, education, agriculture and health
services. We also hope that the international
community will continue its support in financing those
sectors.

Despite the recurrent tragic incidents perpetrated
by international troops against civilians in Afghanistan

and despite repeated appeals to take the measures
required to prevent their repetition, the incidents of
killing civilians continue in a deeply disconcerting
manner. It is enough here to refer to the incident that
took place in the Bala Baluk district on 4 May 2009,
which led to the deaths of 140 civilians according to
Afghan Government sources. Recurrence of such
incidents prompts us to question the establishment of
rules and procedures by the international troop
command to prevent such tragic incidents and their
consequences. It is urgent that fair and impartial
investigations of these incidents be conducted and
those responsible for them be prosecuted.

We wish to express our satisfaction at the manner
in which preparations for elections have been made, as
well as the consensus reached by the Afghan people on
this question. We wish here to commend the role
played by Mr. Kai Eide and the United Nations
Assistance Mission. We believe that the success of
elections depends on the wide participation of the
Afghan people, on the integrity of the process and on
non-interference from outside in the election results.

In conclusion, we look forward to the report of
the Secretary-General evaluating progress in
implementing the mandate and priorities of UNAMA to
be presented next September.

