Mr. Toro-Carnevali (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We are deeply concerned
about the deteriorating situation in South Sudan. We
believe that it is necessary to put an immediate stop to
the violence and we are troubled by the difficult situation
faced by the South Sudanese people. We condemn the
fact that the parties are not honouring their obligations
under human rights law or their agreement to resolve
the conflict in the Republic of South Sudan.

We stress that we firmly and steadfastly advocate
for the protection of the civil population. Nevertheless,
we are concerned that the resolution 2304 (2016) was
drafted without consulting South Sudan's Transitional
Government of National Unity, which, in its letter of
9 August 2016, stated that the approval of the resolution

"would strengthen foreign forces under UNMISS,
in addition to the deployment of a regional
protection force, in preparation for an invasion of
South Sudan, and its relegation to the status of a
protectorate of the United Nations".

The deployment of such a force without the consent
of the host State could make the situation on the ground
even more tense and violent. In these conditions, we
are not convinced that the deployment of a regional
protection force would result in the attainment of our
common goal - the immediate end of violence and the
protection of civilians. Furthermore, we do not have
clear information on the details of the implementation
of the resolution, including who will participate
using what resources, and how exactly the measures
envisioned in the mandate will be implemented.

We hope that the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of South Sudan will be fully respected. We are
of the view that if we are to protect the people of South
Sudan and to ensure a lasting and sustainable solution
to the conflict, we will need more diplomacy and
dialogue and fewer of the threats and sanctions offered
by the resolution. In our view, that was the spirit of the
decisions adopted by the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, with the support of the African Union,
and that is the tone that we hoped to maintain in the
resolution.

The solution to this crisis is a political one and
we will continue to insist on that approach. Our vote
today should be interpreted in no way as condoning
the behaviour of the parties in South Sudan or as
indifference to the need to protect civilians and their
rights, but rather as a call for caution so as to not repeat
past mistakes.

