Lieutenant General Mgwebi: It is an honour and
privilege for me to have been asked to brief the Security
Council today. I have been with the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) for the past 15
months. MONUSCO is a very complex and politically
charged mission. I am going to attempt to cover the
challenges that have faced us over the past 15 months.
I trust that the challenges of which we will be speaking
will be similar to those facing my colleagues who are
Force Commanders elsewhere.

One of the most important aspects is the mandate
itself. When it comes to the actual drafting of the
mandate, it is also critical that its authors take into
account that its implementation will be critical for its
success and that any possible exit strategy should be
understood at the earliest stages, while taking into
account the complexities of the conflict and specific
factors, such as the country's size, the fault lines
leading to and defining the conflict in its present state
and the allocation of resources needed so as to be able
to conduct the mission itself. That speaks to the nature
of the mandate itself.

Once the mandate has been issued, the Secretariat,
the mission and the force's formulation and
interpretation of the mandate become critical, because
if there is a failure to understand the mission's concept
of operation, which underlies campaign planning by
the force, challenges and differences of opinion might
result in connection with how to move the mission
forward. The MONUSCO mandate has just been
extended pursuant to resolution 2348 (2017), which
calls for the reduction of the force to a troop ceiling of
16,215. That is happening at a very interesting time in
the sense that, as a mission and a force, we are expected
to deal with the issue of the protection of civilians in
a country approximately the size of Western Europe,
added to which we are tasked with the objective of
supporting the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in the holding of elections - which was
not included in the previous mandate. If that is what
is expected of us while we are called on to reduce the
force, that becomes challenging.

With regard to current developments, the force
was initially deployed to a greater degree in the east,
whereas there are currently more problems in the
southern sector. Moving the force is becoming difficult,
as the statement of unit requirements issued by the
Office of Military Affairs and the memorandums of
understanding (MOU) signed by Member States tend to
confine the troops at my disposal to a greater degree in
the east. Therefore, ifI must move forces from the east
to where there is a challenge, it means having to speak
to the Office of Military Affairs and the Permanent
Missions that must communicate with their capitals
so as to obtain agreement allowing the forces to move.
In terms of reaction-and-response time, that process
takes time and causes delays. It becomes critical for
the language of the statement of unit requirements and
the MOUs to allow the Force Commander to use forces
available to him in the part of the country in need and
not in specified areas.

That represents a challenge in terms of command-
and-control, policy-writing and giving direction to the
Force Commander to use the forces at his disposal.

Aware that we are expected to deal with armed
groups, especially the foreign armed groups within the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the way in which
the MONUSCO mandates are written tends to provide
for two forces. One is the Intervention Brigade, which is
mandated to conduct targeted operations, whereas the
rest of the Force, commonly known as the framework
brigades, is expected to conduct only normal, and not
targeted, operations. In terms of the cohesion of the
force, that then becomes a challenge to command-and-
control, which then makes the Force Commander's task
a bit ofa challenge to achieve what needs to be achieved.

With regard to the assets and capabilities that are
available, the absence of infrastructure such as roads in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo makes moving
forces from one area to another very difficult. The way
in which the mandate is written expects the force to be
agile, flexible, versatile and mobile. In order to achieve
that, the assets must be available in order for the
mandate to be implemented. Unfortunately, such assets
are often not available on the ground. In the Kasais,
for example, I had to move a force from South Kivu
to the Kasais. Because of the limited Mission support
available, including the people required to provide
the assets that were are not available on the ground,
I was able to move only soldiers and their personal
equipment; no main equipment could be moved. The
soldiers have been on the ground now for the past three
weeks, still awaiting the heavy-lift aircraft to move the
vehicles. The Ilyushin 76, which is expected, is not yet
on the ground, and it has been almost three weeks. That
leaves the troops vulnerable on the ground. How then
do we ensure that the forces and the support element,
which falls under the civilian side of the operation,
are responsive to the requirements of operations? That
becomes a challenge when it comes to moving the
forces to where they are expected to be.

Missions are expected to protect civilians and
rightly so. A very good paper has been written on
the three tiers of protection-of-civilians mandates:
political strategy, physical protection and a conducive
environment. The Mission is made up of civilian,
police and military or force components. The challenge
within the mission itself is to achieve a comprehensive
integrated approach. Mission leadership must look at
that and ensure that all components begin to play their
role, so as to avoid a situation where, when we reach
the physical stage, it is already a bit too late. At the
political level, we must ensure that we are able to, at
least, prevent and anticipate events occurring.

According to a report published by the Office of
Internal Oversight Services, which is tasked with
evaluating the implementation and results of the
protection of civilians mandates,

"the chain linking the intent of the Security
Council to the actions of the Secretariat, troop- and
police-contributing countries and peacekeeping
missions themselves remains broken when it comes
to the use of force" (A/68/787, summary).

The question ofthe use of force as mentioned by the
report must be looked at by the United Nations because
interpretations by some contingents on the ground are
not necessarily the same. They tend to be eager to use
force when it comes to self-defence, but the part of the
report that speaks to the use of force for the defence
of the mandate leads to different interpretations, which
we need to look at.

In addition, command-and-control is a challenge
because, once again, according to the same report,
there is a

"a de facto dual line of command involving mission
leadership and troop-contributing countries that
regulates the use of force by missions" (ibid)

That means that, although they are not expressly
stipulated, there are caveats that are not visible and
come from the capitals. At times, forces are not eager to
move forward and do what is expected of them, wishing
to consider whether it is within their mandate or not,
which is a challenge for MONUSCO. With regard to
the issue of targeted operations by the Intervention
Brigade, the Brigade becomes an escape clause for
some of the framework brigades, which claim that a
specific operation is not their job; it is the job of the
Intervention Brigade. That is one of the areas that we
need to look at.

I would like to point out that the principles of
peacekeeping are still valid, but with regard to what
happens on the ground, some of the armed groups are
foreign, criminal and without any political agenda. In
my view, if we speak of consent, that does not apply
to them. If we speak of impartiality, that does not
apply to them. If we speak of the use of force, where
do we stand with them? Impartiality and all of the
principles are valid, more so perhaps in peacekeeping.
In peace enforcement, however, where no agreement
has been signed, how do we address the principles of
peacekeeping in today's conflict situation, in which
we find ourselves dealing with criminal groups, as
opposed to political groups trying to fight for freedom
or independence from the host country?

It is a challenge for us to work with the armed forces
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially
in politically charged areas such as the Kasais.
Cooperating with them becomes difficult when they are
also found to be committing human rights violations,
but we are expected to support them. How then do we
approach the situation when they are participating in
such abuses? The credibility of the United Nations is
at stake if it is seen to be working with them. In our
experience, when we are present and work closely with
them, their behaviour tends to change; they become
more positive, but in areas in which we are not present,
violations are committed and the environment then
becomes very politically charged.

I thank you, Sir, for giving me the opportunity to
speak. I have tried to very briefly highlight some of the
challenges that my colleagues in other areas might be
experiencing.

