The President (interpretation from Chinese): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of China.

The conflict in Liberia has been going on for six
years. This conflict in western Africa has not only taken
many lives and caused tremendous damage to the
property of the Liberian people, but also poses a direct
threat to peace and stability in neighbouring countries and
in the region as a whole.

Over the years, the members of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) have
made unremitting efforts to end the fighting in Liberia
despite their own economic difficulties. They have sent
peace-keeping forces to Liberia in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. They have
also offered good offices and mediation to find a solution
acceptable to all parties, with a view to facilitating the
peaceful settlement of the Liberian question. The United
Nations and the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL) have also made great efforts to that
end.

At one point these peace efforts were achieving
some success. However, we have noted from the recent
report by the Secretary-General that since early last month
the situation in Liberia has further deteriorated, that
conflict between various parties has continued and that
Monrovia has almost become a dead city. This has
seriously endangered the implementation of the Abuja
Agreement and has made it hard for the general elections
scheduled for this August to proceed on time. For lack of
resources and manpower, the ECOWAS Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG) is no longer able to provide safety
guarantees to UNOMIL. We are deeply concerned about
these developments.

The Liberian peace process is now at a critical
moment. Foreign Ministers of nine ECOWAS countries
reaffirmed at their recent meeting at Accra that the Abuja
Agreement remained the only basis for the promotion of
peace in Liberia. We fully support their decisions and

 

strongly urge the parties to the conflict in Liberia to stop all
hostilities immediately and cooperate with the United
Nations and ECOWAS by strictly observing the agreements
already reached and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, and by working for the restoration of peace.

As the Secretary-General has pointed out, UNOMIL
has played an important role in assisting ECOWAS to
resume the peace process in Liberia. Together with
ECOMOG, it can also promote the adoption of confidence-
building measures, thus creating favourable conditions for
the implementation of the Abuja Agreement. Therefore, we
support the Secretary-General's recommendation that the
mandate of UNOMIL be extended for three months.

We are of the View that the final settlement of the
Liberian question depends solely on the Liberian people
themselves. Only when the parties concerned truly lay
down their arms and engage in patient and sincere
negotiations and dialogue can there be a political solution
acceptable to all parties; only then can the Liberian people
enjoy peace again and set out on the road of reconstruction
and development.

Africa occupies an important position in the world and
represents an important force in the international political
arena. The African people, with a peace-loving and
progress-seeking tradition, have always been a main force
in maintaining world peace and stability. Global peace and
prosperity are out of the question without stability and
development in Africa. At present, the situation in Africa is,
on the whole, moving towards stability, and its economy is
beginning to improve. However, many countries are still
plagued by civil strife, which has not only endangered
stability and security in these countries and their
neighbours, but has also hampered their development.

The Chinese Government has consistently held that a
stable and growing Africa is an indispensable and important
part of a peaceful and prosperous world. The international
community is duty-bound to take effective measures to help
its people end the fighting and to find a political solution to
their conflicts. We hope that Liberia, with the assistance of
the international community, will end its conflict and
achieve peace and stability at an early date. China will
work together with the international community to this end.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker is the representative of Nigeria. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.

 

