Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We thank Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, for his briefing. We welcome Mr. Vuk
Jeremie, Foreign Minister of Serbia, and Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj to the Council.

We are pleased to note that the overall situation
in Kosovo has remained stable during the past four
months. We appreciate the efforts of the Special
Representative to reduce tensions associated with the
elections in Serbia. We are, however, concerned that
the overall security situation in northern Kosovo still
remains fragile.

The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo continues to play a vital role in
ensuring stability in Kosovo. All constituents of the
international presence in Kosovo must maintain
neutrality while executing their respective mandates.

We welcome the continuation of the European
Union-mediate dialogue, which, during the current

reporting period, has resulted in an agreement on
regional representation and cooperation. Any
differences on the implementation of the agreement
should be resolved through dialogue. Furthermore, the
implementation of the technical protocol on the
integrated management of crossing points would help
address the situation in the north. We also note the
progress made towards the certification of university
diplomas.

Both sides need to avoid actions and rhetoric that
would inflame tensions. In that regard, the holding of a
referendum in northern Kosovo on 14 and 15 February
was a counter-productive exercise. Similarly, the
authorities of Kosovo must also ensure the provision of
security for all segments of society, including
minorities, and guarantee the safety of religious and
cultural sites. There is also a need for better
cooperation between parties in resolving the cases of
missing persons.

The achievement of lasting peace needs a vision
and a demonstration of flexibility by the leaders of
both sides. The leaders also have the responsibility to
prepare their publics to make the necessary
accommodations. We would urge all parties to pursue
the path of dialogue and engagement for the sake of
lasting peace in Kosovo and the region.

