Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Madam President, I
would like to express our appreciation to you and to
your delegation for convening this important meeting.

Allow me to join the delegations that spoke
before me in thanking the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Louise Frechette, for her introductory remarks on
this extremely important subject. I would also like to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara
Otunnu, for introducing the report of the Secretary-
General. We commend Mr. Otunnu for tirelessly
continuing advocacy for the most vulnerable members
of society. Our gratitude also goes to the Executive
Director of the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), Ms. Carol Bellamy, for the very
informative briefing she has provided. UNICEF
continues to play an indispensable role in the lives of
the world's children, particularly those affected by
armed conflict.

Almost a year has passed since the historic
adoption of resolution 1261 (1999), which contains a
number of provisions pertaining to the role that all of
us here today, and the international community at large,
need to play in order to make the world a better place
for all war-affected children.
While my delegation is extremely encouraged by
the very useful recommendations in the report of the
Secretary-General, I will not address those specific
recommendations. Instead, I will make a few general
comments; I look forward to examining the
recommendations in detail when the Council considers
action on the report. It is important to note here that
when the Council finally takes action on the
recommendations the views of the other members of
the United Nations should be taken into consideration.

Resolution 1261 (1999) was a significant
milestone. But the international community must go
beyond rhetoric and lip service and take concrete and
practical measures to prevent the victimization, torture,
abuse, maiming and killing of children. An aggressive
and proactive approach is required forthwith.

My delegation welcomes the steps taken so far to
implement resolution 1261 (1999). Eleven months
might not sound very long, but the progress already
made in the implementation of that resolution by many
actors deserves recognition by the Council. We
encourage them to continue these efforts. We welcome
in particular the initiatives of regional organizations on
behalf of children affected by armed conflict, as
enumerated in the report. We commend the role played
by non-governmental organizations in this regard. The
Arria-format meeting which we had with non-
governmental organizations yesterday is an important
beginning of dialogue between civil society and the
Security Council. This must be continued. It will
require joint efforts by all parts of the international
community.

The rights and special needs of girls cannot be
emphasized enough. The rapid spread of HIV/AIDS
compounds our concern, especially with regard to girls.
It is in this context that we need to view the relevant
recommendations in the Secretary-General's report
addressing gender violence.

We warmly welcome the momentous adoption by
the General Assembly on 25 May this year of the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. We particularly welcome the provisions
stipulating 18 as the minimum age for participation in
armed conflict, for compulsory recruitment and for
recruitment or use in armed conflict by armed groups.

The ongoing efforts to address the plight of
children in armed conflict are encouraging. Central to
this should be the commitment to address the root
causes of conflict, as well as factors that exacerbate it.
Unless this is done, enormous resources will be spent
addressing the symptoms, while the problem persists. I
therefore wish to emphasize the need to concentrate on
social and economic development aspects while
addressing children and armed conflict. Furthermore,
the very fact that children are involved in armed
conflict should itself serve as an early warning to the
Security Council and the international community as a
whole and influence how and when they should tackle
these problems.

Let me also mention that children are being not
only victimized, but used to make war. Children can
certainly, therefore, be involved in making and keeping
the peace. It is therefore important that we share and
study the experiences of countries where relevant
programmes are being successfully undertaken, for
possible application elsewhere.

Another issue to which my delegation attaches
great importance is post-conflict support, which will
help traumatized children to be fully reintegrated and
become useful citizens of society. This requires long-
term investment and, hence, the continued support of
the international community for Governments
emerging from conflict. Specifically, this is an area
where United Nations agencies can assist at the local
level.

The duty of all parties to conflicts to respect the
various international humanitarian and human rights
instruments needs to be accentuated here. Those who
perpetrate heinous crimes against children should be
held accountable for their actions.

Finally, my delegation expresses the hope that
other relevant bodies of the United Nations system will
take up the recommendations that fall within their
respective mandates.

