Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela would like to thank Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his briefing. We support the statement made by His
Excellency Ambassador Maged Abdelaziz, Permanent
Representative of the Arab Republic of Egypt, on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Since 1948, the date of the declaration of the
Israeli State, the Palestinian people, humiliated and
exploited by the occupying Power, have been expelled
from their lands. Today, entire generations of
Palestinian citizens continue to pay the high price of
exile, alienation and the systematic undermining of
their human rights.

The historic decision of the Palestinian
authorities to request the Security Council to support
its international recognition as a State with full rights
in the United Nations is a claim for justice and
reaffirmation of the Palestinian people's right to self-
determination. The Government of the United States
has launched a campaign to frustrate recognition of the
Palestinian State, making it conditional on the
relaunching of direct talks between Israel and
Palestine, facilitated by the Quartet. In that way, it
seeks to delay or to block the international historic
demand calling for the establishment of that State.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
diplomatically recognized the Palestinian State on
27 April 2009. Palestine has all the international legal,
political and moral criteria to qualify as a sovereign
State, in line with international law. After so many
decades of delay, Palestine has established itself as a
subject automatically by law in the international
community. Through the building of an unjustifiable
and racist wall, the imposition of neocolonial
settlements, the brutal and ongoing blockade of the
Gaza Strip and institutionalized violence, Israel is
blocking the paths towards a negotiated settlement
between the parties.

The Government of Israel currently has in its
prisons more than 6,000 prisoners, including more than
280 children, some less than 12 years old. We are
dismayed that there are children among those deprived
of liberty. That makes clear the inhuman nature of the
Government of Israel and those who defend such
practices. Such actions, aimed at changing the
demographic composition, the nature and the
configuration of the Palestinian territories, are in
violation of international humanitarian law and the
relevant resolutions of the Council and the United
Nations.

The Government of Israel has long undermined
the principles of the United Nations. International law
prevents Israel from invoking conquest and
colonization, calling it natural expansion. Therefore,
Venezuela once again calls on the Security Council to
take the necessary steps to ensure that the State of
Israel respects all relevant resolutions and its
obligations under international law.

Venezuela reiterates its full support for the
recognition of the Palestinian State by the United
Nations on the basis of the pre-1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. It also supports compensation
and the consequent return to their homeland of 50 per
cent of the Palestinian population who find themselves
dispersed throughout the entire world, in line with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

We pay tribute to the tireless efforts being made
by the Government of President Bashar Al-Assad to
preserve the unity, integrity and stability of his country,
besieged by imperialism. The stability of Syria is
fundamental to peace in the Middle East.

Venezuela reiterates the need for Israel to

withdraw from the occupied Syrian Golan, pursuant to
resolution 498 (1981) and in respect of resolutions 242
(1968) and 348 (1974). We renew our call to the State
of Israel to respect the sovereignty of Lebanon and to
avoid further conflict such as took place in July 2006.
Only through direct negotiations between the parties,
under the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006), can
constructive solutions be achieved.

There is no excuse for the expulsion of the
Palestinian people from their own lands, the frequent
indiscriminate bombardment of Lebanon and the
occupation of the Syrian Golan by Israel. They are
flagrant violations of the fundamental principles of
humanitarian and international law, unparalleled in
modern history.

As our Minister for Foreign Affairs, Nicolas
Maduros Moros, said when he read out the message of
the President of the Republic, Hugo Chavez Frias,
before the General Assembly on 27 September:

"Venezuela hereby affirms its unconditional
solidarity with the Palestinian people and its
unlimited support for the Palestinian national
cause, including, of course, the immediate
admission of Palestine to the United Nations as a
full Member State." (A/66/PV.29)

It is time for the liberation of the Palestinian
people, which will come about with the support of the
peoples of the world. In his message, President Chavez
optimistically predicted that Palestine will live and be
victorious. We wish free, sovereign and independent
Palestine a long life.

