Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Bangladesh thanks
the United States presidency for organizing today's
quarterly debate. We take note of the useful briefing
by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Personal Representative of
the Secretary-General and Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process.

We align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
statement to be made by the representative of Uzbekistan
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

Bangladesh remains concerned over the fratricidal
conflicts raging in many parts of the Middle East
region with grave implications for the maintenance
of international peace and security. The growing
involvement of non-State actors, including terrorist
groups, has compounded the situation in most cases,
having a dire impact on civilians. We appreciate the
Security Council's sustained engagement on these
conflict situations, including on the political and
humanitarian tracks.

In line with precedents, we wish to maintain our
focus on the Palestinian question, which we believe
remains a central preoccupation for the international
community. As we witness wilful provocations to
further diminish the prospects of a two-State solution,
the urgency of restoring the political horizon with a
View to resuming the Middle East Peace Process cannot
be overemphasized. There is every reason for the
States Members of the United Nations to collectively
question and re-examine the untenable status quo
on the Palestinian question. The international peace
conference held in Paris on 15 January bore witness
to that sense of urgency shared by the international
community. The message has been clear - the quest
for a just, comprehensive and lasting solution to
the Palestinian question must be earnestly pursued,
particularly against the backdrop of a volatile regional
security situation.

There is near unanimous agreement in the
international community that the continued expansion
of illegal settlements, including the recent legislation
and announcements, constitutes one of the most blatant
manifestations of injustice perpetrated against the
Palestinian people, and poses a serious impediment to
the resumption and pursuit of the peace process. The
Security Council's adoption of resolution 2334 (2016)
reaffirmed the illegality of the settlements and prevailed
upon Israel to halt further expansion of settlements and
cease attempts to legitimize the existing ones. We urge
the Council to remain seized of the matter and pursue
efforts to ensure cessation of all settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including in and
around East Jerusalem.

Bangladesh remains concerned at the ongoing
blockade of the Gaza Strip, which has seriously
undermined its recovery and reconstruction efforts.
We underscore the critical importance of addressing
systematic human rights violations against the
Palestinian people by the occupying Power and the
need for compliance with the relevant provisions of
international humanitarian law. We note with concern
the ramifications of the hunger strike by Palestinian
prisoners and call for addressing their grievances,
including the illegal detention of children.

When Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas
visited Bangladesh in January, Prime Minister
Sheikh Hasina told him that the Government and the
people of Bangladesh remain steadfast in advocating
for the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including the right of return, self-determination and
an independent and viable State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. We continue to support all
constructive efforts ofthe Security Council and the rest
of the international community aimed at finding lasting
political solutions to the different conflict situations in
the Middle East and at working towards addressing the
various root causes and drivers of conflicts with a view
to sustaining peace in the region.

