Mr. Lucas (Angola): Please accept our
congratulations, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. You can be assured
of our full cooperation. We take this opportunity to
congratulate the Chilean delegation on its successful
stewardship of the Council during the month of
January.

We join previous speakers in condemning, in the
strongest possible terms, the terrorist attack in
Moscow. We express our condolences to the families of
the victims and to the Russian authorities.

We welcome Mr. Harri Holkeri and thank him for
his comprehensive presentation of the Secretary-
General's report (S/2004/71) on the activities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). My delegation would like to
reaffirm once again Angola's unwavering commitment
to achieving a peaceful outcome of the conflict in
Kosovo. Despite difficulties, we are encouraged by
positive developments in the peace process, and I
should like to highlight some of them.

We welcome the progress achieved by Kosovo's
Provisional Institutions towards their normal
functioning at the central and local levels. We are
encouraged by the improvement in the functioning of
the Kosovo Assembly in the preparation of its
legislation as well as by the progress made by the joint
municipal administrations. However, greater efforts are
required for the achievement of greater participation by
ethnic minorities in this process. The number of public
employees in the Provisional Institutions has been
increasing but is still at an unsatisfactory level.

The security situation, while improved, is still a
matter of concern. Despite the decrease in ethnically
motivated crimes, several acts of violence have taken
place in the last few months, while organized crime
remains a great obstacle to the establishment of the rule
of law.

The deployment of the Kosovo Police Service is a
positive step forward in the fight against organized
crime, and the Kosovo Protection Corps, as a civil
emergency agency, has improved its professionalism
and its capacity to come to the aid of the civilian
population in various emergency situations.

My delegation also welcomes the development of
social projects that aim at improving the population's
quality of life. We consider that approach an important
instrument for the return of refugees and displaced
persons under conditions of security. Another challenge
is the dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade. We urge
both parties to keep their commitment to democracy
and to re-establish a direct and constructive dialogue
on practical issues of mutual interest.

Major challenges remain ahead, including
strengthening the rule of law and improving security
conditions and freedom of movement for all ethnic
groups as a means of advancing towards a democratic
and multi-ethnic society that is based on the respect of
basic human rights, regardless of ethnic affiliations,
and on the participation of all communities in the
political process.
The territory's economic recovery and
development are also indispensable for ensuring a
sustainable normalization of Kosovo's society.

To conclude, I wish to reaffirm my delegation's
confidence in UNMIK'S strategy, "Standards for
Kosovo", as a key instrument for achieving the full
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Constitutional Framework. The task forces established
in that framework can be decisive tools for the peace
process's advancement and for the definition of the
final political status of Kosovo.

My delegation urges all concerned in Kosovo and
in the region to cooperate in a constructive manner
with the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the full implementation of resolution 1244
(1999) and the "Standards for Kosovo" policy, in order
to achieve stability, prosperity and a multi-ethnic,
multicultural, democratic society in Kosovo.

