Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
The briefings we have just heard from Mr. Jan Eliasson,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Mr. J ean-Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations - both of whom we would
like to thank earnestly - provide a glimpse of
developments that are not completely pessimistic on the
subject of the deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). Some
indicators, which had been unclear until now, are
becoming more visible, according to the information
given to us by the Secretary-General after his talks with
the highest authorities in the Sudan. The Sudanese
authorities agreed to the expansion of the UNAMID
contingent with the participation of some non-African
countries, and the Sudanese President made a
commitment to authorize the signing of a status-of-
forces agreement. It is true that, according to most
recent information, that agreement has not yet been
signed, but let us not lose hope.
Furthermore, the improvement of the situation in
Chad, while still precarious after the latest conflict,
allows us to think that there is a strong possibility that

the European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR)
and the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) might be deployed
in the meantime, thereby providing substantial support
to the Hybrid Operation. At any rate, we wish to praise
this desire for openness that has been expressed by the
Khartoum Government.

Nevertheless, in spite of some encouraging signs
we must remain vigilant, since the humanitarian and
security situation continues to worsen, as was so
rightly stated in the briefings by Mr. Eliasson and
Mr. Guehenno. Indeed, there is no need to emphasize
that the civilian population, who are the primary
victims of these events, are basing their hopes on a
rapid and effective deployment of UNAMID.

As I had recalled during a previous meeting, my
country, Burkina Faso, has already shown its readiness
to take part in this operation by making available an
SOD-person battalion. Here my delegation would like to
commend the commitment of the contributing
countries, in particular those who have been so
generous in providing logistical support without which,
we agree, UNAMID could not become operational.

The briefings we have just heard seem to
foretell - and no one has challenged this - that the
situation as a whole remains dangerous. This is shown
by the recent attacks of armed groups against Chad, the
resurgence of tension between Chad and the Sudan, and
the atrocities committed by armed rebel groups. All of
those events compromise the effective deployment of
UNAMID in the region. In order to achieve stability in
the region, the various Sudanese parties - the
Government and the armed groups - should chose
dialogue as the best option for settling their political
differences and with the sole goal of respecting the
common interest.

In that connection, my delegation would like to
welcome the efforts made by the mediators with a View
to bringing together the armed movements and the
holding of a conference on substantive issues that can
lead to a fair, negotiated settlement of the dispute.

Forty days since the official date for the
deployment of UNAMID, it has to be said that we have
fallen significantly behind - not just with regard to
the programme itself but, above all, as concerns the
worrying and painful tragedies taking place daily on
the ground. We therefore have but one wish, namely,
that things at last begin to move along. To that end, we

wish much luck to Mr. Eliasson and Mr. Guehenno,
who, we know, are working tirelessly for the success of
this enormous Operation, regardless of the difficulties
and the current impasse. I should also like to thank
Mrs. Ratsifandrihamanana, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations, for her
enlightening and interesting briefing regarding the
situation on the ground from the point of View of the
African Union, with which we are fully in agreement.

In conclusion, I would like to associate myself
with the words of the President in congratulating our
colleague Mirjana Mladineo of Croatia, who
unfortunately is leaving us. I wish her good luck in her
new endeavour.

