Mr. Kabentayev (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Spanish): I
commend the presidency of Uruguay for convening this
debate on the protection of civilians, who are extremely
vulnerable to attacks during the current increasingly
intense conflicts accompanied by an unprecedented
magnitude of human rights violations. Kazakhstan
therefore calls for complete and strict implementation
of the report of the Secretary-General of June 2015
on the relevant recommendations of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (S/2015/453).

The High-level Independent Panel proposed that
mandates to protect civilians should be coherent with
a comprehensive political strategy. Peacekeeping
missions mandated to use force must protect civilians.
We fully support the Secretary-General's proposals
for the active use of non-military protection tools,
including strong political advocacy, vigilant reporting
and monitoring, together with the introduction of
comprehensive security-sector reforms, the rule of law
and good governance, and an end to all impunity.

Kazakhstan attaches the utmost importance to the
security of civilians, as evidenced in its engagement
in United Nations peacekeeping operations in Western
Sahara and Cote d'Ivoire.

The Conference on Interaction and Confidence-
Building Measures in Asia, initiated by Kazakhstan, has
become a good platform for cooperation and dialogue
in Asia, and it has great potential for contributing to
conflict prevention and peacebuilding.

As proposed by the President of Kazakhstan,
Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev, the final document of the
fifth Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional
Religions, which was held in June 2015 in Astana, calls
on all parties around the world involved in conflicts to
cease violence, declare truce and, through negotiations,
reach an agreement to end hostilities, protect civilians
and find a peaceful resolution to all tensions.

We are convinced that the long-term work of the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoys should be
strongly supported by the Council and Member States.
We support the activities of the United Nations regional
offices, which serve as platforms for preventive
diplomacy. Kazakhstan has proposed the establishment
of a United Nations regional hub for sustainable
development and humanitarian assistance in Almaty,
which would complement the work of the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia in the vast territory of the Eurasian region.

Kazakhstan, as a current Chair of the Gender
Equality Working Group of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and one of
the sponsors, along with Austria, Finland and Turkey,
of the OSCE-wide action plan on women, peace and
security, calls for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), which focuses on putting women's rights,
gender equality and women's empowerment at the heart
of global peace and security activities.

Kazakhstan is submitting its candidacy for a
non-permanent seat on the Security Council for
2017-2018 and is particularly committed to prioritizing
the protection of civilians.

