Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon (Republic of Korea): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing. I also welcome Foreign
Minister Ivan Mrkie and Foreign Minister Enver Hoxhaj
to the Council today.
We are pleased to note that Belgrade and Pristina
continue to move forward in their implementation of
the historic 19 April agreement on the normalization
of their relations. We commend the constructive role
and engagement of the European Union, in particular
of Ms. Ashton, in the reconciliation process. The
initial progress in implementing the agreement will
be particularly meaningful as it builds confidence in
the process and helps restore mutual trust among the
stakeholders.

In that regard, we urge the Governments of both
Serbia and Kosovo to use this opportunity to more
actively push forward the implementation of the the
agreement. The holding of municipal elections in
northern Kosovo will be a crucial benchmark in the
implementation process. We encourage Kosovo to step
up its efforts for the transparent and smooth holding of
the upcoming elections.

In order for the ongoing peace process to be
sustainable and irreversible, the root causes of ethnic
tensions and divides should be duly addressed. The
education of youth on tolerance and mutual coexistence
can play a crucial role in enhancing understanding and
respect for ethnic diversity. Unless all ethnic groups
and minorities are integrated into the peace process,
true reconciliation between the two neighbours will
remain elusive.

In that context, more Vigorous efforts should be
made to eliminate the scepticism and resistance of the
ethnic Serbs in northern Kosovo. Their grievances
and concerns, if not properly addressed, will remain
severe impediments to achieving durable peace and
reconciliation. We call on both Serbia and Kosovo
to continue their utmost efforts so that the minority
Serbs in northern Kosovo can recognize the common
interest and share the future in the ongoing process of
implementation of the 19 April agreement.

Pristina should ensure full safety and security for
the ethnic Serb communities. Belgrade's efforts to
assuage their fears and concerns will be critical as well.

We believe that there should be more efforts to
address the legacies of the conflict, such as cases of
missing persons and victims of sexual violence. Those
remaining cases could disrupt hard-won progress
and sow the seeds for future conflicts ifjustice is not
served. We call on the Governments of both Belgrade
and Pristina to redouble their efforts to heal the scars of
war and protect human rights in the region.

Finally, we commend Special Representative
Zarif and the staff of the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo for their dedicated work.

