Mrs. Craft (United States ofAmerica): We welcome
the Secretary-General's announcement that the Syrian
Negotiations Commission and the Syrian regime have
reached agreement on the committee that will draft
a credible, balanced and inclusive constitution. That
constitution must reflect the aspirations of all Syrians,
both inside and outside the country.

Lasting peace is not easily or quickly won. It requires
commitment, meaningful action and a consistent effort
over a sustained period of time. With that in mind, I
therefore say to Special Envoy Pedersen that the United
States would like to extend its thanks for his personal
commitment and effort over the past 21 months in
helping to form the Constitutional Committee.

I also want to thank our partners in the small
group - Egypt, France, Germany, Jordan, Saudi
Arabia and the United Kingdom - as well as Turkey
and Russia for helping us take that encouraging step.
A special word of gratitude also goes to the leadership
and members of the Syrian Negotiations Commission
for their cooperation, even as their supporters faced
brutal attacks.

Last Thursday, the small group on Syria reaffirmed
its broad support for the Special Envoy's efforts to
implement all the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015).
We encourage the United Nations to convene the
Committee, and we reiterate our belief that there can be
no military solution to the conflict - may I repeat, no
military solution to the conflict.

The formation of the Committee is a historic,
tangible first step in the political process to resolve the
Syrian crisis. But if we are honest, we know that there
is hard work ahead for the parties to the conflict and
civil society leaders, who will be tasked with drafting a
new Syrian constitution, in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015). It is essential that the Council vigorously
support their efforts, as well as those of the Special
Envoy to convene the Committee's first meeting on
30 October. When they gather, the members of the
Committee must be able to work in safety, free from
intimidation to alter the outcome of their work.

Furthermore, it is critical that all parties, including
the opposition, the regime and civil society leaders,
engage in good faith in the days ahead with the aim of
ensuring that the legitimate aspirations of all Syrians
are represented.

If there is one party that consistently fails to act
in good faith, it is Iran. It is therefore ironic that the
State responsible for much of the carnage in Syria and
for most of the current conflicts in the Middle East sits
before this very Council today presumably to lecture us
on the path to peace in Syria. If Iran genuinely wished
to contribute to the political process under resolution
2254 (2015), it would leave Syria and remove its militias
and their affiliates without delay.

I also wish to be very clear on the following point.
The Al-Assad regime and its allies must not use the
launch of the Constitutional Committee as a pretext to
stall the political process and pursue a military solution
to the conflict. The violence in Idlib must cease
immediately and unconditionally. That will protect the
lives of innocent civilians and improve the prospects
for a political solution on the ground.

At the outset of my remarks, I noted that lasting
peace requires commitment and meaningful action. But
it also requires that we tell the truth about what has
happened, and what is still happening, in Syria. It is
that aspect of peace with which, I regret to note, the
regime does not appear comfortable.

Bombings continue to terrorize innocent women,
men and children in Idlib. The regime's campaign
has displaced more than half of the Syrian population
and thousands of Syrian mothers and fathers have had
to bury their own children - a fate that no parent
should suffer.

The agreement to form the Constitutional
Committee is clearly an encouraging step but there
are too many levelled neighbourhoods and too many
shattered lives for anyone here today to act as though
the horrors visited upon the Syrian people can now
be forgotten.

The Council cannot believe the version of events,
preferred by some, that our work is nearly finished. The
United States, for one, will continue to speak the truth
about the atrocities committed by that regime, as well
as what must be done to right the wrongs committed
against the Syrian people.

I want to end my statement today by sharing a
brief story. Last week, I had the privilege of meeting
with Amina Khoulani, the co-founder of Families for
Freedom and a woman ofprofound courage. I was deeply
disturbed by what she shared with me: nearly 128,000
Syrians - 128,000 - face arbitrary detainment. That
practice is unacceptable. The Al-Assad regime must
release detainees and provide international monitors
access to detention centres.

However, while I was distressed by Amina's
account, I was even more inspired by her spirit. She is
advocating faithfully, cheerfully and relentlessly for the
dignity of all Syrians. As we seek to build on this first
step towards peace in Syria, I hope that the Council
will adopt the same spirit.

