Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): As this is the first time I
am taking the floor this month, it is with great pleasure
that I wish you, Sir, every success in your duties as
President of the Council during the month of
November. I must assure you that you have my
country's full support.

I also wish to thank Ambassador Oshima and his
team for last month's excellent stewardship of the
Council during difficult moments.

I would like to warmly welcome Prime Minister
Adnan Terzie and thank him for his intervention. I also
would like to welcome once again High Representative
Schwarz-Schilling and thank him for his thorough
presentation on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Greece fully associates itself with the statement
to be made later on by the Permanent Representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union.

In this, his first report to the Security Council, the
High Representative has outlined how he views his
mandate and his goals for Bosnia and Herzegovina in
the upcoming period, given current conditions and
taking into consideration the situation on the ground.
He rightfully believes that now is the time to intensify
the transformation of the country. He explains his role
as one of advising and overseeing as the country
assumes ownership and full responsibility, but also as
one of advocating on behalf of the citizens concerning
their principal priorities. We fully support that new
outlook. It is high time that Bosnia and Herzegovina
completed its long transformation and dynamically
pursued its future within the Euro-Atlantic family.

I have a few comments on the High
Representative's report and presentation. The
satisfactory conduct of the recent elections is a good
sign of the growing maturity of society and
institutions. We hope for the formation of a stable
Government in the near future. Bosnia and
Herzegovina still has some way to go and cannot afford
to lose more time. Already, as the High Representative
described in detail, the pre-election period weighed
substantially against the acceleration of progress.
It is regrettable that, after the initial success last
March, the lower house of Parliament failed to adopt
the package of constitutional reforms. It is even more
regrettable that this issue has polarized political life so

much, when a new Constitution should bring people
together in their effort to build a better country.

It is a pity and a waste of time and effort that the
combination of that issue, together with the atmosphere
of the pre-election campaign, resulted in the slowing
down in critical reform areas noted by Mr. Schwarz-
Schilling.

The Bosnian authorities are, I am sure, fully
aware of what needs to be done and how. Police
restructuring, the completion of public broadcasting
reform and full cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia are just
three of the main preconditions for further progress in
the negotiations for the Stabilization and Association
Agreement. There is, of course, much more. The pace
of economic reform must pick up again and public
spending must be curbed; public administration reform
must also continue; the issue of education reform is
central to all planning for the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina; progress in the unification of the Mostar
city administration must resume; and full compliance
with the decisions of the Human Rights Chamber must
be ensured. Those are but a few main priorities.

Perhaps what needs to happen first, though, on
the part of the Bosnia and Herzegovina leadership and
political establishment is the realization and
acknowledgment that the completion of reforms is the
only way to achieve the full transformation of the
country. Although it requires painful efforts and
sacrifices by all sides, it will, in the end, bring about
the strengthening of a stable, democratic Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

One more open issue is that of the decertified
police officers. We fully support the High
Representative in his efforts to resolve it and hope that
progress can be made soon. Keeping an open mind is
necessary and must be shown. We hope that, after the
recent contacts between the team of the High
Representative and the Secretariat, a solution to the
issue is close. As I said, keeping an open mind is
necessary. It will be good to bring closure to another
outstanding question from the past and show that the
international community is willing and able to act with
fairness and objectivity.

