Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the Secretary-General's
participation in today's meeting. We want to thank him
for dispatching his Special Adviser to Burma and for
working very hard - as I know he did - to make sure
that he was admitted to Burma. Those steps
demonstrate, Sir, your commitment to helping the
Burmese people during this critical time.

We appreciate Special Adviser Gambari's report
on his most recent visit to Burma and commend his
efforts. We support his mission and have confidence in
his diplomacy.

Terrible things have happened in Burma over the
past few weeks. The United States is appalled by the
brutal repression that has been carried out by the
Burmese regime against its own people. The beatings,
mass detentions, torture and even murder of citizens -
children, women, students, monks and nuns - and
even murder simply for participation in peaceful
demonstrations are unacceptable. And they should be
unacceptable to Powers with influence over Burma, to
regional States and, indeed, to all of us in this
Chamber.

Despite the Burmese regime's attempt to block
news of the recent disturbing events from reaching the
rest of the world by shutting off access to the Internet,
courageous Burmese citizens made sure we saw the
truth of what was happening on the ground. The
images were gripping - photographs of the death of a
Japanese journalist shot down by Burmese security
forces and images of the lifeless body, floating in a
river, of a monk who had been executed.
In considering those events, I wish to quote the
words of Nay Tin Myint, a Burmese exile who
underwent dreadful forms of torture during 15 years in
a Burmese prison, which he called "the closest thing to
hell". In a recent opinion piece he reminded us that the
world was not watching in 1988 when thousands were
killed by the guns of the regime. It is watching now.
The people of Burma must not be let down.

Because the brutal repression by the regime is
now occurring far from cameras and public view, it is
difficult to verify the facts on the ground. Only
yesterday, the regime admitted that it had arrested over
2,000 demonstrators and claimed that it had released
692 persons. The regime even arrested several United
Nations staff members during the sweep of houses and
apartments in the area where major protests have
occurred. Fortunately, they were released. But there are
many who are still in jail, rounded up by the Burmese
regime in raids in the middle of the night. Given past
practice, we fear that they are being kept in
unimaginably inhumane conditions and denied access
to international humanitarian organizations.

The impact of the violent repression is clearly felt
throughout the region, and the region itself is faced
with an exodus of refugees from Burma, the spread of
controllable infectious diseases and the trafficking of
narcotics and people - all closely tied to the political
crisis in that country.

The Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) Foreign Ministers made the point, and we
agree, that the events in Burma undermine the
reputation and credibility of that important regional
organization. We welcomed the statement on
27 September by the Chair of ASEAN, Singapore's
Minister for Foreign Affairs, in which he expressed the
revulsion of the ASEAN Foreign Ministers over the
actions of the Burmese security forces and urged a
peaceful transition to a democratic Government. Others
are also speaking out, including the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of India, the Prime Minister of
Singapore, the European Union ambassadors - all
those voices are indicative of an emerging regional,
indeed international, consensus that the repression
carried out by the Burmese regime against its own
people is both indefensible and intolerable.

I also wish to recognize the role of China in using
its special influence to persuade the regime to receive
Special Adviser Gambari. We look forward to the
continued support of China for the Secretary-General's
Special Adviser in order to gain tangible results from
its good offices mission.

What next? We have heard today Special Adviser
Gambari's assessment of his recent visit and an
accounting of the "to do" list he provided to the
regime. I must convey to you, however, our deep regret
that the Burmese authorities did not fully cooperate
with him during his visit. It is of particular concern that
they limited his access to key people and places,
including the leaders of the 88 Generation student
group and monks and monasteries that participated in
peaceful demonstrations. Moreover, the United States
was greatly disturbed to see the regime resume the
unlawful detention of citizens, just hours after his
departure.

Nevertheless, Mr. Gambari's mission may have
succeeded in cracking open the door. It is still too early
to evaluate it, but we take note of the offer of General
Than Shwe to meet with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. At
the same time, we deeply regret that that offer included
unrealistic conditions. In our view, the regime must
move beyond gestures and take concrete steps that
respond to the concerns of the Burmese people and the
international community.

What does the Burmese regime need to do? The
United States calls on the Burmese regime to
implement the following measures: First, it must
immediately end the violent crackdown, including an
end to the raids, lifting of the curfew and the removal
of the military presence around monasteries and on the
streets of Burmese cities. Secondly, it must
immediately release citizens detained for the
participation in the recent demonstrations. This will be
a critical step in de-escalating the current situation.
Thirdly, it must release all political prisoners, including
Aung San Suu Kyi. This overdue step is essential in
order to begin a genuine and inclusive dialogue with all
actors of Burmese society, so as to begin the transition
to a civilian representative government. And fourthly,
it must restore public communication links, such as
telephone lines and Internet connections, within Burma
and between Burma and the rest of the world.

What can the world do to incentivize the Burmese
regime to take these necessary measures? This is an
issue for the entire international community. The
United States has done its part to back up its words
with actions that will serve to ratchet up pressure on
the regime. Last week, the Department of the Treasury

blocked the assets of 14 senior regime officials, and the
Department of State identified senior regime officials
and their immediate family members - over 200
individuals - as subject to a ban on entry into the
United States. We are now exploring follow-up
measures targeting the regime and those who provide
financial support to it.

The Security Council must not remain silent just
because the people of Burma have been silenced by the
violent repression carried out by the regime. We have
an opportunity to be their voice, and we must.

At the moment, Special Adviser Gambari is the
link between the international community and the
regime. It is therefore vital to maintain the momentum
begun by his recent visit in order to obtain concrete
results from his good offices mission. We urge
Mr. Gambari to return to the region as soon as possible
to continue his intensive diplomatic efforts, and we call
on all Governments with influence with the regime to
support his return and his mission. We expect that upon
his return he will receive full cooperation.

Burma's neighbours have a special role and
responsibility. We also urge ASEAN and its member
States to build on their efforts to increase pressure on
the Burmese regime.

What if the Burmese Government does not take
appropriate steps? If the Burmese regime does not
respond constructively to the demands of the
international community in a timely manner, the
United States is prepared to introduce a draft resolution
in the Security Council imposing sanctions. We must
all be prepared to consider measures, such as arms
embargos, to incentivize the regime to cooperate with
Mr. Gambari.

In conclusion, it is time for the Council to do
more than simply listen to a briefing. Like the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom, the
United States also believes that the Council must speak
out in a presidential statement to support the Secretary-
General's efforts to establish a genuine political
dialogue between the regime and all parties, to
condemn the deplorable repression of peaceful
demonstrators and to call on the Burmese regime to
release detainees and political prisoners, so that they
can participate in a dialogue leading to national
reconciliation.

The eyes of the world are focused on Burma. The
people of that nation are going through a difficult time.
Like people everywhere, they deserve to live in peace,
prosperity and freedom. The United Nations should
stand with them and assist in bringing about a political
transition from dictatorship and repression to
reconciliation and democracy.

