Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for scheduling
this briefing on West Africa and the Sahel. I would also
like to thank Lynn Pascoe for his briefing on the
security situation in the region. I welcome the renewed
international focus on this issue, which the Council
will discuss again next month.
The issues affecting the countries of the Sahel are
complex and have many root causes. Indeed, as Mr. Ian
Martin told the Council yesterday (see S/PV.6707),
many predate the Libyan conflict. Addressing those
problems will require a coordinated response. We are
grateful for the work of the assessment mission in
bringing together States and regional bodies to share
knowledge and discuss solutions. The nature of the
challenges facing those countries means they will not
be resolved without their working together. In that
spirit, and despite recent differences, it is also vital that
the United Nations, the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) stand
together with the countries of the Sahel.

The Council must focus its efforts where our
expertise lies, that is, on issues of peace and security.
We must bring to bear the expertise of the rest of the
United Nations family in delivering humanitarian
support to affected States.

It is clear that the Libyan crisis has impacted on
the different countries of the Sahel to different degrees.
However, weapons proliferation, illicit trafficking of
goods and food insecurity are common challenges to
them all. I would like to make three points on those
issues.

First, there has undoubtedly been an upsurge in
weapons proliferation across the Sahel. The main cause
of that has been the gradual return to Mali and Niger of
Tuareg rebels who fought for the Al-Qadhafi regime.
The role of ECOWAS is crucial in mitigating the
impact of that proliferation. I encourage ECOWAS to
continue its efforts to deal with the challenges posed by
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons, and
to aid those displaced by the crisis to return home.

Secondly, on trafficking of illicit goods, it is clear
that, regardless of events in Libya, the Sahel is seen as
an attractive location for traffickers due to the low
risks of monitoring and apprehension by State bodies. I
welcome the regional judicial platform as a mechanism
for cross-border judicial cooperation, as well as the
national efforts of the affected States. But more
bilateral support for capacity-building is needed if
those countries are to develop the relevant institutions
for tackling this issue.

Thirdly, in a region that suffers from food
shortages on an annual basis, the crisis in Libya has
been an exacerbating factor. We call on all
Governments in the region to facilitate continued

access for all humanitarian actors. In turn, the United
Nations must, with its development partners and
regional organizations, ensure that it coordinates its
response appropriately and works with regional
Governments to address long-term drivers of food
insecurity.

Finally, the United Kingdom is committed to
working with the Nigerian Government to support their
efforts towards the effective implementation of a
comprehensive strategy to tackle security threats in
Nigeria. The British Government has condemned the
recent terrorist attacks in Kano, where more than
200 people were killed, and is deeply concerned by the
increasing number of attacks in Nigeria claimed by the
Islamist sect Boko Haram.

Attacks have predominantly affected northern
Nigeria, and targets over the past year have included
Government institutions, security forces and places of
worship, as well as international organizations. Those
included an attack on a United Nations building in
Abuja in August 2011, which killed 23 people.

The United Kingdom has shared expertise on
counter-terrorism policy, doctrine and legal
frameworks, and has provided assistance with specific
capabilities, such as managing the consequences of
terrorist attacks. We will continue to support Nigerians'
efforts to counter terrorism in their country and the
region.

