Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): It is a pleasure
and an honour for me to introduce the third report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), covering the period
from 21 August 2007 to 7 January 2008.

As you know, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Atul Khare, had travelled to
New York to brief the Council, but returned to Timor-
Leste in the wake of the tragic events of 11 February,
when President Jose Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister
Xanana Gusmao were attacked in Dili. Mr. Khare's
presence and good offices during this sensitive period
in Timor-Leste were considered essential.

The incidents of 11 February in Timor-Leste
shocked the entire international community, as
conveyed in the Secretary-General's statement that day.
I am pleased to report that since our briefing to the
Council following that event, the security situation has
remained calm in Timor-Leste. In fact, there have been
no further significant security incidents in the country.

I am relieved to report that President Ramos-
Horta, while still hospitalized, is in stable condition
and that doctors are hopeful that he will make a full
recovery.

To ensure public order and to facilitate ongoing
security operations to apprehend the perpetrators of the
attacks of ll February, the parliament endorsed the
decision to extend the 48-hour state of siege declared
on 11 February for an additional 10 days, until
23 February, and that could be extended still more. The
state of siege imposes restrictions on night-time
movement, a curfew from 8 pm. to 6 am. and a ban on
public demonstrations. In taking those measures, the
Government and parliament have acted with restraint
and with full respect for constitutional provisions and
human rights.

In close cooperation with UNMIT, the
Government has, since the morning of ll February,
shown leadership in carrying out and coordinating
security operations. In addition to efforts by the United
Nations police and the international security forces -
08-24762
the latter supplemented by an additional contingent of
military and police personnel - the Government of
Timor-Leste established, by Resolution No. 3/2008,
approved by the Council of Ministers on 17 February, a
joint command of the Armed Forces of Timor-Leste
(F-FDTL) and the National Police Force of Timor-
Leste (PNTL) to undertake security operations during
the state of siege. Based on discussions between the
Special Representative and the Government and an
exchange of letters with the Prime Minister dated
21 February, it has been agreed that those PNTL
officers who participate, for a limited period of time, in
the operations undertaken by the Joint Command
would not be under the direct supervision and
responsibility of the UNMIT Police Commissioner,
who also serves as interim PNTL general commander,
during that period.

All other elements of the supplemental policing
arrangement between the Government of Timor-Leste
and the United Nations remain unchanged. Within the
framework of the Trilateral Coordination Forum, new
mechanisms have been established to enhance
coordination between the F-FDTL, PNTL, UNMIT
police and international security forces. As of
19 February, a daily meeting between the commanders
of all four security institutions is being held. Further,
as of 18 February, two daily meetings are being held
between the UNMIT Police Commissioner and the
Commander of the international security forces within
the context of a new committee for the coordination of
international assistance.

(spoke in English)

Immediately following the attacks, Timorese
leaders from all parties came together to urge calm,
and the country has remained peaceful, including
throughout the funeral ceremonies for fugitive Alfredo
Reinado and one of his accomplices who died during
the attack on the President's residence. The UNMIT
police and the PNTL, in coordination with the
international security forces and F-FDTL, have
remained on high security alert and have launched an
investigation into the attacks against the President and
the Prime Minister.

Before proceeding with an update on
developments since the issuance of the Secretary-
General's report, I would like to share some
observations on the tragic attacks on the President and
the Prime Minister. While the full effect of these events
08-24762

is not yet known, the stability of a State cannot be
measured only in terms of the occurrence or absence of
outbreaks of Violence or emergencies, but also by how
the State addresses such challenges. As conveyed in
our last briefing, it is reassuring that, following the
11 February events, the Timor-Leste Government, the
parliament, all political parties - including in the
opposition - security institutions and the population at
large responded with calm and restraint and with due
respect for the Constitution and the rule of law. What
some feared might have deteriorated into a
destabilizing crisis did not happen, with the institutions
of the State and citizens showing strong resilience. All
political leaders of the country and the general
population will hopefully continue to refrain from
politicizing these terrible events.

Of course, the 11 February incidents raise some
serious security-related issues which will need to be
addressed. Nevertheless, the course of events over the
past 10 days reinforces the importance for UNMIT, in
partnership with the Timorese, to continue focusing
efforts on the four priority areas outlined in the
Secretary-General's report, that is, the review and
reform of the security sector, the strengthening of the
rule of law, economic and social development and the
promotion of a culture of democratic governance.

While the pressing problems of the petitioners are
not yet resolved, the group of petitioners that began
gathering in Dili two weeks ago in response to the
Government's call to pursue discussions on the
resolution of their grievances has continued to increase
in number, reaching about 155 by mid-week, and more
are expected. In the wake of Reinado's death, the
Government is intensifying outreach efforts to those
who had been his followers to join these discussions, in
the hope that the tragic events of 11 February might
serve as a turning point in the process.

The Visit of the Security Council mission last
November and the mid-December visit of the
Secretary-General to Timor-Leste reflected the
continuing strong support of the international
community for the Timorese people, with both being
the first such visits since the restoration of the
country's independence over five years ago. As had
been highlighted by the Security Council, the
Secretary-General emphasized that intensified efforts
to promote dialogue to defuse existing tensions and
foster greater political consensus, as well as the
strengthening of inclusive democratic processes, will
be essential for achieving sustainable stability and
prosperity in Timor-Leste. Both visits therefore
underscored the importance of further progress towards
implementation of the commitments made by all
parties within the context of the political party accord
of 26 May 2007. As members know, the accord
specified inclusiveness and participation as basic
principles of good governance, as well as the need to
ensure a meaningful and constructive role for the
opposition in parliament and the participation of civil
society in the political, economic and social
development process of the country.

It is promising that, since those high-level visits,
serious efforts in this direction have been undertaken
under the leadership of President Ramos-Horta, who
curtailed his official visit to Brazil by a few days to
return to Dili on 3 February.

In a 17 January meeting, President Ramos-Horta,
Prime Minister Gusmao, FRETILIN President Lu-Olo
Guterres and FRETILIN Secretary-General Alkatiri
had constructive discussions on the establishment of
possible mechanisms for promoting more inclusive
approaches for addressing the country's pressing
problems. On 7 February, the President convened
another meeting, at his home, between the leaders of
the four parties comprising the Government coalition,
the Alliance for a Parliamentary Majority (AMP) and
FRETILIN to further discuss mechanisms for
collaboration to jointly address such pressing problems
as the internally displaced persons (IDPs), the
petitioners and the then fugitive Reinado, as well as
critical longer-term issues of security sector review and
reform and strengthening of the justice sector and of
public administration.

By all accounts, that 7 February meeting was
another positive step forward, with the parties reaching
consensus on the desirability of such a mechanism and
looking forward to further talks the following week. In
a letter to the Secretary-General on 7 February,
FRETILIN Secretary-General Mari Alkatiri positively
referred to progress made in those discussions and the
efforts of all concerned to foster an inclusive and
participatory environment to enable the country to
move forward. President Ramos-Horta himself has
played a crucial role in bringing the parties together,
and I hope that the parties will continue to come
together to keep the positive momentum going while
he is recovering. UNMIT will continue with its good
offices to facilitate that process.

Constructive efforts were made by the President
of the National Parliament, Fernando "La Sama" de
Araujo, to promote the establishment of an ad hoc all-
party parliamentary commission to address the pressing
issues of the IDPs and the petitioners. UNMIT
supported those efforts and, while this particular
initiative has for the time being been overtaken by
events, UNMIT will continue to support all such
initiatives to enhance inter-party cooperation.

Other mechanisms established earlier have also
been utilized to promote dialogue on critical issues
facing the country, notably, the weekly bilateral
meetings of the Special Representative, respectively
with the President, the Prime Minister and the
Secretary-General of FRETILIN, as the party with the
largest number of seats in parliament; the Special
Representative's regular meetings with the President of
the National Parliament, leaders of political parties and
civil society; and the fortnightly meetings of the High-
Level Coordination Committee and the Trilateral
Coordination Forum. At the request of FRET ILIN, the
Special Representative also hosted a meeting on
security sector review and reform for the party's
leadership on 6 February, during which agreement was
reached to hold fortnightly working-level meetings to
exchange Views and contribute to the process.

As reflected by resolution 1704 (2006), the
mandated tasks of UNMIT are wide-ranging -
understandably so, given the multifaceted challenges
confronting Timor-Leste. In that connection, let me
briefly touch upon some of the key issues raised in the
Secretary-General's report. Security sector reform is a
long-term process that must be approached in a holistic
manner, taking account of a wide range of factors.
Broad input of civil society into the security sector
reform process will contribute to a sense of public
ownership needed to support the further development
of security forces, which act in an impartial manner
with due respect for human rights. The Government-led
and United Nations-supported country-wide survey to
ascertain the views of the Timorese population on the
security sector is a vital element to ensure the
involvement of a broad range of stakeholders.

As emphasized in the Secretary-General's report,
following the 2007 elections the UNMIT police has
devoted increasing attention to the reform and
rebuilding of the national police. With the completion
of the screening process, UNMIT police has focused
more on the professional development of individual

PNTL officers through training and mentoring, as well
as on the institutional strengthening of the PNTL as an
impartial, professional and reliable service. I would
like to reiterate the need for police-contributing
countries to provide officers with the required expertise
in training and mentoring, including women officers,
which is also important in view of the high incidence
of gender-based violence in the country. I would also
note that the ratio of women officers within the PNTL
is four times that of the UNMIT police. Until the PNTL
has more fully developed its capacities, a continued
strong UNMIT police presence, including the four
formed police units, will be essential to ensure stability
in order to build on the gains made over the course of
the current mandate period.

On 4 February, PNTL assumed command of three
police posts in Dili under the continued supervision
and guidance of UNMIT police, who remain stationed
in those posts, though in reduced numbers. The
outcome of that pilot handover and lessons learned will
be taken into account in proceeding with the gradual
phased transfer of law enforcement responsibility to
the PNTL throughout the country. As outlined in the
Secretary-General's report, the progress of the phased
transfer will depend in part on increasing capabilities
of individual PNTL officers through consistent and
structured mentoring processes, as well as physical
co-location. As police posts, and eventually districts,
are handed over to the PNTL, UNMIT police officers,
within the authorized strength, will be progressively
deployed to sub-districts and specialized units - such
as the Border Patrol Unit - which currently do not
benefit from their full-time presence. The expert
mission which will travel to UNMIT in late March to
conduct a thorough assessment of PNTL requirements,
as well as possible adjustments needed to UNMIT
police skill sets, will be crucial for further refining
those initiatives.

While the reform and rebuilding of the PNTL is a
process that will take some years, progress over this
year will be critical in determining the direction and
strategies to be followed over the long term. In going
forth with assistance to rebuild the PNTL, UNMIT
police efforts must be part of a larger holistic strategy
developed by the Timor-Leste Government in
coordination with the broader international community,
whose bilateral assistance will also remain essential in
the medium and long terms. As with any UNMIT
mandated tasks, the understanding and support of the

Timorese population are an important and key element
for success. To that end, in January the UNMIT Police
Commissioner and other senior police officers
participated in a series of public outreach meetings
with civil society groups across the country.

The Timorese police service is one component of
the larger rule of law architecture that includes the
courts, the Office of the Prosecutor-General, public
defenders and the corrections system, as well as the
legal framework, all of which are in need of enhanced
international support if the increasing backlog of cases
is to be tackled and the credibility of the justice system
bolstered in the eyes of the Timorese people.

To ensure access to justice, to determine the truth,
to establish credible accountability for crimes
committed, to provide compensation for victims and to
establish proper precedents for the future are all Vital
elements that remain of paramount concern. As a
positive step in that direction, UNMIT and the Timor-
Leste Government signed on 12 February an agreement
concerning United Nations assistance to the Office of
the Prosecutor-General to complete outstanding
investigations of the former Serious Crimes Unit.
Investigations have already begun. Despite constraints
faced by the judicial system, notable progress is also
being made in implementing the recommendations of
the Independent Special Commission of Inquiry report.
UNMIT also remains prepared to provide assistance to
the Government and Parliament regarding the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation of
Timor-Leste.

Even though UNMIT's mandated tasks do not
directly include assistance for the further development
of the Armed Forces of Timor-Leste (F-FDTL), it will
be crucial for the cohesive functioning of the security
sector as a whole to further strengthen its institutional
capacities, policies and processes. Furthermore, the
development of cooperative relations and trust between
the PNTL and F-FDTL is vital to improve inter-
operationability between those security institutions, as
well as for the progressive assumption of law
enforcement responsibility by the PNTL. Sustained
international support will thus be important for the
continued efforts of the F-FDTL command, under the
leadership of Brigadier General Taur Matan Ruak, to
further develop the Armed Forces so that they can
discharge their military role appropriately for a
peacetime setting.
Timor-Leste faces two interlinked humanitarian
challenges: the resolution of the situation of the
remaining 100,000 IDPs throughout the country, with
30,000 in camps in Dili, and addressing longer-term
and chronic vulnerabilities that may have a direct
humanitarian impact on the overall population. The
IDP situation is a political and security concern, as
well as a humanitarian one, and largely considered as
neither short term nor easily fixed. On 12 January,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Khare
joined President Ramos-Horta, President of the
National Parliament Fernando de Arat'ljo, Prime
Minister Gusmao and F-FDTL Commander Ruak in a
meeting with the IDPs, which was the first such
meeting with the current national leadership. Further,
on 25 January, the Prime Minister and Minister for
Social Solidarity held a meeting with IDP camp
managers. UNMIT has and will continue to actively
encourage such initiatives, as well as the appeal of the
Prime Minister to the IDPs that all people of Timor-
Leste need to rise above partisan politics to resolve
such critical issues facing the country.

A durable solution to the IDP situation, through
voluntary return or relocation, will require a holistic
approach that depends on a number of factors,
including, among others, an improved security
environment, a strengthened legal framework for
resolving land and property disputes, and economic
regeneration and livelihood activities. As mentioned
earlier, I am pleased that, as a first step forward in the
transition from blanket food assistance towards
targeted assistance to the vulnerable, food rations
distributed to the IDPs have been reduced as of
February by 50 per cent without any major security
incident, although just over half of the beneficiaries
have refused the reduced rations.

The chronic and longer-term vulnerabilities in the
country include its susceptibility to natural disasters.
Just this past month, parts of the country were hit by
severe storms. According to the Disaster Operations
Centre, over 700 houses were damaged or destroyed.
Those events, and a locust infestation, also caused
significant crop damage that may have implications for
food security. The United Nations and other
international partners assisted the Government in an
assessment of and response to the damage, but the
country needs to strengthen its institutional capacities
for dealing with such events. Other factors, including
chronic food insecurity, can also adversely affect the
humanitarian situation. The Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the World Food
Programme estimate that 20 per cent of the population
is food insecure and that a further 23 per cent is highly
vulnerable to becoming food insecure.

Furthermore, rural livelihoods are fragile and
create the potential for migration to urban areas ill-
prepared to deal with expanding populations.

Short- and medium-term employment
programmes continue to be desperately needed.
Despite the country's considerable oil revenues, the
existing legislation regarding the management of the
petroleum development fund limits the amount of
resources that can flow to the State budget and does
not allow for front-loading of expenditures, as might be
required to kick-start the economy and address urgent
socio-economic issues.

In his report to the Council, the Secretary-
General noted that the functioning of the parliament,
the Government and other State institutions
demonstrated progress in building on the gains of the
peaceful electoral process, as well as a commitment to
restore normalcy following the 2006 crisis. The
Secretary-General also emphasized the need to address
critical political and security-related issues through
inclusive and collaborative processes, and the
importance of a meaningful and constructive role for
the opposition.

Let me say in conclusion that, confronted by the
tragic events of 11 February, the Government, the
parliament and the opposition acted in an exemplary
manner, and State institutions did indeed function
according to the constitution. That is indeed
encouraging. But the fact that Timor-Leste came so
close to a real breakdown shows how important and
urgent it is to address a number of issues: the
remaining Reinado supporters, who are under arrest
warrants; the petitioners; and the internally displaced
persons.

Those pressing issues have been unresolved since
the crisis of 2006. Each, in and of itself, should be
solvable with a concerted effort across the
political spectrum. Recent efforts led by President
Ramos-Horta - to which I have referred - to bring
together FRETILIN and the Government coalition were
promising and need to continue. Solving those
immediate issues will allow the country to give its full
attention to the core underlying socio-economic
challenges - in particular widespread poverty and
massive youth unemployment - that, if not addressed,
will continue to threaten the political stability of
Timor-Leste

