Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
initiative you have taken in organizing this public
debate on Kosovo. Indeed, over the past four months,
that province has been at the centre of intense
diplomatic activity. A key event was undoubtedly the
appointment of Mr. Harri Holkeri as a new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. My delegation
is pleased at his presence today to provide a
comprehensive briefing to the Security Council on
developments in the situation in Kosovo. I wish to take
this opportunity to reassure him of Cameroon's support
for his difficult mandate and his tireless efforts to
promote the reconciliation process, to improve the rule
of law and the security situation, to promote returns
and minority rights, and to create and strengthen
conditions for economic development beneficial to
everyone. My delegation also thanks the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive and very useful report
(S/2003/996).

On 14 October, a direct political dialogue was
established, for the very first time and at the highest
level, between the Belgrade and Pristina authorities.
That is a step that we hope will be decisive in
establishing a climate of confidence among the parties,
despite the non-participation of the Government, which
we call upon to become urgently involved. Indeed, the
parties must show political courage and a heightened
sense of responsibility. Those elements can make the
dialogue consistent and open up new prospects for
reconciliation and peace. This new momentum, which
carries hope, should be able to inspire and hasten
negotiations in the four working groups on energy,
missing persons, returns, and transport and
communication, with a view to swiftly achieving
decisive results on those practical aspects that can
make life in Kosovo easier.

I wish to recall my country's attachment to the
principle of "standards before status". That is why we
firmly believe that the path taken on 14 October in
Vienna is a good approach. It can guide the
international community in its quest for a reasonable
and lasting solution to the problem of Kosovo's final
status. Such a solution, we think, can be achieved only
when the benchmarks have been fully applied. The
launching of a direct dialogue on practical questions of
mutual interest between Belgrade and Pristina should,
however, not conceal the admirable efforts undertaken
within the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
in Kosovo.

Yes, it is undeniable that remarkable progress has
been made in the unpredictable province of Kosovo,
and we welcome that. But that progress, however
remarkable, should not lessen our vigilance for even a
moment. Indeed, it is clear from the report of the
Secretary-General and from the balance of Mr.
Holkeri's preliminary briefing that violence in Kosovo
with regard to minorities remains a living reality whose
effects are seen in the low rate of returns of displaced
persons and in the resurgence of intolerant and
exclusionary behaviour, especially with regard to youth
and in terms of education and health. Such attitudes, if
we are not careful, could widen the current social
breach. Kosovo's provisional authorities must do
everything possible to curb those tendencies and to
promote multi-ethnic and multi-cultural integration,
particularly in this period, when there are great hopes
at both the political and economic levels. Those
authorities, who have just inherited the transfer of 19
competences reserved for the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General - in conformity with the
Constitutional Framework - and are preparing to
receive 13 more before the end of 2003, should
reassure the international community. In that context, I
should like to refer to the security situation in this
region of Kosovo, where the resurgence of violence -
mainly against minorities - must be condemned and
fought against, because it could eventually reduce to
naught the progress achieved on returns, dashing the
immense hopes aroused by Vienna.

Certainly, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) remains
resolutely committed to establishing the rule of law and
to providing Kosovo with judicial institutions that
conform to European standards. But UNMIK itself has
not been spared from attacks, which for the first time
have caused the deaths of international police officers.
That once again raises the problem of the security of
United Nations personnel, associated personnel and
humanitarian personnel, which itself is a major concern
for my delegation. We also fear that the new wave of
this violence is targeted. If it persists, it could dull the
international community's fervour and definitely
jeopardize the process of reconciliation and inter-ethnic
normalization in Kosovo. That would be a clear victory
for extremists of all stripes. The international
community must not resign itself to that. Any measure
that it undertakes must necessarily proceed from the
recommendations of those with a mandate on the
ground who are experiencing Kosovo's daily realities.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
express its appreciation to Mr. Holkeri, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for the quality
of the work that he has accomplished in such a short
period of time. We reiterate our thanks and words of
encouragement to all the members of UNMIK, who are
risking their lives each day to work tirelessly for the
advent of a reconciled Kosovo.

