Mr. Fulci (Italy): To explain my delegation's
position on the draft resolution before the Council, allow
me to begin by recalling the Italian Government's strong
conviction that the serious crisis afflicting the region of
the Great Lakes can be solved only through political and
diplomatic means - certainly not through military means.
Stability and security in the entire region, including
Rwanda, can be fostered not through an increase in
arms - we all know that there are already too many in
the area - but through confidence-building measures
aimed at creating a climate of trust and dialogue and
through a diplomatic conference with the participation of
all the Great Lakes States, which, in our opinion, could
greatly help to find a global solution to the many
problems of the area.

As one more tragic proof of the excessive circulation
of weapons in the area, let me recall the cowardly killing,
on Sunday, 6 August, in the Vicinity of Goma, close to
the Rwandan border, of six Italian citizens, six people of
good will engaged in humanitarian work on behalf of the
Italian non-governmental organization Mondo Ginsto,

 

which means "A Just World". The perpetrators are still
unknown, but, according to the account of the only
survivor, they did not steal any property from the victims.
Clearly, they wanted to send an ominous message of some
sort. In this regard, my Government's and my gratitude
goes to all colleagues who have in recent days expressed
their condolences, which I have already conveyed to the
families.

The Italian Government is fully aware, on the one
hand, of the legal and political grounds for the Rwandan
Government's request to have reinstated its capacity to
defend the country, and, on the other hand, is fully aware
that conditions have evolved since the embargo was
imposed.

There is still a threat to the stability of Rwanda,
primarily by elements belonging to the former Government
and army, which entertain hopes of revenge. Another threat
to stability comes from the fact that a large number of
Rwandans, for fear of reprisals, are still living in refugee
camps outside Rwanda, thus preventing a true and complete
process of national reconciliation and denying the
contribution of their work and their talent to the economic
recovery of Rwanda. Needless to say, the result of all this
is that instability spreads throughout the area and threatens
the security of other countries, not of Rwanda alone.
Therefore, we believe that it is crucial for the Council
not to be seen as sending the wrong message that only a
resort to weapons would provide sufficient security. This is
why we have agreed to a cautious approach by postponing
to a later date the definitive lifting of the embargo, while
suspending its effects in the meantime. The draft resolution
attaches conditions to ensure that it will not result in
another wave of proliferation: arms will have to be marked
and registered, and the Sanctions Committee has to be
notified of their supply.

We have noted with satisfaction the more positive
recent developments in Rwanda, as reflected in the report
of the Secretary-General. It is reassuring, in particular, to
see that working relations between the Rwandan
Government and the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda (UNAMIR) - to which my Government attaches
the greatest importance - are better now than in the past.
The draft resolution takes due note of this fact. Of course,
a lot still needs to be done, especially in some areas, such
as the overcrowding of the prisons and all the ensuing
problems. Not only is it necessary to train the police and
provide it with new arms; it is also necessary to rebuild the
judicial system. One of the main reasons why the Blue
Helmets are still there is exactly to help the Kigali
Government in this particular field and to achieve genuine
national reconciliation.

UNAMIR's capacity to fully implement its mandate
will encourage, we believe, the voluntary repatriation of
refugees to Rwanda. Their return should remain a top
priority of the Kigali Government, as it should remain a
top priority for the international community. We fully
share the views of the Secretary-General in this respect.

History has given ample evidence that the massive
presence of refugees in camps right outside the border of
a State is bound to provoke violence and instability. The
people of Rwanda have already experienced enough
violence and enough bloodbaths.

For all these reasons, I will cast Italy's vote in
favour of the draft resolution.

