Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Moroccan delegation, I wish at the outset
to thank you, Madam President, for your initiative to
convene this debate on a question of such importance
to the international community: peacebuilding. My
delegation is pleased to note that peacebuilding
remains a central concern of the United Nations
system. Moreover, we are very pleased that, under your
presidency, Madam, the Security Council will be
making a major contribution to the reform of the
United Nations.

This question was indeed given special attention
this year, during the consideration of the report of the
Secretary-General entitled "In larger freedom: towards
development, security and human rights for all"
(A/59/2005). As we all know, the report contains a
proposal to establish an intergovernmental
Peacebuilding Commission. Many among us believe
that the proposal could well become the object of
consensus.

The nature of most post-cold-war conflicts -
which more often than not are based on ethnic, cultural
or religious confrontation - means, even if those
conflicts are subsequently internationalized, that they
can have a devastating effect on the societies
concerned. Hence, once United Nations efforts have
succeeded in stabilizing a situation and putting a
complete end to hostilities, it is very often necessary to
tackle the daunting job of peacebuilding, in which
former combatants must learn how to behave as new
partners. They have to learn to join political parties or
bodies working for human development.

To achieve that, the short-term and medium-term
support of the international community is essential in
order to ensure the success of that delicate transitional
period from the cessation of hostilities to the building
of social consensus with the participation of all, with
everyone assuming his or her rightful role. Rebuilding
takes time, and it must take account of a series of often
complex and interdependent factors such as
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
rehabilitation; security-sector reform; establishment of
the rule of law; and good management of natural
resources.

When a country emerges from conflict, the first
challenge relates to the rule of law: formulating
appropriate, coherent norms and providing the
resources needed to implement them; establishing
procedures for the settlement of disputes; and putting
in place the appropriate judicial structures. If the
conflict had been a theatre of serious crimes against
human peace and security, it is essential that the
perpetrators of such crimes not go unpunished. Here
again, the international community must provide
assistance to ensure due process, either through
international, joint or national tribunals, and with the
possibility of establishing what have come to be called
truth and reconciliation bodies provided with the
necessary guarantees. By "necessary guarantees" we
mean that certain guarantees should be attached to any
amnesty that may be offered, apart from the
compensation provided to victims. In our view, the
right mix of those elements to combat impunity would
make it possible to deal with crimes committed on a
massive scale.

Another challenge in any peacebuilding process
lies in the area of democratization and good
governance. Although we now agree on the goal of
democratization, without which there can be no true
sustainable development, we must take account of
historical and cultural factors when determining the
pace of democratization in any given society. We all
have our historical baggage to carry.

Unfortunately, many conflicts also revolve
around the control of or access to natural resources.
Accordingly, the main effort during the reconstruction
phase or the peacebuilding phase has to be focused on
dismantling war economies and on managing natural
resources in the best interests of all of the people.

In the relationship between the State concerned and
its neighbours - we have many examples of this and the
Council has tackled the most important examples, such as
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo - the
certification of certain precious commodities can be

established. Monitoring mechanisms can be established in
the United Nations in order to put an end to major
transnational trafficking in these commodities.
In recent years, the United Nations has, it is true,
acquired a wealth of experience in peacebuilding,
through a number of difficult undertakings, particularly
in Africa. The majority of peacekeeping operations,
decided on by the Security Council, today increasingly
include a peacebuilding component. The multitude and
diversity of stakeholders, however, make it difficult to
elaborate a real strategy here. Interventions by various
United Nations institutions - the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund, bilateral donors and
other non-governmental organizations - each acting in
its area of competence, very often lack coherence.
Peacebuilding activities are not coordinated with
development cooperation activities, and this is an area
where we believe that the United Nations can do better
in terms of being effective at a time when many are
talking about the need to improve the management of
the Organization.

However, this is a complex task, because none of
the bodies within the United Nations system has an
exclusive peacebuilding mandate. Governments that
emerge from peace agreements need some time, and
they need support properly to play their role of
interlocutor vis-a-vis the international community -
quite simply, to become legitimate.

Peacekeeping operations decided on by the
Council are given the necessary funding from assessed
contributions, but this is not the case when it comes to
peacebuilding activities, where resources are neither
stable nor predictable. Furthermore, the pace of
fundraising for peacebuilding programmes is often
slow and is not in keeping with the urgency felt on the
ground. The delays that we have seen in disbursements
by financial institutions have often been a major
obstacle to rapid action, notwithstanding the often very
generous pledges made at various fundraising
conferences. There are many examples - Sierra
Leone, Liberia or Haiti, in particular, which the
Council was discussing just yesterday. These problems
must be resolved by designing better strategies
whereby all stakeholders can participate right at the
beginning of the peacebuilding effort, in particular as
soon as the date has been set for the holding of
elections, as in the case of Cote d'Ivoire or in Haiti.
Financial and technical assistance should also be
planned for, so that the structures that emerge from the
elections can function normally and live up to the
expectations of the people.

Otherwise, there will be democracy, but there
may also be a failure of democracy. Frequent regular
meetings between the major donors, troop-contributing
countries, financial institutions and the Governments
concerned must take place in order to assess the
situation and to elaborate strategies.

Very modestly, my country, pursuant to its
commitment to South-South cooperation, is entirely
prepared to make a contribution in terms of the
necessary technical assistance to be provided, for
example by sending experts to help countries in the
South and enabling them to benefit from our
experience in development. Of course, the mandates of
peacekeeping operations need to be more ambitious.
They should include more peacebuilding activities,
particularly during protracted conflicts.

We are aware that there is no clear line of
separation between peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
This is the doctrine of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. Rather, we are witnessing a gradual
process where, for some time, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding will coexist.

The Secretary-General's proposal to establish a
Peacebuilding Commission is an initial response to this
question inasmuch as it provides an institutional
framework to enable the various stakeholders to act
together, target their activities and make them
complementary. The peacebuilding fund, the shape of
which is still vague, will, if it is set up, provide an
appropriate response to the question of the
unpredictability of resources.

We all know that there is broad consensus to
establish this Peacebuilding Commission which,
according to Morocco, should be attached to the
Security Council and to the Economic and Social
Council. And why not also to the General Assembly, if
the international community so decides? In that body,
donors, financial institutions and experts should
cooperate to make a success of the transitional process
in countries emerging from conflict.

When I say cooperate, it is not just the rich that
cooperate; it is the rich and poor working together,
achieving unity to help the poorest among us in the
international community.

Morocco hopes that our Heads of State and
Government will give their agreement to the principles
that will govern the future Commission, which will be
a symbol of a chain of solidarity among countries and
between generations.

