Mr. Calovski (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia): When I am referred to in the way that
you, Mr. President, just referred to me, it is my duty to
state that I am the Permanent Representative of the
present Macedonia, not the "former" Macedonia.

Let me at the outset express my satisfaction at
seeing you, Sir, the Permanent Representative of
France, presiding over this very important meeting of
the Security Council on the Balkans, a subject of
crucial importance to my country, the Republic of
Macedonia, and to our region, South-eastern Europe.
The position of the Republic of Macedonia coincides
with that expressed by the representative of Portugal
speaking on behalf of the European Union and by the
High Representative for the European Union Common
Foreign and Security Policy, His Excellency Mr. Javier
Solana.

The history of the Balkans, of South-eastern
Europe, or of the countries situated in the Balkan
peninsula is, as members know, full of examples of
armed conflict. The First World War started there; the
Second World War lasted the longest; since the end of
the cold war there have been four armed conflicts, the
most recent of them in Kosovo, Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. That is too many, and I hope there will be
no more.

Many books have been written and many analyses
made with the aim of answering a number of questions.
Why has all this happened? Who or what generates the
problems, difficulties and armed conflicts in the
region? How much of this is the result of the pursuit by
local forces of regional, continental or global interests?

The simple answer is that they have all played a
role; they have all contributed. The victims have been
the ordinary people of the region, who have been
struggling all along for a better life, for peace and
development, and for their inalienable human rights.
Further wars or conflicts must therefore be
prevented. In that endeavour, the United Nations and,
of course, this body, the Security Council, have a
responsibility and a duty to discharge. They have an
important role to play, but, of course, not alone. The
responsibility of the regional organizations, such as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), as well as other initiatives and
organizations, is extremely important.

Also of crucial importance are the responsibilities
and duties of all States of the region, and of course the
activities and the behaviour of local actors: the political
parties, the non-governmental organizations and the
cultural, religious, business and other civil-society
associations. In short, the mobilization of all forces in
favour of peace and development in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations should be the basis,
the foundation, of a new chapter in the history of the
Balkans and of South-eastern Europe.

The best mechanism for that endeavour is the
integration of all States of the region into the Euro-
Atlantic structures, in the first place into the European
Union and NATO. In that regard, I would like to note
the importance of the presidency conclusions endorsed
at the meeting of the European Council held on 19 and
20 June 2000, conclusions to which Mr. Solana made
reference.

Here in the United Nations and elsewhere, the
Republic of Macedonia has continuously emphasized
several positions that are of crucial importance for the
future development of the Balkans and of South-
eastern Europe: the development of good-neighbourly
relations among all States; the integration of all States
into the European Union and NATO; the prevention of
conflicts and the peaceful resolution of disputes; and
full observance of international law.

Since 1993, as a result of the initiative of the
Republic of Macedonia, the General Assembly has
adopted resolutions on the situation in the Balkans and
South-Eastern Europe. It has adopted resolutions
53/71, 48/84B, 50/80B, 51/55, 52/48 and 54/62.

I would like to take this opportunity to stress
something that is common to all those resolutions and
that should be taken into account by the Security
Council. These General Assembly resolutions require
that all States of the region should strictly observe the
United Nations Charter and the provisions of
international law; that there should be full
normalization of relations among all States of the
region; that the inviolability of international borders
should be observed by all States; that relations among
all States should be based on mutual respect; and that
the needs ofthese States be speedily integrated into the
European Union and that NATO should be fully
supported.

The fifty-fifth regular session of the General
Assembly, in accordance with these resolutions, will
discuss the Balkans under provisional agenda items 67
and 68. The present discussion in the Security Council
could be an important contribution to the one that will
take place in the autumn.

The Republic of Macedonia is developing fruitful
cooperation with all Balkan States; we have established
diplomatic relations with all ofthem. We are constantly
endeavouring to enrich our good-neighbourly relations
with all of them and to make a positive contribution to
the situation in our region.

The Balkans, the countries of South-Eastern
Europe, should not be seen only as a geographical part
of Europe, but also as an indivisible part of the
political, economic, social and cultural development of
Europe. The essence of their orientation is truly
European. It is true that these countries are at present
going through a difficult period of transition, but one
should not forget their contribution to European
civilization. The potential of the region, both human
and material, is such that one cannot doubt the great
future of all countries ofthe region.

After the Kosovo war, the international
community adopted two crucial decisions for the
present and the future of the region. One was adopted
by this body, the Security Council, resolution 1244
(1999), under which the war ended; the other was
adopted by the European countries, the United States,
Canada and Japan - the Stability Pact for South-East
Europe, which is designed to help the transition of the
region into a region free of violence and instability, an
area of peace, stability, development, democracy and
cooperation.

The implementation of these two decisions is of
key importance for the future of South-Eastern Europe.
The Security Council recently examined the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). Regrettably,
that debate was restricted. It is, however, gratifying to
note that the Security Council was unanimous in its
demand for that resolution's full implementation. The
implementation of the Stability Pact is under way, and
we hope to see the result ofthis process soon.
Many other activities are also under way. I would
like to mention the importance of the South-East
European Cooperation Process, the Central European
Initiative and other initiatives. However, the role of the
United Nations and of its Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, of NATO and its Kosovo Force, of
the European Union and of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, as far as Kosovo
is concerned, remains of paramount importance.

The countries ofthe region are extremely eager to
see concrete results of the implementation of all these
endeavours. In Macedonia, the expectations are high,
particularly taking into account our positive
contribution during the crisis in the former Yugoslavia,
and recently during the Kosovo war. The delays and
hesitation in the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999), of the Stability Pact, of the General Assembly
resolutions and of other initiatives will only help the
negative forces in the region, which, regrettably, are
still active.

The region of South-Eastern Europe is not
preoccupied with the consequences of the wars in the
former Yugoslavia only. The economic development of
all countries ofthe region is ofthe highest priority. The
transition of the economies into market economies and
their integration into the European and global
economies are a daily preoccupation of all
Governments in the region. This is a very difficult
process, in particular since it creates numerous social
problems which should be properly tackled so that the
political and economic transition can go forward. Wars,
crises, embargoes, United Nations sanctions against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and so forth, have
hardly affected the Balkan economies in transition. My
country, the Republic of Macedonia, is a very
illustrative example. According to the latest
assessments of our Ministry for Development, the
damages are estimated at over $1.5 billion. The
damages on the ground due to the cancellation of
already concluded contracts amount to about $60
million - not to mention how much we have spent due
to the acceptance of nearly 400,000 refugees from
Kosovo who stayed in Macedonia for months. The
most heavily affected industries were our metallurgy,
civil engineering, basic chemical, metal processing,
textile and leather processing industries. It is not
difficult to see the effect of this on our otherwise small
economy.

If the Security Council would like to shoulder
fully its responsibility under the Charter, it should
address the implementation of Article 50 of the
Charter. The present preoccupation of the Security
Council, mainly with the provisions of its own
resolutions, should be addressed. The Security Council
should struggle not only for the implementation of its
own resolutions, but also for the implementation of the
resolutions of other principal organs of our
Organization, the implementation of the United
Nations Charter and the implementation of
international law. Of course, in that endeavour it should
cooperate closely with the other principal organs of our
Organization and with other organizations of the
United Nations system, such as the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund.

So we know what is going on in all parts of our
region. We also know very well what the peoples ofthe
region want. There is no need for new studies or new
declarations. What is needed - what is expected - as
I mentioned, are results of the commitments undertaken
by the international community and Member States. We
need full support for the process of integration of our
region into the Euro-Atlantic structures.

We should not be discouraged or held hostage by
the behaviour of the destructive forces in the region. It
is true that these destructive forces are too loud, but
their strength is weak and they will not matter in the
period to come. There will be no more armed conflicts
in our region. I am sure about that.

The Security Council should send a clear message
from this meeting that the time for all destructive
forces has ended; that the Balkans and South-Eastern
Europe have entered a period of cooperation and
integration; and that this process is irreversible. The
United Nations missions in Kosovo, the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Croatia must succeed. The process of the integration of
the Balkan States into the Euro-Atlantic structures
must proceed speedily, resolutely and without
hesitation, and it, too, must succeed.

Before concluding, I would like to express my
great appreciation for the endeavours of Mr. Carl Bildt,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Balkans, in particular for his untiring efforts to
influence- and even to push~ the positive
developments in the region and, of course, for his
informative and very useful briefing.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Belarus. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

