Mr. Mantovani (Italy): Let me first express my
warmest welcome and heartfelt thanks to you, Madam
Minister, for convening this meeting, which gives us a
precious opportunity to focus on a very crucial issue.
We welcome the South African initiative, and we hope
it will be a first step towards a constructive discussion
on how best to exploit the potential of Chapter VIII of
the Charter. Let me also welcome the presence here
today of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Congo,
Mr. Rodolphe Adada, and of the Secretary-General of
the Department of Foreign Affairs of Indonesia,
Mr. Cotan.

Italy aligns itself with the statement that will be
made later by the representative of Germany on behalf
of the European Union, but I wish to add some remarks
in my national capacity.

In this debate, which aims above all to explore
relations between the United Nations and the African
Union, I wish to recall the remarks made on 29 January
by the Italian Prime Minister, Mr. Romano Prodi, at the
African Union Summit in Addis Ababa. On that
occasion, he recalled the words of one of the fathers of
Africa, Le'opold Senghor. Senghor used to say that
anyone who wishes to work with Africa disinterestedly
must approach it with humility, knowing that while one
may have much to give, one may have even more to
receive, to listen to and to learn. Senghor's sentence
captures perfectly the sentiments underlying today's
debate.

The United Nations certainly has a lot to offer the
African Union, especially in terms of technical
assistance, capacity-building and lessons learned in
more than 50 years of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
around the world, and possibly also in financial terms.
But we in the United Nations also have a lot to learn
from the African Union. I am referring in particular to
the impressive progress made by the African Union in
managing and settling African conflicts as well as to
the way in which the Union's Peace and Security
Council is structured and conducts its work.
Cooperation between our respective organizations is
therefore mutually enriching and beneficial and
certainly must not be a one-way process.

So far, the interaction between the United Nations
and the African Union has mainly been need-driven
and has been developed on a case-by-case basis. Italy
welcomes recent steps towards a more strategic and
systemic approach, such as resolution 1625 (2005),
resolution 1631 (2005), the Ten-Year Capacity-building
Programme and last year's statement by the President
of the Security Council (S/PRST/2006/39). We also
look forward to further steps that might stem from this
debate, and in particular from the presidential
statement that will be adopted later.

Here, I wish to stress a few points.

First, the main responsibility for the maintenance
of peace and security in Africa, as elsewhere, rests
firmly in the hands of the Security Council of the
United Nations. That basic principle has twofold
implications: on the one hand, organizations with
mandates from the Security Council have the
responsibility to keep the Council fully abreast of their
activities in accordance with Article 54 of the Charter
and to act within the guidelines provided by the
specific mandate. On the other hand, delegating does
not mean disengaging, and the Security Council should
continue to provide support and guidance to regional
actors in the implementation of its mandate.

Secondly, we should explore the possibility of
drawing up guidelines flexible enough to apply to
various forms of collaboration. No one formula or
solution is right for every crisis that might arise. But
this does not mean forgetting the importance of
homogeneous standards and respect for certain basic
shared principles. The adoption of some predetermined
criteria would enable the Security Council to avoid the
perception of any possible double standards.

The third point is the importance of the
cooperation and assistance that the African Union
might get from other regional organizations. The
European Union, for instance, will continue to do its
part, as recalled most recently in the conclusions of the
Ministerial Council meeting held earlier in this month.
I am sure that the representative of Germany will have
the opportunity to elaborate further on this.

Finally, in our View, strengthening the capacity of
the Commission of the African Union and the
executive branches of subregional African
organizations is paramount for the success of any
strategy aiming at ensuring increased regional
ownership of peace and security in Africa. Italy
welcomes the important efforts of the United Nations
Secretariat, particularly the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, in this regard and will
continue to actively support them, notably in the areas
of training and capacity-building.

Structured reflection on these matters could be
continued also in existing bodies, namely the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa, the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations and the Peacebuilding Commission.
Involving somehow representatives from interested
regional and subregional organizations by giving birth
to a new joint working group could also be explored to
that end.

