The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.

Today, as we meet for this session, how can we
not think first of the children in Lebanon, Israel and the
occupied Palestinian territories - innocent victims in a
conflict that they have nothing to do with?

I am also thinking beyond them, of the 300,000
children now taking part in armed conflicts across the
world, and many more still suffer from such conflicts.
It is an unacceptable state of affairs. The children,
often very young - forcibly recruited or volunteers
out of desperation, soldiers, scouts, spies, servants or
sexual slaves, victims of indiscriminate attacks - have
in turn witnessed violence, been forced to commit
violence and have been victims of violence. Nearly
half of them are girls, often single mothers. When the
fighting is over the children, even when liberated, often
live on the margins of society. Without reintegration,
they are potential factors in the resurgence of crises.

The Security Council assumed its responsibilities
in taking up this question in 1999. On the initiative of
France, and also Benin in 2005, the Council adopted a
series of resolutions that progressively increased
pressure on the perpetrators of serious violations of the
rights of the child. No other subject on the Council's
agenda has received so much sustained and operational
attention.

Today we have all the instruments needed to
combat the scourge. First, precise standards exist,
specifically the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and its Second Optional Protocol, as well as the Rome
Statute. The international community also identified
best practices for the demobilization and reintegration
of children in their communities through the Cape
Town Principles, which will be revised and completed
in Paris at the end of the year.

Secondly, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and UNICEF are working together

to combat abuses and protect children, each with due
respect for the identity and mandate of the other, in
close consultation with other actors in the United
Nations system.

Thirdly, a monitoring network has been set up in
several countries in conflict, making it possible to
collect, verify and synthesize information; this is the
monitoring and reporting mechanism launched by
resolution 1612 (2005) in July 2005. I would like to
pay tribute to the dedication and courage of the actors
in the field, especially the child protection advisers in
peacekeeping operations, UNICEF agents and the
humanitarian workers of the non-governmental
organizations who sustain this mechanism, sometimes
at risk of their lives. Without them, nothing would be
possible.

Fourthly, impunity is shrinking for those who
perpetrate crimes against children. The arrest of
Thomas Lubanga and his transfer to the International
Criminal Court has made an impression, with good
reason.

Last but not least, the Security Council follows
this matter in detail on a regular basis in the Working
Group established under resolution 1612 (2005).
France is honoured to chair that group. UNICEF and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General are
closely involved in its activity. Its first report on its
activities has just been published (see S/2006/497, annex).

As Chairman of the Working Group, I can say
that it was up and running in the space of a few
months. It adopted all the requisite decisions for
functioning well, including its terms of reference and a
detailed programme of work. We are on the verge of
agreeing on a toolkit. The Working Group played a
useful role in the appointment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. It backed Ms. Coomaraswamy's
visits in the field and played a key role in the
establishment of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism in resolution 1612 (2005). We await with
much interest Ms. Coomaraswamy's first general report
in November.

At its meeting on 26 June last, the Working
Group reached a new stage. It examined in detail the
situation of children in a specific armed conflict, in this
case in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We will
have occasion to consider other situations between now
and the end of the year, and we will be submitting
recommendations to the Security Council.
The current period therefore constitutes a real test
for the Working Group, even as children continue to
suffer in the field. We must redouble our efforts to
reduce the gap between our action here and its tangible
effects in conflict situations.

How are we to eliminate the gap and further
strengthen the effectiveness of our actions? First, we
must better publicize what the Security Council is
doing; that is one of the objectives of our debate today.
Next, we must underscore our wish to encourage and
provide concrete support, again and always, to
cooperation between the United Nations and the parties
exploiting children. Ms. Coomaraswamy's first visit to
the field - to Uganda - was very constructive in that
regard. Other visits are due to follow shortly.
Cooperation is our priority. However, let no one doubt
our vigilance vis-a-vis all those who fuel the vicious
circle of violence. The Council must be ready, as
explicitly stated in its resolutions, to use the full
arsenal of available measures to punish those who defy
its authority by refusing to comply with its resolutions.

Lastly, we must work more on the link between
security and development. The absence of a future for
children undermines all our efforts in prevention and
demobilization. That is why we wanted to involve in
this meeting actors in development, without whose
support there can be no lasting success. France, for its
part, will make a further contribution of €5 million to
support the UNICEF action plan and the activities of
the Special Representative in implementation of
Security Council resolution 1612 (2005). Technical
assistants will be deployed in the regions most
concerned by this question. The first group of
assistants will be based in the Great Lakes region to
help the national commissions tasked with
demobilization and reintegration of children.

I resume my functions as President of the
Council. The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Canada, to whom I give the floor.

