Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to
thank Assistant Secretaries-General Ivan Simonovie
and Taye-Brook Zerihoun for their briefings. President
Poroshenko's peace plan offers a fragile hope for a
solution to this artificially induced crisis, which has
been stoked by Russia's persistent anti-Ukrainian
propaganda as well as a continuous influx of militants
and weaponry from across Ukraine's Russian borders.
A return to normality is badly needed after the months
of destruction and lawlessness perpetrated by illegal
armed separatists, which have led to a disturbing
deterioration of human rights and the humanitarian
situation in eastern Ukraine, as the third report of
the United Nations human rights monitoring mission
testifies.

The report is yet more proof that a pro-Russian
militant insurgency has been the cause, and not the
effect, of the serious human rights violations and a
breakdown of law and order in the eastern regions of
Ukraine, just as Russia's occupation of Crimea was the
cause, and not the effect, of serious human and minority
rights violations in that region. The report details cases
of abductions, unlawful detentions, killings, torture,
ill-treatment, forced disappearances, intimidation
and harassment perpetrated by the armed separatists
in eastern Ukraine. Criminality and looting have
increased considerably in areas held by the militant
separatists. Stalinist-style arbitrary executions by the
insurgents have also been recorded, including within
their own ranks or as revenge on those giving support
to Government forces. One such case mentioned in the
report is the execution of a farmer in front of his family
for bringing food to Ukrainian forces.

The separatists have been carrying out increasingly
brazen attacks using ever more sophisticated weapons.
They possess anti-aircraft and anti-tank weaponry,
automatic assault rifles, man-portable air defence
systems and other arms. Last week, three T-64 tanks,
BM-2l Grad multiple rocket launchers and other military
vehicles crossed illegally from Russia into Ukrainian
territory and were seen in the towns of Snizhne, Torez
and Makiyivka. On 14 June, in a criminal act they
readily admitted to, militants downed a Ukrainian
military transport plane, leading to 49 deaths. Only
a few minutes ago, while we were speaking in the
Council, a military helicopter was again downed by the
separatists, resulting in nine more deaths. We offer our
sympathy to all those who have lost their loved ones and
have been affected by the displacement, deprivation,
intimidation and threats produced by this crisis.

We reiterate our long-standing position that
Ukraine has a right and a duty to defend itself and
to seek to restore law and order within its borders.
Legitimate force must be used with due restraint,
avoiding unnecessary damage to civilian infrastructure
and civilian casualties. The best way to defeat the
deadly mix of violence, hate and lawlessness that drives
the pro-Russian insurgency is by upholding legality and
the rule of law.

Mr. Simonovie's third report contains a number
of recommendations to the Ukrainian Government.
Lithuania and all the members of the European Union
stand ready to assist Ukraine in reforming the security
sector, the police and the rule of law. We welcome the
steps that the Government of Ukraine has taken so far in
implementing the 17 April Geneva statement, through
a number of round tables, initiatives and legislative
changes, including those aimed at decentralizing
power. Other important legislative measures are in
the process of being enacted, and Assistant Secretary-
General Simonovic' spoke about that at length. The
Ukrainian Government has repeatedly offered to
grant amnesty to those who lay down their arms. Just
a few days ago, President Poroshenko went to eastern
Ukraine to directly engage with the local population
and authorities.

Welcome steps have also been taken to ensure
the rights of ethnic minorities. In stark contrast to the
situation in occupied Crimea, where the teaching of the
Ukrainian and Tatar languages is being squeezed out,
on 30 May Kyiv amended the framework curriculum
to improve the teaching of minority languages as
diverse as Armenian, Bulgarian, Tatar, Gagauz, Greek,
German, Hebrew, Hungarian, Korean, Moldovan,
Polish, Romanian, Russian and Slovak.

President Poroshenko's most recent initiative, a
15-step plan for a peaceful settlement of the situation
in eastern Ukraine, which my country fully endorses,
could be a real game-changer. While it was unfortunately
greeted by more insurgent attacks, trilateral talks
are taking place, and there has been some movement
on exchanging prisoners and restoring public utility
services.

The Ukrainian Government is doing its part to
realize the peace agreement. The onus is now on the
separatists and on Russia to do theirs. We note the
fact that on Wednesday Russia's Federation Council is
to revoke a resolution authorizing the use of Russian
armed forces on Ukrainian territory, and we hope that
implies all of Ukrainian territory. More, however, must
be done. Russia has yet to clearly dissociate itself from
the militant separatism in eastern Ukraine or to call on
all the insurgents to lay down the arms. It has not yet
ensured proper control of its borders with Ukraine or
put an end to the flow into eastern Ukraine of Russian-
made weaponry and mercenaries, as well as foreign
fighters.

Importantly, Russia has yet to end the incendiary
campaign against Ukraine that has been stoking militant
insurgency in the eastern part of the country. Ukraine's
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
are non-negotiable and must be respected by all. We
reiterate our condemnation of the occupation of Crimea
and stress that a forced redrawing of internationally
recognized borders has no place in the twenty-first
century.

Lithuania appreciates the work being done by the
United Nations human rights monitoring mission and
the special monitoring mission of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to
provide regular updates on the situation in Ukraine.
We welcome the Ukrainian Government's invitation
to allow the extension of the United Nations mission
for three more months. As noted by previous speakers,
impartial reporting on human rights violations and
developments on the ground is key to ensuring that
facts are not manipulated.

Ukraine's continued openness to international
monitoring shows its constructive spirit and stands
in stark contrast to the actions of the separatists, who
have done all they can to prevent reporting from the
areas they hold captive. Let us not forget that they
are still holding eight OSCE observers. We call for
their immediate release and that of all the hostages
in separatist hands. The Ukrainian peace plan offers
a potential breakthrough for the restoration of peace
and stability in line with the international principles
of respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of Ukraine. We hope that all the parties
will seize this opportunity, although the events of a few
minutes ago raise legitimate doubts as to the separatists'
commitment to it.

