Mr. Pachachi (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I
wish to express deep gratitude to the Council for
having invited us to participate in this historic meeting.
My special thanks go to the Secretary-General, Mr.
Kofi Annan, and to his Special Representative for Iraq,
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, and their colleagues for
their efforts regarding the situation in Iraq and the
country's future. We shall take into account their
valuable remarks and their constructive proposals.

It is indeed a great pleasure and honour for me
and for my two colleagues, Ms. Aqeela al-Hashemi and
Mr. Ahmad Chalabi, to appear before the Security
Council on behalf of Iraq and the interim Governing
Council, of which we have the honour of being
members.

Our homeland has rid itself of the oppressive
tyrannical regime that oppressed our people for three
decades, usurped our freedom, eroded our dignity and
exercised the worst forms of oppression, as
demonstrated by the mass graves now being discovered
across the country. Despite their ongoing suffering,
frustration and oppression due to current security and
living conditions, which have not improved as quickly
as we had hoped, the people of Iraq have finally had a
taste of the freedom that had been denied them for so
many decades. The Iraqi people will never return to a
society based on fear and injustice. Iraqi citizens can
now express their views and articulate their aspirations
freely.

A State marked by the intelligence services,
mandatory arrests and random executions has ended,
never to return. The Iraqi people consider our
participation in this meeting to be clear and explicit
recognition of Iraq's sovereignty, which the Council
emphasized in the second preambular paragraph of its
resolution 1483 (2003). The Governing Council was
established as the embodiment of the nation's
determination to preserve Iraq's sovereignty, safeguard
its unity and territorial integrity, achieve a better future
for its people and reconstruct its social fabric,
following the disintegration of all values and social
cohesiveness and the undermining of national unity in
that dark era.

The Governing Council - which represents the
full spectrum of Iraqi society and whose members have
been chosen as a result of painstaking and extensive
consultations among Iraqi personalities of various
religious, ethnic and political affiliations - was
assisted, during the intensive negotiations that
preceded the formation of the Council, by
representatives of the Coalition Provisional Authority
and by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, in keeping with operative paragraph 9 of
resolution 1483 (2003). We wish to place on record our
sincere gratitude to all of them for their efforts.

Resolution 1483 (2003) did not set out in a clear
and precise manner the functions of the interim
administration. This flexibility in the scope of the
resolution allowed a certain latitude for expansion of
the powers of the Governing Council so that all aspects
of government could be covered. All of our proposals
in this regard have been fully responded to.

Our primary goal, which we will continue to bear
in mind, is to shorten the duration of the interim
administration period and put together an elected
Government under a constitution to be endorsed by the
population in free elections. The elections should be
open to all, and the people should be able to express
their opinions freely.

The draft Constitution will be examined by a
constitutional congress representing all political, social
and religious groups. The Governing Council will
prepare for that conference by determining the best
way to ensure the participation of representatives and
to take the necessary legislative action as well as other
measures to facilitate its operations, including in the
areas of electoral law, population census, electoral
register, organization of political parties and other
questions relating to freedom of expression and
freedom of assembly. The United Nations, given its
expertise and experience, could help us to draw up this
legislation.

The Constitution, much-awaited by the Iraqi
people, will put in place a democratic, pluralistic and
federal system that safeguards people's basic rights;
consolidates the rule of law in an independent judiciary
system; ensures the peaceful handover of power
through free elections; places the armed forces under
the authority of the elected administration; and gives
women full rights on the basis of equality.

In brief, we look forward to the creation of a civil
society that believes in personal freedom as a premise
for governance and rejects totalitarian systems, which
have brought only misery and destruction to our
people.

Let me touch on some of the pressing issues to be
addressed by the interim Governing Council. This list,
however, is not exhaustive.

First, there is a need to appoint ministers, to fill
vacancies in Government agencies and ministries, and
to appoint competent personnel who were not
implicated in any crimes committed by the previous
regime.

Secondly, Iraqi embassies abroad must be
reopened so that they can carry out their regular
functions. Representatives of foreign Governments
must be received, and Iraqi representatives appointed
to international organizations, first and foremost to the
United Nations. Iraq will then work to improve
relations with neighbouring Arab countries, its other
neighbours and the international community at large.

Iraq will require tremendous assistance in all
areas in order to rebuild its economy, modernize its
industrial sector, reform its educational system,
improve its sanitation services and provide basic
necessities to all its citizens. There is no doubt in my
mind that the United Nations and its specialized
agencies will have an important and vital role to play in
all these areas.

Thirdly, one of the primary functions of the
Governing Council is to ensure security and stability
and to establish institutions that can rebuild the
national police and the national army and enable them
to preserve stability and security in Iraq. The police
and the army should be used to eliminate those
destructive elements and saboteurs who continue to
impede the national development process and to
undermine the interests of the civilian population.

Fourthly, there should be a re-examination of the
legislation enacted by the previous regime -
legislation that enabled it to tighten its control over the
country. The judiciary system, which was destroyed by
the previous regime, should be reformed.

Fifthly, special tribunals should be constituted in
order to bring to justice those who committed criminal
acts under the former Iraqi regime, so that they will
stand trial for their humanitarian crimes against the
Iraqi people. Such tribunals will prosecute accused
criminals. We have asked a special group of Council
members to present proposals regarding the formation
of these special tribunals.

Iraq's national economy must be revived, and
projects must be undertaken that provide jobs for the
unemployed; alleviate the poverty of a large segment of
society, a large percentage of which is still living below
the poverty line; promote justice and fairness in the
distribution of national wealth; and consolidate
political freedom as the economic situation improves.

We will work to ensure that every individual
benefits from Iraq's tremendous national assets through
the creation of a special fund, and we will ensure
compensation for victims of forced displacement and
for people whose property was confiscated by the
bloodthirsty regime of Saddam Hussain.

The Governing Council has taken several
decisions that will enable it to begin implementing this
ambitious programme. With regard to security, the
Council has decided to employ at least 30,000 Iraqi
police officers, to train them, to provide them with
equipment and to pay them adequately. The Council
has decided also to establish, as expeditiously as
possible, at least 1,500 schools and clinics throughout
Iraq.

Also in the context of the economy, all salaries,
including back pay, will be paid, and we will start a
programme to reabsorb more than 200,000 demobilized
soldiers into the civil society employment sector,
especially in the public works and construction sector.
The Governing Council will examine the budget with a
View to satisfying the needs of the population, reform
the currency system and issue a new currency in order
to provide citizens with purchasing power. The
contribution of the United Nations and its specialized
agencies in that endeavour will be extremely important.

The challenge that is facing us is enormous. The
responsibilities of the Governing Council are many,
difficult and diverse. The important responsibility
borne by the members of the Council cannot be
overstated. We need the Iraqi people to fully support
us. We will have to demonstrate to them our credibility
and merit if we are to lead them in this historic process.

Speaking personally, I would like to say that I am
optimistic. The Iraqi people have demonstrated their
ability to coexist in harmony and tolerance, and we will
make every possible effort to overcome the difficulties
that we face. We are counting on the support of the
Council in restoring Iraq to its proper position within
the international community.

