Mr. Pleuger (Germany): I did not intend to take
the floor, but since other delegations have made their
views known after the voting, I thought that, as we
have been working hard over the past week under the
Secretary-General's mandate as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
661 (1991) concerning Iraq, I should just like to say a
few words.

First, I should like to welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General, who shows by his presence how
important this resolution is, and to thank our
collaborators in all delegations - not only in the
German delegation - for the work that they have
done. The negotiations were very difficult, because
many complicated issues had to be addressed. I should
also like to thank our collaborators and my colleagues
around this table for their spirit of compromise, which
enabled us to produce a draft resolution that could be
adopted by consensus. I understand, of course, that if
you negotiate a compromise, it can never satisfy
everyone in every respect. Therefore, I am particularly
grateful for the spirit of compromise and cooperation
that we found, which led 14 members of the Council to
sponsor the draft resolution and led to a unanimous
vote in the end.

I should like to make two points that I think are
important for the general public, which has been
waiting for this decision to be taken for the whole of
the past week.
First, I believe it is important that, after a very
heated debate on the complicated Iraq issue over the
past six weeks, the Security Council found its way
back to a unity of purpose, which was to provide Iraq's
suffering people with necessary humanitarian goods.

My second important point is that we have
enabled the Secretary-General and the Office of the
Iraq Programme to restart the oil for food programme
as soon as the situation on the ground permits. Once
again, I should like to stress the dimension of this task.
We heard from the Secretary-General that the food
basket consists of 80 per cent of the goods coming
from the oil for food programme. Sixty per cent of the
people of Iraq depend on those rations: that is more
than 40 million people who must be fed. They had to
be fed before the war, they need food more now, and
they will need it even more after the war.

I think the fact that the Security Council has
taken this decision to enable the Secretary-General to
feed Iraq's suffering population is a positive signal, and
it has been strengthened by the adoption of the
resolution by consensus in the Secretary-General's
presence. It is a signal to the people of Iraq that they
have not been forgotten, and it is a signal to the
international community and to international
humanitarian organizations that they must do whatever
they can to alleviate the plight of a suffering people.

