Mr. Leplinskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation expresses its
gratitude to Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region,
for his substantive briefing. Progress in the peace
process in the Great Lakes region would not have been
possible without the active involvement of the Office
of the Special Representative and the African Union.
Together with the regional secretariat, they have made
much progress in terms of organizing the Dar es-
Salaam and Nairobi summits.

Today's meeting attests eloquently to the
attention that the Security Council is devoting to the
situation in the Great Lakes region. We are pleased to
note encouraging developments. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo has held its first democratic
elections in four decades. Peacebuilding efforts are
under way in Burundi, whose problems are on the
agenda of the recently established Peacebuilding
Commission. Issues related to northern Uganda are
being gradually addressed; peacebuilding measures
have been elaborated and are being carried out.
Multilateral security mechanisms involving the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, Rwanda
and Burundi are being implemented. Clearly, none of
that would have been possible without the assistance of
subregional organizations, partner countries, donors
and international financial institutions.

A critical event last year was the signing by heads
of State of the Great Lakes region, at Nairobi in
December 2006, of the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development in the Great Lakes Region, which
ushered in a new era of post-conflict rehabilitation and
social development. The primary task for participants
in the International Conference, now and in the near
future, will be to ratify the Pact and to begin the
progressive implementation of decisions taken and
arrangements agreed.

On 31 March the mandate of the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes Region will conclude. The Special
Representative, Mr. Fall, and his staff have done a
great job and deserve the highest praise. Let me also
take this opportunity to express our gratitude to all
those who have assisted and will continue to assist the
Great Lakes region in seeking to achieve lasting peace,
stability and economic progress: the United Republic
of Tanzania, South Africa, the Group of Friends of the
Great Lakes Region, the regional Preparatory
Committee and the National Coordinators.

