Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, Burkina Faso joins other members of the
Council in welcoming you, along with Mr. Charles
Michel, Minister for Development Cooperation of
Belgium, and Mr. Vittorio Craxi, Under-Secretary of
State for Foreign Affairs of Italy. Your participation in
this debate, Sir, shows the importance that you attach
to the question of children and armed conflict.

We would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for her very
instructive information. We also commend the Working
Group, chaired by France, for its meticulous follow-up
on this very important question. Obviously, we cannot
fail to thank Ms. Ann Veneman and Ms. Jo Becker for
their valuable information on this subject.

As we all know, the background of this scourge is
still marked with horrors. The terrible reality is that
thousands of children continue to die each year from
the direct impact of war, and that thousands more die
from indirect consequences, including malnutrition,
disease, psychiatric conditions and mental disorders.

In fact, the report notes the persistence of serious
violations against children by illegal armed groups and
by some governmental forces and indicates that, in
spite of the setting of a statutory minimum age for
recruitment into the armed forces through national and
international legislation, in particular the 25 May 2000
National Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the Involvement of Children in Armed
Conflict, thousands of children are still being abducted,
recruited and forcibly used as soldiers in areas of
armed conflict.

In addition, we deplore the fact that violence
stemming from clashes, cluster bomb or mine
explosions and attacks against schools and hospitals
continues to kill thousands of children and to wound a
very significant number. Another unfortunate crime
relates to blocked deliveries of humanitarian assistance
due to growing insecurity as result of ambushes, thefts
and killings, all in flagrant violation of the Fourth
Geneva Convention.

It is thus vital that appropriate measures be taken
to spare the lives of children and to encourage and
facilitate humanitarian action.

Here, we wish to make a few recommendations,
first of all, to Member States. We call upon
Governments to criminalize the recruitment of child
soldiers and to enact legislation to protect humanitarian
action. We encourage States that have not yet done so
to ratify and ensure compliance with the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflicts.

Then, with respect to parties to conflicts, we urge
the international community to do everything it can to
ensure that parties do not target schools and, indeed,
that they make a commitment to protect them. Parties
to conflicts must commit themselves to sparing
primary health-care services, including water delivery,
and they must guarantee safe passage for humanitarian
organizations so that they can deliver assistance and
services to children, including in resettlement and
refugee camps.

With respect to aid and assistance organizations,
we call on donors, on a priority basis, to include in
their emergency programmes support for health and
education so that in time of armed conflict education
and the delivery of sanitation and health services for
children will continue in camps for refugees or
internally displaced persons.
Finally, we urge the Security Council to consider
measures - coercive measures, if possible - against
any party to an armed conflict that continues to
systematically violate legal provisions established to
protect children in a period of armed conflict. In
particular, it is the Security Council's duty to ensure
full implementation of all of its relevant resolutions,
including resolution 1612 (2005), and to ensure strict
compliance with the recommendations of its Working
Group, with which parties are called upon to cooperate
more.

Here, Burkina Faso welcomes the establishment
of the monitoring and reporting mechanism on children
in armed conflicts, whose daily action towards its
objectives has had a deterrent effect. We also call for
an extension of the mechanism to all cases of
violations, and we encourage all those who have joined
it to be frank and productive in cooperating with it.

Ongoing and systematic consideration of the
question of children and armed conflict shows the
extent of the Security Council's grave concern.
Children are the future of humanity. Therefore, we
must never cease to denounce anything that seriously
threatens their existence and their future.

