The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United
Kingdom.

Today we have had confirmation of the barbaric
murder of Mr. Kenneth Bigley, a British national held
hostage in Baghdad. We extend our most sincere
sympathy to Mr. Bigley's family at this time of great
sadness. Tragically, many countries and families are
dealing with the suffering and the grief caused by
mindless acts of violence - the violence of terrorists.
Last night, in Sinai, we witnessed cruel and unjustified
terrorist acts committed against civilians - acts that
served no conceivable purpose. Last week, in Pakistan,
innocent civilians were once again the target of
appalling terrorist acts.

When the Security Council began negotiation on
this resolution, the appalling tragedy in Beslan, as well
as the series of other recent attacks in Russia, were on
our minds. The threat of terrorism touches us all and
that is why this resolution matters. The adoption of
resolution 1566 (2004) underlines the importance of
the work of the Council, the work it is already doing
through its Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), its
Committee on sanctions against Al Qaeda and the
Taliban and their respective expert teams. Some six
months ago, we approved a new CTC Executive
Directorate and it is important that it now be fully
operational as soon as possible. But the resolution,
rightly, goes further. It sets the scene for the Council to
address the wider threat, and it is the first time that the
Council will consider how to take practical action
against terrorists not related to Al Qaeda and who are
therefore not included under the existing sanctions
regimes.

Of course, there are some difficult balances to be
struck as this work goes forward. One of the most
important of those was raised by Jack Straw in the
General Assembly last month: the threat of terrorism
confronts democratic States with an acute dilemma -
to fight those who recognize none of the values for
which we stand, while remaining true ourselves to
those values. Counter-terrorism must be conducted in
accordance with international law, including human
rights and refugee law.

For example, the Council has declared that acts,
methods and practices of terrorism are contrary to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations, as are
knowingly financing, planning or inciting terrorist acts.
The 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees
itself sets out that it does not apply to anyone who has
committed a war crime, a crime against humanity or
other serious crime or who is guilty of acts contrary to
the purposes and principles of the United Nations. We
cannot allow those who commit, support and finance
terrorism to shelter behind the refugee status to which
they are not entitled and we should look at ways to
ensure the speedier extradition of such individuals.
The Security Council is shouldering its
responsibilities to tackle a threat that affects us all.
These are challenging issues and ones which the
working group will now have to tackle. The issues will
require careful consideration and one of the first things
on the agenda will be consideration of a terrorist list.
We look forward to engaging in that work.

Finally, by adopting this important text by
consensus, supported by the strong statement of the
representative of Turkey, we are demonstrating the
strength of the Council, the determination of the United
Nations and the collective will to combat the scourge
of terrorism.

I shall now resume my functions as President of
the Security Council.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at I p.rn.
