Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): I join previous speakers
in expressing appreciation to you, Madam President,
for convening today's open debate and congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his statement and
Under-Secretary-General John Holmes and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for
their useful briefings.

My delegation believes that the protection task
cannot be understood and addressed in humanitarian
terms alone, as it requires focus and action on a
multiplicity of different areas, ranging from politics to
human rights to disarmament. The Security Council
has considered the protection of civilians issue for over
a decade. We can acknowledge that substantive results
have been achieved in establishing a normative
framework. The politicization and selectivity that
characterize the debate have affected credibility. This
has called into question our sincerity about concerns
for the plight of civilians affected by armed conflict.

The normative framework on civilian protection
cannot be applied in a theoretical manner, regardless of
the circumstances. Our own past experience in dealing
with a terrorist group that used the civilian population
forcibly as a human shield to launch attacks on the
armed forces should remind all of us of the challenges.
While shielding themselves behind innocent civilians,
they also succeeded in marshalling the support of their
sympathizers abroad to stage massive demonstrations.
Unfortunately, too many well-meaning persons were
taken in by these cynical efforts to garner sympathy.
Many of the rules of war are based on the presumption
that the parties to the conflict are the conventional
armies of responsible States, but terrorists totally
disregard these laws and principles.

We also need to address the causes of the
escalation of armed conflict. The proliferation of illicit
arms has contributed to the spread of violence and
terrorism everywhere. Unless we are able to stop its
proliferation, civilian safety will remain at stake, and
our best efforts to deal with the humanitarian
consequences of conflicts will soon exceed existing
capacities and available resources.

Whilst measures can be imposed, albeit
selectively, on States legitimately engaged in
protecting their civilian population from terrorists,
non-State actors such as terrorist groups, on the other
hand, have relatively easy access to illicit weapons.
This is because there is no dedicated international
regime to conduct surveillance, let alone interdiction,
of such illicit arms trafficking. On the other hand,
external actors such as diaspora communities openly
fund arms purchases aimed at destabilizing States
whilst receiving support and protection in their host
countries, and their criminal agents cross international
boundaries at will, unchecked.

There is also a need to recognize the legitimate
role of the military in civilian protection, whilst we can
agree that it is not an exclusive role. It is noteworthy
that protective responsibilities are part of the mandate
of United Nations peacekeeping forces, and their
valuable contribution in this regard has been noted.
More than 3,000 Sri Lankan peacekeepers are on the
ground protecting civilians in challenging operational
environments.

The role of Governments in civilian protection
should be respected, as it is their primary responsibility
to protect their own citizens, especially in times of
armed conflict. United Nations and other humanitarian
agencies must support and assist Governments and, in
doing so, be sensitive to the realities on the ground,
including by respecting the sovereignty of States. The
principle of unimpeded access for humanitarian
personnel must be respected, but it cannot disregard the
State's responsibility to ensure the safety and security
of humanitarian personnel, as terrorists do not
distinguish between military and humanitarian
personnel in their attacks. Calls for unimpeded access
in some situations are once again a clear case of
applying theory without factoring in the realities on the
ground. It must never be overlooked that, as in our own
experience, the military, often at a huge cost to its
personnel, has to brave the dangers of terrorism to
bring civilians out of harm's way.

Therefore, military and humanitarian personnel
must seek to work in partnership, and their
responsibilities towards civilians must be addressed
through regular dialogue and consultation in places
where civilian protection is at stake. Therefore, we
should look at capacity-building measures for military
personnel and peacekeeping forces to deal with civilian
protection activities. The assumption that civilians can
best be protected and cared for only by civilian
humanitarian workers belies the training provided to
our armed forces to respect humanitarian law at all
times and to handle peacekeeping responsibilities.
These are particularly pertinent given that we are
dealing increasingly with internal conflicts.

An inevitable consequence of armed conflict is
internal displacement. Internal displacement poses
several challenges; key among them is that armed
groups use displacement to exploit civilian
populations, sometimes by masquerading among them.
In this context, civilians have a right to be protected
and the State has the primary responsibility not only to
provide for the welfare of displaced civilians in terms
of food, clothing, medical care and shelter, but also to
ensure their safety in keeping with the provisions of
the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement.
Unfortunately, ground realities are not understood or
considered by those who look at civilian protection in
isolation and apply generalizations regardless of the
specific circumstances.

The resettlement issue is also politicized. In my
country, we have resettled nearly 90 per cent of
internally displaced persons within one year of
concluding a 27-year conflict. Resettlement
necessitated clearance of uncharted mine fields laid by
the terrorist group in civilian residential areas,
farmlands and roads. Whilst assistance for de-mining
and resettlement is miniscule, there are those who
hypocritically preach to us about the need for early
resettlement.

The cost of armed conflict on civilians and the
need for accountability is a matter of concern to all
democratic and elected Governments, including our
own. In this context, our Government established a
commission of inquiry in May this year. Quite often
and quite naturally, the focus on civilian casualties is
centred on the loss of life and property damage caused
in military operations, whilst insufficient consideration
is given to the thousands of lives lost in suicide attacks
on civilian targets by non-State actors. We have to

devise means to also hold non-State actors accountable
and to recognize the asymmetrical nature of conflicts
where democratic States are confronted by ruthless
terrorist groups that pay scant attention to the rules of
war and challenge conventional armies on how best to
protect vulnerable civilian populations.

My delegation hopes that the Council's
discussion on the protection of civilians will facilitate
practical decisions based on ground realities. The
challenges facing us are primarily of a practical nature,
requiring more international cooperation and greater
coordination between the United Nations and Member
States.

In conclusion, we would like to acknowledge the
valuable contribution of the United Nations agencies,
particularly the Office of the Emergency Relief
Coordinator and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), and other national and
international partners in providing support and
assistance to Government efforts for relief
rehabilitation and the resettlement of the affected
civilians. My delegation wishes to convey a special
word of appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Sir
John Holmes for the very constructive and supportive
role he has played and for his excellent leadership of
OCHA. We wish him well in all his future endeavours.

