Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
the presidency for allowing the United Kingdom to
make a further statement. I wish to respond to some of
the statements made in relation to the Falkland Islands.
I note the very questionable relevance of this issue to
the theme of today's debate and regret the fact that some
participants have used this debate, in which we have
seen a very valuable and timely discussion of United
Nations cooperation with regional and subregional

organizations, as a platform for expressing positions on
a range of unrelated issues.

Several ministerial participants referred in their
statements to Argentina's so-called legitimate claim
to the Falkland Islands. The United Kingdom does
not accept that Argentina has any legitimate claim to
sovereignty over the Falkland Islands. The historical
facts and legal position are quite clear. The United
Kingdom has administered the Falkland Islands
peacefully and effectively for more than 180 years. In
1850, by ratifying the bilateral Convention for settlement
of existing differences, Argentina acknowledged
that there was no territorial dispute between the two
countries.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, on
behalf of the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States (CELAC), said that respect for self-
determination was a founding principle of CELAC.
The United Kingdom also attaches great importance to
that principle, which is enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. In March, the people of the Falkland
Islands exercised their right to self-determination in a
referendum, which established overwhelmingly their
wish to remain an overseas territory of the United
Kingdom

In her national statement, President Fernandez
said that the United Kingdom and Argentina should
bilaterally discuss the Falkland Islands. The United
Kingdom is clear that any such discussion is not just a
matter for the two Governments. The views of the people
of the Falkland Islands cannot simply be ignored. There
can be no discussion of the sovereignty of the Falkland
Islands against the wishes of the islanders.

Finally, I reject the suggestion of the Foreign
Minister of Uruguay that illegitimate oil-related
activities are being conducted in Falkland Island waters,
which constitute unilateral measures by the United
Kingdom, contrary to a General Assembly resolution.
The decision to exploit its natural resources was made
by the Falkland Islands Government for the benefit of
the people of the Falkland Islands, and in accordance
with the right of self-determination of the people of the
Falkland Islands under international law. All activities
related to hydrocarbons on the continental shelf of the
Falkland Islands are regulated by legislation of the
Falkland Islands Government in strict accordance with
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.

