Mr. Mahamat Zene (Chad) (spoke in French): I,
too, would like to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special
Representative of the Secretary- General in Afghanistan
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his briefing. I also thank
Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal, the new Permanent
Representative of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
to the United Nations, for his statement and warmly
welcome him to the Council.

On the eve of the first anniversary of the departure
of International Security Assistance Force from
Afghanistan, the security, humanitarian and human
rights situation in the country is still of concern,
despite the tireless efforts ofthe new Afghan authorities
and the support of the international community. We
commend the Afghan Government in its unfailing
efforts, which have, among other things, dislodged
the Taliban from Kunduz. We reiterate our support to
the Afghan authorities and repeat our call to Afghan
stakeholders to promote dialogue through the High
Peace Council, in the interests of their people, and to
implement the Peace and Reconciliation in Afghanistan

Programme in line with the Kabul communique and the
conclusions of the Bonn Conference. To that end, we
welcome the 12 October meeting in Kabul of the Ulema
National Conference, which was facilitated by the High
Peace Council and supported by UNAMA. Its aim
was to bring together all parties to the conflict so as
to promote peace, and we congratulate President Ghani
for approving its conclusions.

With regard to the security situation, the seizure
of Kunduz by the Taliban, which we firmly condemn,
shows that the situation is unstable and worsening
owing to the unfortunate incidents that have claimed
the lives of many civilians and international expatriate
staff. We deplore the attacks on civilians, and we hope
that they will not happen again in future. We extend
our condolences to the families of the victims and to
the Afghan Government and we hope that those who
were injured make a speedy recovery. We also condemn
the 11 December terrorist attack carried out near the
Spanish Embassy in Kabul. We extend condolences
and solidarity to the families of the victims and to the
Governments of Afghanistan and Spain. We reiterate
our firm condemnation of terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. We underscore the real need to
bring the perpetrators of such barbaric acts to justice.
Furthermore, we express our serious concern regarding
the increase in the number of terrorist attacks and the
serious threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters in
Afghanistan and the subregion, including those from
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. That requires
heightened vigilance and strong mobilization from the
international community.
We commend the efforts made by Afghan
Government to combat drug trafficking, as well as
the 15 October adoption, in partnership with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, of the
national drug action plan for the period 2015-2019.
We encourage the Government to continue to work to
combat and eliminate the scourge of drugs. In the same
vein, we urge countries in the region to step up their
cooperation and coordinate their efforts in cross-border
efforts aimed at combating the illicit trade in drugs.

Chad is very concerned about the use of improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) by terrorist groups against
civilians, the Afghan security forces and diplomatic
and humanitarian staff. To that end, we underscore the
need to step up coordination and exchange information,
both locally and regionally, so as to prevent parts for
IEDs from being delivered to terrorist groups and
to better control the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons. By the same token, we are extremely
concerned by the deterioration in the humanitarian
situation, in particular that of persons being displaced
because of natural disasters and a lack of security. We
urge the international community to urgently provide
the necessary assistance to displaced persons, and all
donors to contribute to such efforts.

In conclusion, we reiterate our support to the Afghan
authorities and urge the international community to
further support them in restoring peace and rebuilding
the country.

