The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

I thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing. As always
while addressing the political process, he never loses
sight of the well-being of the Palestinian and Israeli
peoples. I would also like to thank our second briefer,
Ms. Adele Raemer. Far too often, we talk about this
issue without truly understanding the human impact of
the violence that emanates from Gaza. In this season
of lights, it is important for the Council to take stock
of the things that we see clearly and the things we fail
to see. What I must note yet again is how the Council
seems either unwilling or unable to see the reality
that Israelis live in constant fear of attack. Instead
of recognizing that reality, the Council tolerates an
endless string of condemnations of Israel. But I will
not stand for that. I have said it before and I will say it
again today that Israel has no better friend than Kelly
Craft. It will surprise no one in this Chamber to hear
me say that the Trump Administration strongly opposes
resolution 2334 (2016). It is one-sided and unfairly
critical of Israel. Had I been Ambassador at the time
of the vote on the draft resolution, I would have vetoed
it. We would not normally dignify this resolution with
further discussion of its contents.

However, given the comments we heard this morning
about rocket attacks that threaten innocent people, it
would be of some benefit to explore one element of this
resolution. Resolution 2334 (2016) is unambiguous in
one important respect. It condemns all acts of violence,
including acts of terror, provocation and incitement.
Lest we dismiss rocket fire as something other than an
act of violence, we should recall that millions of Israelis
live under the threat of attack each and every day. A
little more than a month ago, Ms. Raemer was one of the
many Israelis trapped in bomb shelters in her home as
more than 150 rockets launched by Palestinian Islamic
Jihad rained down around them. During those kinds of
attacks, Israelis cannot leave their homes, so they do
not. During those attacks, it is impossible to go about a
normal life, so they do not. It hardly needs saying, and
yet I feel that I must, that unguided rocket fire affects
both Israelis and Palestinians. In Gaza, Palestinian
women were also forced to take shelter as rockets fired
by terrorists from crowded civilian neighbourhoods
flew overhead. That constant threat of attack is the
painful reality of daily life for hundreds of thousands
of people, Israelis and Palestinians. It is the continued
threat of such a violence to so many that precludes the
possibility of lasting peace.

Moreover, these acts of violence are clearly
condemned by resolution 2334 (2016). So I must
ask - will the Council also condemn them? Will it
even take them seriously? While Israel's poor treatment
in United Nations venues is now so commonplace as to
have become unremarkable, what truly is remarkable
is the resilience of the people of Israel. Because
despite living among the echoes of rocket fire, the
people of Israel promote and defend freedom. They
build universities, they win Nobel prizes and conduct
innovative research. Israel is a gleaming light for the
world. Is it to be condemned? No. It is to be emulated.
It is the spirit of determination, of resilience in the
face of threat that keeps alive the hope for a peaceful
solution, one that promotes and protects the security
of Palestinians and Israelis alike. But that solution will
be forged only when the two parties can return to the
negotiating table. For that to happen, the Council and
the parties in question must take more seriously the
threat of violence from Gaza, especially from Hamas
and Palestinian Islamic Jihad. So when our task ahead
is difficult and the political world is dark, let us be the
ones to bring the candles to illuminate the way.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of the
Observer State of Palestine.

