Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank the United States presidency for organizing
this special Council meeting of finance ministers
devoted to the fight against terrorist financing. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
Mr. Je-Yoon Shin, President of the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF), for their briefings.

Effectively countering every form of financing of
terrorism, including the raising, transfer and use of
funds and other financial assets by terrorists, requires
States to continually adapt their responses to the
terrorists' increasingly sophisticated methods in an era
of technological advances and globalization. In that
regard, we welcome the results that have been achieved
through the sanctions regime imposed on Al-Qaida
through resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011). As
the principal tools available to the Security Council,
they have enabled us not only to implement sanctions
measures such as the assets freeze, travel ban and arms
embargo, but also to prevent the transfer of weapons
to the individuals and entities on the sanctions list. We
commend the activities of the Committee established
pursuant to 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities and
would like to express our appreciation to the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team for its
valuable assistance to the Committee in implementing
the Security Council's measures.

Resolution 2253 (2015), which we havejust adopted,
strengthens the existing sanctions regime against
Al-Qaida and takes into consideration the new aspect
of the terrorist threat stemming from the activities of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Chad
welcomes this significant new phase in the fight against
terrorist financing, which specifically targets the illicit
trade in oil and petroleum products, modular refineries
and related materiel, as well as associated individuals
and entities who facilitate the travel of foreign terrorist
fighters.

The process of adding individuals to the sanctions
list must be done with transparency and respect
for human rights. In that regard, we emphasize the
importance of ensuring the independence of the
Office of the Ombudsperson and of strengthening its
capacity by providing it with the tools and resources
it needs to function. We would also like to stress the
importance of strengthening the independence of the
Monitoring Team. Furthermore, the appointment of the
Ombudsperson and the Monitoring Team experts should
be done in respect for transparency and competence, as
well as for the principle of regional representation.

Beyond this, we are impatiently awaiting the
various reports requested under resolution 2253 (2015),
particularly that of the Monitoring Team working
jointly in cooperation with the Executive Directorate
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee in following up on
the implementation of resolutions 2199 (2015) and 2178
(2014), as well as the report of the Secretary-General on
United Nations action aimed at helping Member States
combat this threat.

Strengthening the global fight against terrorist
financing has to be done by enacting and implementing
measures on the national, regional and international
fronts. In that regard, to the extent that its means permit,
Chad has made major efforts to prevent and combat
money-laundering and terrorist financing. To do so,
we have established a national financial investigation
agency and begun to implement the relevant community
regulations established on 4 April 2003 by the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community.

After adopting our first ever anti-terrorism law a few
months ago, we are determined to add to our legislative
arsenal in order to be able to more effectively combat
terrorist financing in all its forms, in accordance with
the relevant FATF recommendations concerning the
fight against money-laundering, terrorist financing and
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The
FATF recommendations form the basis ofa coordinated
response to threats to the integrity of the financial
system and will help to harmonize its regulation at the
global level. In that regard, efforts are under way to
enact legislation prohibiting terrorist financing in all
its forms. Chad participated actively in formulating a
subregional strategy for combating terrorism and arms
trafficking in Central Africa and we expect to ratify
the 19 international instruments on terrorism in their
entirety.

The addition of ISIL to the sanctions list and the
change of the name of the sanctions regime, henceforth
to be known as the ISIL (Daesh) and Al-Qaida sanctions
list, signals the international community's determination
to respond commensurately to the extremely serious
threat that terrorism represents. However, we should
recall that the deliberately provocative names that
terrorist organizations give themselves cannot and
should not be associated with any religion, nationality
or civilization. The fight against terrorism must not
become a vehicle for inciting religious hatred and
fear, because terrorism is a global threat that does not
confine itself to any religion or community.

In conclusion, we note that there is an entire
range of tools and norms for effectively combating
terrorist financing, including the relevant Security
Council resolutions, especially resolutions 1367 (1999),
2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015), adopted today. What is
therefore lacking is their effective implementation. We
urge every State to get to work immediately to tackle
the problem of terrorist financing.

