Mr. Hill (Australia): Australia appreciates the
Secretary-General's report on Afghanistan. We also
take this opportunity to express our appreciation to all
who work within the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We thank
Mr. Guehenno and his team, both here and in the field.
We welcome very much the Secretary-General's
appointment of Kai Eide as Special Representative, and
we look forward to working closely with him.

This open debate on Afghanistan is timely. It
arrives at a time when the international community is
refocusing on the issues of Afghanistan. Of course, I
note in particular the upcoming Bucharest summit,
which will involve discussion of a comprehensive
political/military plan by NATO and non-NATO troop-
contributing nations. I am pleased to hear today that
the Secretary-General will be attending. Also, of
course, as has been mentioned, there is the very
important upcoming Paris Conference, which will
provide an opportunity for a two-year review of the
Afghanistan Compact - in other words, of the broader
nation-building task.

I cannot stress enough that the international
community as a whole has real and enduring interests
in Afghanistan's stability. Afghanistan remains front
line in global efforts to defeat terrorism - a threat
affecting all countries that support democracy,
secularism and moderation. No member of the
international community can afford to see Afghanistan
succumb again to the forces of extremism and
ideological fundamentalism. International success in
Afghanistan is clearly a measure of resolve in global
efforts on terrorism and is certainly viewed that way by
Al-Qaida and other extremist groups.

There have been hard-won gains on stabilization
over the past seven years - and I was pleased to hear
them referred to by the Ambassador of Afghanistan
today - but again, as he said, unless we sustain and
reinvigorate international efforts, not just for security
tasks, but also for reconstruction and development,
progress will be undone. It is essential that we continue
to build the capacity of the Government of Afghanistan
so that it has the tools to address the challenges the
people of Afghanistan will face in the short, medium
and long terms.

Australia has recently increased its commitment
to capacity-building, with the addition of an
operational mentoring and liaison team to provide
training and guidance to the Afghan National Army.

The Secretary-General is right to note in his
report that there is a clear need for more resources and
a more coordinated, integrated approach by the
international community to tackling Afghanistan's
challenges. That includes coordination of our military
and non-military efforts and coordination of our efforts
across different provinces and regions, not only by
NATO and its International Security Assistance Force
partners, but also by the United Nations and other
international actors.

We must all be prepared to work towards the
same objectives to achieve real success, especially
when addressing complex issues such as counter-
narcotics. It also means more commitments without
caveats and greater focus on deploying resources to
where the stabilization challenges are most acute, in
particular in the South.

Strengthening United Nations engagement in
Afghanistan is crucial to progress on stabilization and
establishing the longer-term conditions for peace and
security. We encourage increased United Nations
engagement, not only in Kabul but also at the
provincial level, including, importantly, through a
United Nations presence - UNAMA and United
Nations agencies - in the South, including Uruzgan.

Special Representative Eide will have the
important task of communicating to the people of
Afghanistan the strong commitment of the United
Nations and its Members to the people and the
Government of Afghanistan, and our united efforts to
foster stability and development throughout the
country. As the Secretary-General notes in his report,

"[t]he guiding principle of UNAMA activities is
to reinforce Afghan leadership and strengthen
international cohesion in support of that
leadership" (S/2008/159, para. 64).

In partnership with the Afghan Government,
Mr. Eide also has a key role in providing leadership
and direction to the efforts of the United Nations,
especially to ensure effective coordination of
international humanitarian and development activities
and their extension to all parts of the country.

Australia is making a major contribution to the
international community's efforts in Afghanistan
through military and non-military contributions. We
have some 1,000 troops focused in Uruzgan province,
working in partnership with the Dutch forces. We have
committed $450 million in reconstruction,
development and humanitarian assistance to
Afghanistan since 2001, and we are examining options
for an increased Australian police presence. We will
remain committed.
