Mr. Corman (Turkey): I should like to start by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I also
congratulate the Permanent Representative of Libya on
having successfully completed the March presidency of
the Council.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Hedi
Annabi for his briefing today and for his continuous
and tireless efforts for the stabilization of Haiti at the
head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH).

Today's open debate is indeed timely, considering
that the Security Council has just come back from Haiti
and that the first round of partial senatorial elections
will be held in two weeks. Having mentioned our trip
to Haiti, I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Haiti for the hospitality we enjoyed
in his country and the Permanent Representative of
Costa Rica for having organized the Security Council
mission in such an efficient manner.

Turkey attaches great importance to stability in
Haiti and fully supports MINUSTAH. We have
contributed to MINUSTAH since its inception, and we
will soon have another group of Turkish police officers
joining the group already in Haiti. These additional
Turkish police officers will serve alongside the troops
and police officers of other contributors in these
difficult times in Haiti.

We hope that the upcoming partial senatorial
elections will not have a destabilizing effect, but will
make a contribution to enhancing institutional
effectiveness in Haiti. As outlined in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2009/129), the readiness of the
Haitian political leadership to work together, especially
in dealing with the aftermath of the devastating
hurricanes, was a clearly encouraging sign. This state
of mind should prevail not only in times of natural
catastrophe, but also in trying to solve the daily
problems of the Haitians.

In that context, the United Nations, and
MINUSTAH in particular, should remain vigilant, as
we witnessed during our stay that the underlying
causes of instability in Haiti - extreme poverty and
the precarious socio-economic environment - are
unfortunately still prevalent. We therefore join in the
Secretary-General's call to the Haitian leadership and
people to maintain the spirit of consensus and
cooperation, as well as the political collaboration and
dialogue shown after the hurricanes.

In this sense, the fairness, transparency and
inclusiveness of the upcoming senatorial elections, as
well as of State mechanisms in general, will be of great
importance. On the other hand, the international
community and MINUSTAH should keep helping and
supporting Haiti in these endeavours. In this regard, the
donor conference to be held in Washington, D.C., will
be of outmost importance in showing the determination
of the international community to assist Haiti, and will
certainly help MINUSTAH to carry out its duties.

The progress achieved by the Haitian National
Police in fully assuming its responsibilities, the post-
election political climate and any eventual
improvement in the socio-economic situation could,
among other parameters, guide our future assessment
of the gradual drawdown of MINUSTAH. Meanwhile,
beyond any conceptual debate about the definition of
the nature of its mandate, MINUSTAH should
definitely remain in Haiti for the foreseeable future.
