Mr. Mazeikks (Latvia): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this annual debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I also thank
the Secretary-General, the Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
Ms. Edwar, an Iraqi civil-society representative, for
their briefings.

Latvia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union.

Innocent civilians, including women and children,
often constitute the vast majority of victims; often they
are deliberately targeted by parties to armed conflict,
illegal armed groups or terrorist organizations. The
increased incidence of armed conflict in urban areas
has taken a devastating toll on civilian populations
and has damaged civilian infrastructure. The use of
explosive weapons and, what is more deplorable, the
use of chemical weapons, in populated areas, forced
displacement, as well as sexual violence, starvation,
sieges and the denial of much-needed humanitarian
assistance as methods of warfare have become daily
news and do not seem as outrageous as they really are.

Latvia is deeply concerned about attacks on
humanitarian and health-care facilities and personnel
in armed conflict, which continued at a high rate last
year. Overall, we are concerned about the growing
sense of fatigue when it comes to disregard for
humanitarian principles in present-day conflicts.
Impunity for widespread violations on the ground must
not be tolerated. It cannot be emphasized enough that
all State and non-State parties to conflict must respect
international law, humanitarian law and human rights
law. Innocent civilians should be spared the effects
of hostilities, not robbed of their lives, health, future
prospects or homes.

We thank the Secretary-General for his recent
report (S/2018/462) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, which analyses progress in three focus
areas. It is clear that much more needs to be done to
translate progress at the normative level into more
effective country-specific measures to protect civilians.
States bear the primary responsibility to protect their
populations, including from atrocity crimes.

Promoting the protection of civilians in all United
Nations activities is essential, starting with the conflict-
prevention agenda. Latvia considers the protection of
civilians in armed conflict as an important part of the
Security Council agenda. However, greater efforts by
the Security Council are needed to address situations
of concern, act promptly in order to prevent or stop
a conflict and to demand accountability. Existing
challenges to the protection of civilians in diverse
conflict-affected areas, including Syria, Afghanistan,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Ukraine,
as underscored by the report of the Secretary-
General, should be addressed with a sense of urgency.
We call on the permanent members of the Security
Council to refrain from using the veto in situations of
atrocity crimes.

The protection of civilians is an important
component of United Nations peacekeeping mandates.
Local communities expect United Nations peacekeepers
to protect them. However, the effective implementation
of protection mandates remains a challenge. Our work
to make peacekeeping operations more adaptable
and relevant to the current complex challenges must
continue. Better planning, equipment, situational
awareness and training are essential to improved
performance, effective mandate delivery, the protection
of civilians and security of peacekeepers. We also
recall the importance of the Kigali Principles on the
Protection of Civilians, which Latvia endorsed in 2016.

Lastly, I would like to emphasize the importance
of accountability for serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law. We are
concerned about the overwhelming lack of proper
investigation and prosecution of perpetrators. Latvia
is of the view that, where national action is lacking,
international legal mechanisms can step in to provide
justice for victims. We cannot expect future perpetrators
to take the United Nations and its Security Council
seriously as long as the current perpetrators act with
impunity. It is a fundamental legal obligation and in our
common interests to promote and ensure the effective
protection of civilians.

