Mr. Skau (Sweden): I would like to align myself
with the statements to be delivered later this morning on
behalf of the European Union and the Nordic countries.

Maintaining international peace and security is at
the core of the Organization's mission. Peace operations
have been the most visible - and by many measurements
successful - means by which we have sought to deliver
on this aim. The important work of reviewing the
United Nations role in peace and security that has taken
place over the past two years has underlined the need to
improve our efforts to prevent conflict from emerging,
in managing and ending conflicts when they do, and
in preventing a slide back into conflict when peace is
achieved. It is clear that peace operations are integral to
this work of sustaining peace.

I would like to thank the Egyptian presidency of
the Council for scheduling today's open debate, which
creates the space for a frank and ambitious discussion
in support of the Secretary-General's efforts to create
a United Nations system ready to meet the challenges
of sustaining peace in the twenty-first century. I would
also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Amina
Mohammed and their excellent and prominent briefers
for their important contributions, which have helped
frame today's discussion.
Let me make three points on how we believe
the Council and the United Nations system can best
organize itself to not only respond to conflict, but more
importantly, prevent it.

First, neither conflict nor peace emerges from a
vacuum. The drivers of conflict and the enablers of
peace are essentially political. For this reason, we must
recognize the primacy of politics in our strategies for
the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts.
Long-term political strategies that aim to prevent
conflict and sustain peace by addressing root causes
are essential. Effective political strategies should tie
together all the international community's efforts in an
integrated and mutually reinforcing way.

Our work, including peace operations, needs to
be people centred and results oriented. Improving the
daily lives of people is paramount, including through
core tasks such as protection of civilians' physical
safety and their human rights. Peacebuilding should be
truly inclusive, involving Governments and societies,
and take into account local and national perspectives,
which are crucial to enable informed decision-making.
Lasting peace requires the involvement of the entire
population, meaning that the full, equal and effective
participation of women should be hardwired into all of
our efforts towards sustaining peace. Building political
strategies requires high-quality, context-sensitive and
inclusive analysis across the whole of the conflict cycle.
That should be prepared jointly by the whole of the
United Nations system.

Let me also mention here the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) to contributing meaningfully to the
Council's efforts to adopt a sustaining peace approach
in peacekeeping operations. Unlocking the full
potential of the Peacebuilding Commission, not least
during mandate discussions and transitions of peace
operations, will require more informal and frequent
interactions between the Council and the PBC on a
wider range of issues. The Commission is uniquely
placed to convene international actors for the kind of
coordinated and strategic response for sustaining peace
that we know full-well is needed.

Secondly, as part of an integrated response
aimed at building long-term peace, the peace and
security instruments of the United Nations must
work in tandem with development, human rights and
humanitarian efforts from the start of every mission.
Human rights violations can be drivers of conflict,
and restoring respect for human rights will often
contribute to addressing root causes and to sustaining
peace. From the outset, the United Nations system must
simultaneously promote development, including social
service delivery, and aim to build the national capacities
needed to address those challenges.

As members ofthe Council, we have a responsibility
to ensure that mandates are realistic, context-tailored
and flexible. Within mandates, tasks need to be
prioritized, sequenced and adjusted over time. Effective
implementation of mandates also requires well-trained
and well-equipped peacekeepers. A clear vision of a
sustainable end state should guide integrated mission
planning and leadership from the outset. How the United
Nations system is working together to that end should
be an everyday question in a conflict setting - not
only a question of an exit strategy.

Thirdly, when it comes to sustaining peace, we
must never leave the job half done. Putting in place the
essential building blocks I have mentioned today will
allow the United Nations to better sustain peace before
and during transitions and the drawdown of peace
operations. Early and integrated work across the United
Nations system can ensure the sustainability of gains
and that transitions are transformative and forward-
looking processes. In Mali, the Council has sought
to achieve that by requesting a mission-wide strategy
with a view to - among other things - handing over
relevant tasks to the United Nations country team as
part of a long-term exit strategy. In times of transition,
national Governments and partners need to be fully
engaged to ensure their ownership of the process. In
Liberia, for example, we can draw useful lessons from
the recent peacebuilding plan - a process that engaged
both the wider United Nations system and the Liberian
Government, with the full support of the PBC.

When the Council asks United Nations country
teams to step up, which we often do, we have a joint
responsibility to ensure that they have sufficient
capacity and, not least, the resources to do the job. We
must find ways to avoid the financial cliff seen in many
transitions, most recently in cote d'Ivoire, Darfur,
Liberia and Haiti. For instance, strengthening rule-of-
law institutions is often a focus ofmissions in transition.
The United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti is one
such example. Ample resources are needed to continue
to underpin that focus, in which consideration of the
full chain of rule-of-law institutions is important.

The landmark resolution 2282 (2016) on sustaining
peace provides us with a foundation for our work.
We look forward to the Secretary-General's report
on the steps taken so far to implement the sustaining
peace approach across the United Nations system, as
well as next steps. That includes concrete options for
more predictable financing for conflict prevention
and sustaining peace, including from assessed
contributions. We will continue this discussion with
our partners in the African Union during our visit next
week, as well as during the high-level event during
the General Assembly, organized by Ethiopia. Those
discussions will help us as we prepare to take stock
together at the high-level meeting next spring.

The range and nature of threats to international
peace and security are evolving and multiplying.
They now include terrorism and violent extremism,
the effects of climate change and the actions of
transnational organized crime, to name but a few.
Such challenges beg the question of whether existing
reform ideas go far enough to bring the United Nations
conflict management machinery into the twenty-first
century. Our focus should not only be to adapt to
today's challenges, but also to anticipate how conflicts
will evolve. Prevention must be the new watchword.
That means understanding and getting ahead of events,
ahead of the curve, rather than merely reacting to them.

