The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

I should like first to thank the delegation of Jordan for
having requested the urgent convening of this meeting. I
also thank Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for his
briefing today.

At the outset, I express Spain's deepest concern
over the extremely serious situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories and Israel. We profoundly regret
the loss of human life and strongly condemn the violence,
including acts of terrorism. In the face of this spiral of
violence, we cannot limit ourselves to considering the
immediate triggers; we need to look into its underlying
causes, undoubtedly including the political vacuum.
It is an urgent priority to maintain the status quo on
the esplanade of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, take measures
to ensure its preservation and enforce compliance with
the agreements establishing the status quo. We cannot
allow extremists to play the lead role. Jerusalem is a
holy city for Muslims, Jews and Christians and should
not be exploited by extremist elements for militant ends.

The international community should issue that
appeal unanimously and clearly. Spain greatly values
the role being played by Jordan to that end, and we trust
that a constructive dialogue with Israel will contribute to
restoring stability in the framework of the management
arrangement agreed decades ago. Jerusalem must serve
as the capital ofboth States, and it is critical to preserve
the spirit of tolerance that enables coexistence there.
How can the international community and the
Security Council contribute effectively to ending the
violence and averting wider escalation? Very little or
nothing can be done without the necessary commitment
of the interested parties. That is why the role ofpolitical
and community leaders in restoring calm and containing
animosity is essential. We therefore hope to see a greater
effort of moderation on the part of political leaders of
Israel and the Palestinian Authority to prevent a further
exacerbation of the situation. Cooperation on security
issues must be maintained.

Alongside the appeal for moderation, we must
avoid acts of incitement and the excessive use of force
in response so that the repression of violence does not
aggravate it. The international community should also
seek to protect lives and promote security. To that end,
we must consider the formulas or goals that could serve
objective - obviously, with the support of the parties
and help them to meet their responsibilities. It would be
a good idea for the Security Council to receive the legal
report being drafted by the Office of Legal Affairs to
explain the options available for the adequate protection
of the Palestinians.

However, no appeal to calm, no strategy of
moderation and no attempt to maintain the status
quo will halt the current or any future escalation of
violence in the region unless the parties are committed
towards a political endgame. That is an orientation
for which the support of the Security Council and the
international community is essential. The situation is
critical; we would not be meeting here today if it were
not. The Security Council cannot limit itself merely to
listening to responses and making yet further appeals
for non-violence and restraint.

The time has come for the major issues that have
remained outstanding since the Oslo agreements to
be put on the table once again and for the Council to
promote the relaunching of a true peace process in the
Middle East. We are all aware that Spain's Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation will preside next
week over an open debate of the Council on the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. Spain has
always believed that this issue must be debated at the
highest possible level, and has therefore encouraged
participation in the debate at the ministerial level. We
do so again today. The serious events of the past few
weeks fullyjustify the need for such a debate.

Spain feels that the Quartet must remain active.
Together with France and Malaysia, we believe that
another meeting in a broader format would provide
valuable elements for the debate on 22 October. Perhaps
the expanded Quartet could be preceded by a meeting
of the regular Quartet, as requested by the Russian
Federation. We need to consider creating political
prospects that will allow us to make significant
progress towards the two-State solution, which appears
increasingly fragile. Without a prospect of peace;
without the possibility of moving towards the existence
of two sovereign living side by side in peace; without a
path leading to an end to the occupation and to regional
normalization, it will be difficult to stop the violence
and to establish peaceful coexistence.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers. I invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

The meeting rose at 1 pm.
