Mr. Oquist Kelley (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. We are pleased to see a
sister republic of the Central American Integration
System lead the debate. We also congratulate Belgium,
Germany, Indonesia and South African on their election
to serve as non-permanent members on the Council.

Climate-change disasters have already led to failed
States, and even failed societies. That has been the case
in the past and is beginning to occur now. Forecasts
are catastrophic if we do not take urgent action. Four
thousand two hundred years ago, the great civilizations
of the Bronze Age all toppled at almost the same due
to droughts lasting more than 100 years. In some cases
droughts have lasted up to 300 years, such as in the
Akkadian empire in Mesopotamia, in the Old Kingdom
of Egypt, and the early Minoan civilization in Crete.
I wonder if our civilization could survive a 300-year
drought, or even a 100-year drought.

Currently, the Sahara Desert is destroying the
livelihoods of herders and farmers in conflict, while an
Islamist war rages nearby, leaving 15.6 million people
in the Sahel affected by a food crisis and generating a
dangerous mass migration to the north. Lake Chad has
dried by 95 per cent, affecting the population of four
countries that face a double crisis of climate change and
Boko Haram operations. At the same time, Al-Shabaab
operates among the tens of thousands of refugees and
internally displaced persons in Somalia.

As for the future, if subsistence farming economies
continue to collapse, an estimated 20 million refugees
from the Sahel alone are expected by 2050. If Europe
does not know what to do with 1 million refugees, it
should ponder what it would do with 20 million.

Central America and the Caribbean are among
the most vulnerable regions to climate change
worldwide. In Mesoamerica, southern Mexico and
Central America, there is an increasingly arid dry zone
inhabited by 3.6 million subsistence farming families.
If there is a climate-related collapse, that economy of
approximately 18 million people would swell the slums
of the cities of the region or march north to climb over,
dig under or pass through any wall they find along
the way.

The biggest obstacle to overcome is political will.
One indicator is the lack of climate financing. For
mitigation and adaptation, the real test will be the
replenishment of the Green Climate Fund in 2019.
For losses and damages, the only scientific, fair and
ethical way is for the countries that have caused the
phenomenon to compensate the countries that are
suffering the consequences to the extent of their
historical and current responsibility, as Nicaraguan
President Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra
proposed in the message delivered on his behalf to the
General Assembly in 2015 (see A/70/PV.23). For those
who find that approach very radical, we must remind
them that the concept of compensation for damages
has been part of all the legal and ethical systems of the
world since antiquity. Of course, there are those who
find it old-fashioned because they think that survival is
too expensive. If small island States that are losing their
future are not compensated, there will be no climate
justice in world.

To safeguard international peace and security
from the impact of climate change we have to decide
on what to base our policies - science or greed, the
common good of humankind and the planet in the long-
term or national economic advantages in the short-
term, defending the most vulnerable populations or
promoting the selfish economy of endless, limitless and
meaningless growth of production, consumption and
capital accumulation on a planet with limited resources?

We are 11 years from 2030 and have some decisions
to make. There has been some progress. We congratulate
Poland on the twenty-fourth Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, held in Katowice, but we must
implement the Paris Agreement by following through
on the commitments to reduce emissions and provide
financing that will enable us to limit global average
temperature rise to 15°C. The future of our civilization
and the ecosystems that are vital to life on Mother
Earth depend upon the 1.5°C target. With the climate
summit to be convened by the Secretary-General in
September, we have an opportunity to launch a genuine
and effective movement for survival.

