We thank the Estonian presidency for organizing this important open debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. For El Salvador, this provides an invaluable opportunity to renew collective commitment on this issue, since it is civilians who still account for the vast majority of the victims of conflict and who suffer its effects in the short and long terms. El Salvador takes this opportunity to reiterate its firm commitment to the implementation and application of the four Geneva Conventions of 1949, the principal norms of international humanitarian law, resolution 1265 (1999) and other related resolutions, which together provide the international framework underpinning obligations to ensure the protection of, and respect for, human rights, especially of those not participating in, or who can no longer participate in, hostilities. Based on our commitment to this international framework, my country has worked towards its application through the Interinstitutional Committee on International Humanitarian Law of El Salvador, whose main objective is to serve as an advisory body to the Government of the Republic on the measures to be taken for the effective adoption, application and dissemination of international humanitarian law. Various ministries of the executive branch participate in this Committee, in the fields of foreign relations, justice and security, education, national defence and public health, together with the Office of the General Prosecutor of the Republic, the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic, the Office of the Attorney for the Defence of Human Rights, and the Salvadoran Red Cross. To ensure effective functioning, the participation of these institutions is coordinated through a permanent secretariat and working subcommittees in the areas of legislation, awareness-raising and training in the matter, and protection of cultural heritage. After more than 20 years' work, we can highlight its following main achievements: guiding the ratification of international instruments of international humanitarian law, most recently the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, and the consequent harmonization of national law with international requirements; awareness-raising and training on international humanitarian law, including for personnel of the armed forces, especially Salvadoran contingents to Security Council-mandated peace missions, other State institutions, and members of the academic community; developing the international humanitarian law handbook for the armed forces of El Salvador, containing information on the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their Protocols Additional, as well as other relevant instruments; and progress in implementing The Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict. Moreover, that Committee also assisted in establishing a national monitoring committee on resolution 1325 (2000), as well as in the creation and application of a national action plan for the period 2017-2021 for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions, the implementation of which brings together many State institutions, civil society and academia. Given the changing dynamics we face at present, this plan is currently undergoing a revision process so as to adapt it to respond more efficiently and effectively to national needs. Similar processes are under way with regard to children and young people, to ensure better implementation of resolution 2250 (2015) and subsequent resolutions. Among the civilian population, vulnerable groups such as women, children and young people are the most affected. We therefore stress the importance of continuing to ensure the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. In this regard, we support in particular, given the specific needs of the most vulnerable sectors of the population, the adoption of resolution 2475 (2019), on special protection for persons with disabilities in situations of armed conflict. We reiterate the call to continue strengthening and incorporating special provisions and personnel into peace missions to ensure the protection of these groups - such as increasing the number of women in peace missions, since women have been shown to help strengthen relationships with local communities, helping build trust, which is an essential condition for protection. In this regard, El Salvador will continue working to see an increase in the number of women professionals in the peace missions where we have a presence, given their major contributions to meeting the objectives of achieving peace, security and international stability. My country remains deeply concerned about the humanitarian damage caused during hostilities in populated areas. The protection status of civilians, despite all efforts to ensure respect for international humanitarian law, remains at risk. It is civilians who account for the majority of casualties in conflict situations; likewise for the effects of conflict - it is civilian children, women and men who continue to endure forced displacement, famine as a method of war, denial of access to humanitarian aid, and sexual and gender-based violence. At the same time, we continue to observe attacks on humanitarian personnel, medical facilities, civil infrastructure, property and the livelihoods of the civilian population. Against this backdrop, my country wishes to share the following considerations. First, as the Secretary-General mentioned a year ago, while the normative framework for protection and guarantees of international humanitarian law have been strengthened, continuing violations reflect low compliance with those measures. That highlights the importance that protection instruments under international humanitarian law be binding in nature, and the Security Council has a key role to play to that end. Secondly, given the continuing rise in reports with credible and documented evidence of violations, there is an urgent need to apply, whenever possible, more effective and robust approaches through national policies for the protection of civilians in all Member States of this Organization. These could establish civilian damage- mitigation teams, prepare risk and impact analysis of any such actions in populated areas and incorporate the principles of international law into all defence policies. Thirdly, one of the areas of greatest deficit on this topic is accountability. In this regard, it is important to strengthen the capacities and resources of institutions involved in the administration of justice at the national and international levels alike, based on principles of impartiality and integrity, and this includes the International Criminal Court. Accountability must respond to the need to offer reparations to survivors of violations of international humanitarian law. We believe that linking local, national and regional accountability mechanisms with those with a broader international scope could provide significant advantages and show results more effectively and efficiently. Fourthly, in our view it is important to adopt measures to protect civilians not only from physical harm but also from the irreversible psychological harm caused by abuses such as sexual violence or torture during detention, as well as for victims of forced disappearance and to provide assistance to their relatives. Fifthly, peacekeeping operations are one of the main mechanisms for upholding international peace and security, carrying out their functions in hostile countries and regions. We welcome the inclusion of approaches to protect civilians and vulnerable groups in the mandates set by the Security Council, and call for their continued inclusion in all current and future missions. We also believe that improving the protection of civilians in peace missions will require systematic evaluations of relevant regulations and system-wide accountability guarantees. In that regard, we welcome the recent review and launch of the United Nations policy on the protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations. Sixthly, there is overwhelming evidence that the use of weapons can have a long-term impact on the recovery and development of communities affected. Therefore, it is essential to assess the links between the indiscriminate use of weapons and violations of human rights law and international humanitarian law. Without prejudice to the right to guarantee their national defence, States must refrain from exporting arms, ammunition, parts and components of conventional weapons to places where they are likely to be used to commit or facilitate serious violations of international humanitarian law. In other words, the implementation of international humanitarian law goes hand in hand with respect for, and the universalization of, international instruments on arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation, including the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All its Aspects; the Arms Trade Treaty; the Ottawa Convention; the Convention on Cluster Munitions; the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons and all its Protocols; and all instruments for the prohibition of weapons of mass destruction - the Treaties on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, and the Conventions on Chemical and on Biological Weapons, among other international and regional instruments. We would like to make special mention of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as this year marks 50 years since its entry into force and 25 since its indefinite extension. In this regard, we stress the need for the urgent application of concrete, transparent, verifiable and irreversible measures for nuclear disarmament, in order to comply with the obligations contained in the Treaty. The forthcoming review period is an opportunity to maintain and uphold the credibility, viability and effectiveness of the Treaty. In the same vein, we welcome the priority given in the Secretary-General's new Agenda for Disarmament to the issue of the use of explosive weapons in populated areas, and we recognize the call for all States to support the development of measures to address the humanitarian impact in this area. We firmly believe that, with sufficient political will, this can be achieved through the development of common operating policies and standards, and the exchange of good practices. We hope that the Security Council will take the initiative of preparing a draft political declaration in these terms, thereby moving from words to concrete action. El Salvador firmly believes that the most effective way to protect civilians is to prevent conflict by investing in development, promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes, responding to the needs of post-conflict countries and regions and building stability by promoting a culture of peace and respect for international law. The protection of civilians must be a priority of the work of the Organization and must override any geopolitical interest that is opposed to it. Genuine protection requires a commitment on the part of all Members of the United Nations to safeguarding the human dignity of all peoples without discrimination. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak represents the greatest challenge worldwide since the founding of the United Nations. The pandemic, which has reached all regions of the world, is also present in countries that are already in crisis owing to conflict or natural disasters or that are affected by the consequences of climate change. We must not forget that those countries need support to strengthen their health-care systems, particularly in view of the large number of people who need emergency assistance. In these difficult times, we call on those countries that, to the extent of their capacity, are able to support initiatives aimed at maintaining life-saving efforts to continue to do so. Furthermore, we commend the work of the specialized agencies of the United Nations system, especially in ensuring the delivery of humanitarian assistance with equal access to all peoples, without any discrimination. We would not want to miss this opportunity to express, on behalf of the Government of El Salvador, our gratitude for the support received through the Secretary-General's United Nations COVID-19 Response and Recovery Fund, launched by the Secretary-General and its donors. The resources granted to El Salvador will be invested in facing that health emergency, minimizing the social impact and supporting efforts towards an economic recovery. Before concluding, we wish to thank the International Committee of the Red Cross and the Red Cross and Red Crescent movement for the support that they provide to States to prevent the suffering of civilians in conflict situations and for the efforts made to ensure compliance with international humanitarian law, as it has been doing in my country through the Inter-Institutional Committee on International Humanitarian Law in El Salvador. We wish also to acknowledge the laudable work carried out by humanitarian workers, including medical personnel, in conflict zones. We condemn all attacks against them, which are unacceptable and may constitute war crimes; and, finally, we acknowledge the efforts of civil society to empower and give voice to those affected by armed violence.
