Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico would like to thank France for having
convened this open debate. We would also like to thank
to the Secretary-General, the President of the Central
African Republic and the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their briefings.

My country acknowledges that peacekeeping
operations constitute an invaluable tool for international
security, and we firmly support the role of the Security
Council in assigning priority on an ongoing basis to
the protection of civilians in peacekeeping operation
mandates. Nonetheless, we would like to reiterate the
point that the efficiency of the Security Council and
the United Nations in terms of protecting civilians
to date presents us with mixed results. Some actions
taken by the Council have been successful, but in other
instances a lack of consensus among Council members
have blocked early action that could have saved lives
and to preserve the human dignity of civilians.

Member States are asking more and more from
peacekeeping operations. For that reason, we bear
a collective responsibility to equip peacekeeping
operations with the tools that they require to be able
to fulfil the mandates conferred upon them by the
Security Council to protect civilians in armed conflict.

As the Secretary-General mentions in his most
recent report (S/2016/477) on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, the obligation to act with strict
adherence to international law, international human
rights law, international humanitarian law and refugee
law is a requirement for strengthening the protection of
the civilian population.

It is also vitally important that the perspective of
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and local
actors be taken into account in any strategic assessment
of peacekeeping operations pertaining to the protection
of civilians. Working in a coordinated way with
peacekeeping operations, such actors can enhance
the ability of peacekeeping operations to strengthen
and uphold early-warning systems, mechanisms of
oversight and intelligence, as well as foster a climate
of trust among the most affected communities and
the United Nations. In that context, we believe that an
important step that has been taken is the deployment
of civilian protection advisers to missions with
explicit protection-of-civilian mandates, which will
contribute to the drafting of protection strategies and
the coordination of their implementation.

As far as Mexico is concerned, the work of
women Blue Helmets fosters trust and contributes to
an enhanced understanding of the essential needs of
protection of local populations, thereby paving the way
for more effective responses. For that reason, we would
like to reiterate to encourage greater participation by
women in peacekeeping operations.

We also believe it is indispensable that we uphold
the zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse by members of peacekeeping operations, be
they civilian or military, and indeed by any authorized
force authorized by the Security Council. Anyone
who commits such crimes must be brought to justice.
It the joint responsibility of the Secretariat and of
police- and troop-contributing countries to improve
predeployment training, including for staff focused
on protecting civilians and on the matter of prevening
sexual exploitation and abuse.

In order for there to be more precise and better
implemented mandates, we reiterate the need for
consultations among the Security Council, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the Secretariat at
every stage ofa peacekeeping operation.

As pointed out by the Secretary-General, I would
like to emphasize that humanitarian action and
peacekeeping are important instruments to protect
civilians, Nonetheless, such efforts cannot, and
should not, replace political efforts to prevent and
resolve conflicts.

The key role given by the High-level Independent
Panel on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations
and the Secretary-General to prevention, mediation
and, above all, the primacy of political solutions over
military ones, have given rise to a new dimension in
the peace and security pillar of the United Nations,
namely, the matter of sustaining peace. That is an
issue on which the Security Council adopted a historic
resolution (resolution 2282 (2016)), as did the General
Assembly (resolution 70/262).

The three review processes, along with the
adoption of 2030 Agenda on Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1) and the outcome
of the World Humanitarian Summit, afford us an
opportunity to redefine the United Nations architecture
for the protection of civilians and to comprehensively
address the underlying causes of conflict, which have
a great deal to do with ensuring inclusive societies
that allow for the full development of the potential of
every individual.

Civilians continue to make up the majority of Victims
in armed conflicts. It is therefore vital to translate the
commitment of the Security Council into updated and
strengthened protection mechanisms, as that will give
rise to a palpable shift in the situation on the ground. We
must seize this moment to institutionalize a paradigm
shift in our protection approach with the overall goal
of forging short and medium-term responses and
measures into sustainable solutions to guarantee long-
term security for civilians.

