Mr. Teixeira da Silva (France) (spoke in French): Last February, in resolution 1291 (2000), our
Council authorized the phase two deployment of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). Nine
months later the implementation of this peacekeeping
operation remains blocked by the persistence of
hostilities, in particular in the Equateur province, and
by the parties' lack of cooperation with the United
Nations. On several occasions, our Council has had to
remind the parties of their obligations. Security
Council resolution 1304 (2000), adopted four months
ago, insisted

"that Uganda and Rwanda, which have violated
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, withdraw all
their forces from the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo without further delay, in
conformity with the timetable of the Ceasefire
Agreement and the 8 April 2000 Kampala
disengagement plan". (resolution 1304 (2000),
para. 4 (a))

The Council also demanded that all the parties,
and in particular the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, cooperate in the MONUC
deployment by lifting all restrictions on the freedom of
movement of its personnel and by ensuring its security.
Unfortunately, the Council's demands have not been
heeded by the parties.

The Security Council is deciding today to extend
the MONUC mandate by two months. France, along
with the Secretary-General, hopes that the parties will
make good use of this extension to show that they are
committed to advancing the peace process in the
Congo. The message sent once again to the belligerents
is clear. There are four points, which were recalled in
the statement (S/PRST/2000/28) adopted by heads of
States and Government at the Security Council Summit
in September: first, an appeal to the parties to cease
hostilities and to fulfil their obligations in accordance
with the Lusaka Agreement and Council resolutions;
secondly, an appeal to speed up the withdrawal of
Ugandan and Rwandan forces, as well as all other
foreign forces, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1304 (2000); thirdly, an appeal to all the
Congolese parties, and in particular to the Government,
to engage fully in the national dialogue; and finally, an
appeal to all the parties to cooperate with MONUC so
that its deployment will be possible.

It is now the responsibility of the belligerents to
take concrete actions in response to this appeal
addressed to them at the highest level by the Security
Council. The United Nations is no substitute for the
parties if the parties themselves do not display their
willingness to arrive at a peaceful settlement of the
cr1s1s.

Let us also recall that the continuation of this
conflict, fed as it is by the plundering of the country's
natural resources, has brought about tragic
consequences for the Congolese people. The massacres
of civilians, particularly in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the lack of
health-care services and food mean that the conflict in
the Congo today is undoubtedly the most serious
humanitarian crisis in Africa. Humanitarian
organizations and the Secretariat have witnessed the
scope of the crisis. In two years the number of victims
has reached the hundreds of thousands. It is urgent that
the parties end the conflict.

