Ms. Altalli: When I was l2-years-old, my father
Jries Altalli, who is a retired teacher and the sole
provider of my family, was abducted by the political
security branch in Damascus. He was tortured for one
year in that branch, transferred to the Adra prison and
subsequently to the notorious Tadmor prison. After nine
years, on 16 November 2000, my father was released
through a presidential pardon.

This story is the story of thousands of Syrians from
before and during the conflict. It is hard to describe
the suffering that Syrian women, men, girls and boys
have experienced in the past nine years. Shall I talk
about the bombing, starving to death under siege,
chemical weapons, forced demographic changes or the
indiscriminate shelling ofhouses, hospitals and schools?
More than half of the population has been displaced,
either internally or forced outside the country. Tens of
thousands have been arrested and tortured.

The Syrian Government is a principal party,
together with many parties, that is responsible for the
situation in Syria. Yet the Syrian crisis is approaching
its ninth year and, on the fourth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 2254 (2015), now is the time to
end the suffering of Syrians. I call upon the Security
Council, on behalf of the silent majority of Syrians, to
work together and with Syrians to find a sustainable
solution based on resolution 2254 (2015). Syrian
non-governmental organizations, such as the Center for
Civil Society and Democracy, and our partners believe
that a political solution is not only urgent and necessary,
but also possible. Therefore, I put before the Council
today a six-point road map to end the Syrian tragedy.

First, all hostilities must end across the entire Syrian
territory, including sexual and gender-based violence.

Secondly, we must improve the conditions of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees,
support them and facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
aid by all parties. An independent United Nations
committee must be formed, with the participation of
Syrian civil society, to supervise the voluntary and safe
return of refugees and IDPs to their places of origin or
the places that they choose to go.

Thirdly, a specialized gender-sensitive committee
must be formed, under the auspices of the Security
Council, to address all matters concerning Syrian
detainees to oversee treatment and overcome the
negative effects of detention for all detainees in Syria,
to support the release of all detainees and kidnapped
people, reveal the fate of detainees and the forcibly
disappeared, and provide all necessary support to those
who have been detained and abducted, as well as to
their families.

Those first three points are intended to build the
confidence of Syrians not only in the political process,
but also in the Security Council.

Fourthly, we seek the formation of an international
working group of permanent members of the Security
Council to support the efforts of the Special Envoy for
Syria, Mr. Pedersen, in the comprehensive political
process, including the constitutional process, and to
provide a safe, neutral and conducive environment,
including by restructuring security and military
agencies in accordance with the principles of
international human rights. All that will pave the
way for free and fair elections under United Nations
supervision in 2020-2021.

Fifthly, we must support the achievement of a
political agreement among the various parties, with
the direct participation of Syrian women and civil
society, in accordance with the following criteria: the
establishment ofjustice and accountability mechanisms
that guarantee the victim's rights; the separation of
powers and the peaceful reallocation of powers based
on the outcome of the negotiations; guarantees of
full human and women's rights and the safeguarding
of all freedoms, including the freedoms of religion,
expression and association; enabling the formation
of political parties and civil society organizations in
Syria; and building a common Syrian identity based
on diversity by ensuring the rights of Syrians from all
communities, religions, gender, races and ethnicities.

Sixthly and finally, we must plan and prepare for
sustainable development and reconstruction in Syria,
including an effective Syrian national action plan on
women, peace and security, based on resolution 1325
(2000) and its subsequent resolutions. Young people
must also be included on the basis of resolution 2250
(2015). The implementation of those plans can start as
soon as the agreement on transition is reached.

I implore Council members to work together as
a united Security Council to achieve those measures
and to take action to end the suffering of millions of
Syrians. We look to the Council to support the efforts
of Syrian civil society and Syrian women peacebuilders
by listening to their voices, directly and permanently, at
all United Nations meetings about Syria.

After everything that has happened in Syria, I feel
fortunate to have been able to visit my father many
times in prison and grateful for his release after nine
years of incarceration. Today, 19 years later, I come to
the Security Council to ask for its help in securing the
release of all detainees in Syria. It should give thousands
of Syrian children a chance to see their parents again.
It should give those Syrian children the ability to feel
joy in their hearts as we stand on the threshold of a
new year.

