Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): Mr. Minister, it is
very good to see you here today, and I well remember
your visit during Bangladesh's last presidency of the
Security Council. It is truly a pleasure to have you back
with us. I wish also to thank the Deputy Secretary-
General for her introduction to what is a very important
and comprehensive report from the Secretariat.

Let me also draw attention to the fact that the
representative of Sweden will be speaking later on in
this debate on behalf of the European Union, and I
associate myself with the remarks that the Council will
hear later from him.

We are grateful for the comprehensive and
thought-provoking report that we have in front of us
today. The time has come to translate the rhetoric of
conflict prevention into concrete action. We strongly
endorse the Secretary-General's call for the
international community to move from a culture of
reaction to a culture of prevention. Prevention should
be the cornerstone of the United Nations collective
security system for the twenty-first century.
Any assessment of conflict must include the
political, socio-economic and developmental variables
relevant to that conflict. Preventive action must address
its root causes rather than its symptoms. Therefore we
strongly support the linkage the report makes between
conflict prevention and sustainable development.
Conflict and sustainable development are mutually
exclusive conditions: over time, one will inevitably
erode the other. Our aim must be to ensure that
sustainable development - not conflict - gains the
upper hand. Our collective efforts to meet the
international development targets and the other
commitments set out in the Millennium Summit
Declaration are an important contribution towards
addressing the root causes of conflict.

The United Nations agencies, funds and
specialized agencies are key players in conflict
prevention, in addition to the Secretariat, and here I
would endorse the point that has just been made so
eloquently by Ambassador Cunningham. We strongly
support recommendation 10 of the Secretary-General's
report, which encourages the administrators of United
Nations funds, programmes and specialized agencies to
consider how best to integrate conflict prevention into
their various activities. This will be an important
contribution towards mainstreaming conflict prevention
approaches into their work.

We also agree with the report's assessment that
the United Nations will not always be the actor best
placed to take the lead. Where it is, the challenge, as
the Secretary-General correctly identifies, is to
mobilize the collective potential of the United Nations
system with greater coherence and focus. This is an
important area in which, frankly, we must do better.
Greater interaction on conflict prevention between the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, as recommended by the
Secretary-General, would be a good place to start.

That is why the United Kingdom, during our
Security Council presidency last April, and with an eye
on the importance of that need for coherence and
coordination, suggested a joint meeting of the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council to
discuss those issues. We should not lose sight of the
potential this cooperation can bring. We also strongly
encourage more systematic cooperation between other
parts of the United Nations system, with the United
Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions, and with
other international actors. This is vital if scarce
resources are to be used in the most effective way.
There is, for example - as everyone around this table
knows better than most - a critical need for
improvement in designing effective, properly resourced
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes.

As the Secretary-General says, the United
Nations needs to work with and help strengthen the
capacity of regional partners. This has been a key
conclusion of several of the Council's recent debates
on conflict prevention and peace-building. We are keen
to see this implemented in concrete and practical ways.
Effective prevention strategies require the cooperation
of both national and regional actors. The use of inter-
agency task forces, such as the recent Task Force visit
to West Africa, offers opportunities to integrate the
efforts of the United Nations with those of regional and
subregional organizations.

We also welcome the Secretary-General's
intention to provide the Security Council with periodic
regional or subregional reports on threats to
international peace and security. We agree with his
view that this approach will help to strengthen, rather
than diminish, sovereignty. There is a powerful logic in
the report's description of conflict prevention as being

"the best protection for [a state's] citizens against
unwelcome outside interference" (S/2001/574, para. 168).

But, while respecting institutional mandates, we must
adapt our efforts to the problem at hand. In certain
regions, there may not be formal organizations with
which to consult, but, instead, groupings of countries
which have come together under informal ad hoc
arrangements. We believe that the United Nations
needs to be more creative about finding ways to work
with such informal groups. The effectiveness of such
strategies will be enhanced further if civil society and
the private sector are pulling in the same direction. We
therefore echo the Secretary-General's appeal to the
private sector to adopt socially responsible practices
designed to prevent, rather than foment, conflict.

Paragraph 55 of the report refers to the recent
inter-agency mission to West Africa, which I have
mentioned earlier. This, among other things,
recommends the establishment of a United Nations
office in West Africa headed by a new special
representative. We support this idea, but need
clarification on certain key aspects. For example, we
would welcome clarification of the role and mandate of
this office versus those of other Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General in the region,
and those of the political and post-conflict peace-
building offices and United Nations country teams
which are also present there. In this respect, we
encourage stronger links between Headquarters and the
United Nations country teams in the field.

We agree with recommendations 5 to 7 of the
report on the important role of the International Court
of Justice in the prevention of conflict and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. The United Kingdom has for
many years accepted the compulsory jurisdiction of the
International Court We urge Members of the
Organization that have not yet done so to take this step.

We also welcome the thrust of recommendation 9
and the Secretary-General's intention to enhance the
traditional preventive role of his office. We would
encourage him to develop and enhance his preventive
diplomacy efforts in the ways outlined in the report.
We stand ready to support him in that endeavour.

Finally, the report contains an appeal to the donor
community to increase the flow of development
assistance to developing countries. Over the past few
years the United Kingdom has been one of the few
countries to significantly increase the resources it
devotes to development assistance.

We are full-square behind the United Nations
efforts in taking forward the recommendations set out
in this report. It is important, and that is why I have
spoken at greater length than usual. We will continue to
engage with the Secretariat and the United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes in finding ways to do
this. By reducing the level and intensity of conflicts,
we will significantly enhance prospects for global
development and poverty reduction. That is a goal to
which we should all be directing our efforts.

