Mr. Oshima (Japan): Like others, I wish to thank
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ian
Martin, for his briefing. I welcome the presence in this
Chamber of our former colleague, Ambassador
Guterres, and wish him well in the discharge of his
new important duties as Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Timor-Leste.

I wish to reiterate our appreciation to the four
Governments - Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia and
Portugal - for the contribution they are making with
their security forces to the stabilization of Timor-Leste,
as well as to the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste
(UNOTIL) in Dili, led by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Hasegawa, for its
contributions.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
with his recommendations on the shape and mission
mandate for a post-UNOTIL United Nations presence
in Timor-Leste in the aftermath of the recent turmoil in
the country. We also commend the assessment task
carried out by Mr. Martin of the political, security,
social and economic situation in the country, which
formed the basis for the conclusions of the Secretary-
General's report.

The report of the Secretary-General concludes
that the recent series of violent incidents were
triggered by political conflict in the Government,

which expanded and came to involve the security
organs of the country and caused extensive
displacement of innocent civilians. Significantly, the
report noted that, while there have been some gains in
certain areas, including the promotion of democratic
institutions and governance since the independence of
the country four years ago, the Government and society
still face enormous challenges, such as, among other
things, institution-building in the security sector and in
the judicial field, establishment of the rule of law,
fighting poverty, and dealing with the high degree of
youth unemployment, which contributed to the crisis
and aggravated it once it began.

The Japanese Government, for its part, sent a
mission to Timor-Leste following the turmoil and
issued a report whose conclusions match in large
measure the assessment and conclusions contained in
the Secretary-General's report.

We believe that, in considering the appropriate
shape, size and mandate of a successor mission to
UNOTIL, it is important to fully take into account
those conclusions and the assessment of the Secretary-
General. In that context, we wish to emphasize a few
points as particularly important.

First, we consider that the basic assumptions of
and the policy line followed by the Security Council in
Timor-Leste for the past few years have proved in the
main to be a correct approach. That policy is aimed at
promoting, as much as possible, the independence,
self-reliance and ownership of the Government and its
people as much as possible; fostering the gradual
transition from a peacekeeping to a peacebuilding
mission, while taking local conditions fully into
account; and encouraging broad-based partnership with
various actors for sustainable development. We do not
believe that the recent turmoil occurred because of the
United Nations policy, which, in our view, helped the
people of Timor-Leste to make important gains within
a relatively short period of time, starting almost from
scratch.

However, that is not to say that what the United
Nations has done in all its areas of involvement has
been perfect. There were obvious shortcomings, and it
is important to recognize them and learn lessons from
the experience. For example, we believe that we could
have prevented the recent outbreak of violence, or at
least minimized its consequences, if we had been able
to discern and promptly address the fragility of the
political and security system of Timor-Leste.

Secondly, the Secretary-General's report
underlines the importance of not trying to reverse,
because of the recent internal disturbances, the transfer
of responsibilities that has already taken place. The
responsibilities have been gradually handed over to the
Government of Timor-Leste, to United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes and other
development partners, as appropriate. That transition,
the Secretary-General reports suggests, should
continue to be encouraged. We fully endorse that
notion, which we believe should inform, as an
important guiding principle, the consideration of the
follow-on United Nations mission.

Thirdly, Japan fully supports the proposal of the
Secretary-General to develop the idea of a compact and
to promote the conclusion of such a compact between
Timor-Leste and international development partners
upon the initiative of Timor-Leste.

We also believe that, in order to ensure the
effective operation of a follow-on mission in Timor-
Leste, and even to ensure optimal coordination and
cooperation among key participants within the
framework of such a compact, an appropriate
mechanism, such as a policy consulting council, would
need to be considered. The Japanese Government
mission's report mentioned previously has made such a
recommendation as a useful facilitation tool for
effective coordination and cooperation among actors,
which should include the United Nations, the
Government of Timor-Leste and other international
partners. We would like to encourage the United
Nations to consult with the Government of Timor-Leste
on such an idea at an appropriate time.

UNOTIL's mandate will expire on 20 August, and
the Council will need to agree on a draft resolution on
a follow-on mission. The Core Group countries on
Timor-Leste have been discussing elements of the draft
resolution, drawing on the Secretary-General's report.

Japan, as the lead country on that issue in the
Council, will continue to facilitate those discussions in
the Core Group and to conduct consultations as well
with the members of the Council, in order to proceed
with the preparation of a draft resolution. Our aim is to
work on the draft resolution with a view to its adoption
by consensus by the end of this week.
Currently, there appears to be a broad agreement
of views on establishing a multidimensional mission,
largely based on the Secretary-General's
recommendations, including the police and civilian
adviser components of the new mission. There is still
some significant divergence of opinion on how to
handle its military component. Some argue that it
should remain under a bilateral arrangement, while
others contend that it should be brought under the
United Nations Blue Helmets.

Japan's view is that, for the sake of ensuring
operational effectiveness, it would be preferable to
utilize, to the fullest extent possible, the international
security forces that have been provided on a bilateral
arrangement. Nevertheless, we will continue to
facilitate discussions on the issue, aimed at arriving at
an option that is agreeable to all the partners.

