Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine): We would like to express
our heartfelt condolences to the relatives of those killed
in today's plane crash. It might be fitting for us to look
back to the turn of the nineteenth century, which
witnessed a series of deadly terrorist attacks. In 1894,
the French President, Sadi Carnot, was assassinated. In
1897, Empress Elizabeth of Austria was stabbed, and
the Spanish Prime Minister, Antonio Canovas, was
killed. In 1900, the Italian King, Umberto I, was killed,
and in 1901 the United States President, William
McKinley, was assassinated. At that time, terrorism
became the leading preoccupation of politicians,
police, journalists and writers - from Dostoevsky to
Henry James. If world leaders had decided at that time
to assemble, most of them would have insisted on
giving terrorism top priority on their agenda.
Unfortunately, they did not do so.

We know the history of the twentieth century very
well. Had those leaders gathered and discussed the
threats that were common to all nations at that time,
maybe some of the worst pages of the bloodiest century
in the history of civilization could have been
prevented.

It is only natural that the Security Council
convene at this critical juncture to discuss an issue that
has become a major concern for all of humanity. And it
is precisely the Security Council, which, by virtue of
its powers, is bound to formulate a unified response to
these threats and to make its decisive input in setting
up a comprehensive United Nations policy against the
scourge of terrorism.

The terrorist attacks of 11 September turned a
new page in the history of mankind. They shocked the
conscience of humanity and left a deep scar in the lives
of millions of people. Now, the international
community cannot afford to remain unprepared and ill-
equipped in the face of new threats, because the next
move by terrorists may result in a catastrophe of global
proportions. This moment also represents a unique
opportunity for humanity to show its maturity and
unity.
Ukraine has clearly defined its place in the
ongoing global efforts to combat international
terrorism. My country's stance was reaffirmed by the
President of Ukraine at a recent international
conference in Warsaw, Poland, which brought together
the leaders of 17 States of Eastern and Central Europe.
We endorse the plan of action adopted at the
conference and consider it a meaningful and powerful
contribution to the worldwide struggle to eradicate this
crime. Ukraine intends to continue to provide all
possible assistance to the multinational anti-terrorist
coalition, by using, inter alia, the capacities of the
group of States comprising Georgia, Ukraine,
Uzbekistan, Azerbaijan and Moldova (GUUAM) and
the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization.

This Council has already taken the first step in
setting the necessary framework for a global response
to international terrorism by adopting resolution 1373
(2001). We emphasize the need to pursue its full and
consistent implementation by all States. I have no
doubt that the Security Council and its counter-
terrorism Committee will continue to focus their
primary attention on this mission in the months ahead.

But this is only part of the complex tasks that
confront this Organization in this multifaceted
undertaking. Others include addressing such global
diseases as arms smuggling, drugs production and
trafficking and money laundering. We have to
eliminate the hatred and ethnic and religious
intolerance that continue to constitute a breeding
ground for numerous conflicts. We also have to resolve
the problems related to the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery
and related technologies. All these issues have acquired
additional significance in the aftermath of the recent
events.

The road ahead of us is long and bumpy. But still,
the enormity of the task should not discourage us from
doing what we ought to do. We believe that the present
meeting will become an important step along the way
and will help to consolidate international resolve to
fight terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.

