Mr. Oh Joon (Republic ofKorea): I would first like
to congratulate you, Sir, and the delegation of Uruguay
for assuming the presidency of the Security Council
this month, which is the first month of your term in the
Council. Let me also thank you for convening today's
timely debate on the protection of civilians.

As we enter the new year, we are humbled by
the daunting realities around the world, given the
devastating impact on civilians - particularly women
and children - resulting from the many conflicts
that we are grappling with. In the past, the Security
Council has repeatedly expressed the urgent need to
protect civilians in armed conflicts. Resolutions 2222
(2015), on the protection ofjournalists, 2175 (2014), on
humanitarian operations, and 2150 (2014), which calls
for the prevention of, and the fight against, genocide
are only a few recent examples. Back in February
2013, during my country's presidency of the Council,
the Security Council adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/2) that comprehensively addressed
the issue of the protection of civilians - including
humanitarian access - and refugees, the need to
protect humanitarian personnel, sexual- and gender-
based violence, and the need to end impunity for serious
violations. We urge the Security Council to continue to
address those issues with a renewed sense of urgency
and resolve.

In that regard, we appreciate the Secretary-
General's continued commitment to incorporating the
protection of civilians throughout all United Nations
peace operations. A large part of his September 2015
report (S/2015/453) is devoted to identifying ways in
which to better implement the protection-of-civilians
mandate in the field, inter alia by tailoring them to
the conditions on the ground, My delegation also
welcomes the Security Council's presidential statement
of 25 November 2015 (S/PRST/2015/23). For our part,
the Government of the Republic of Korea has been
engaged in the ongoing discussion to build and sustain
the political momentum for the implementation of the
recommendations of the Secretary-General and of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations.
Last year, we hosted two conferences on that subject,
first in New York in May, followed by one in Seoul in
October. We look forward to continuing that discussion
this year.

The Republic of Korea also supports the fight
against impunity and for holding accountable those
who have committed the most serious crimes of
international concern. We have joined many other
delegations in supporting the code of conduct regarding
Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes, as well as the French-
Mexican initiative on the suspension of the veto power
in cases of mass atrocities.

Finally, I wish to underscore that Member States
bear the primary responsibility to protect civilians.
It is our responsibility to bring perpetrators of
atrocity crimes to justice, as specified in the relevant
international instruments. With that in mind, my
delegation wishes to urge the members of the Security
Council to take advantage of the opportunity presented
by the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the 2005
World Summit Outcome Document and to reaffirm
especially its paragraphs 138 and 139, regarding the
responsibility to protect. The Security Council already
has a wide range of tools to enhance compliance and
accountability so as to address the current challenges
presented by the protection of civilians. The task at
hand is to mobilize the collective will of the Council
to utilize those tools. We hope that the views expressed
during today's debate will help the Council to carry out
its commitment to protect civilians.

