Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefing by Mr. Mohammed Ibn Chambas, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWAS).

We begin our statement by highlighting the work
and efforts of UNOWAS, headed by the Special
Representative. It is necessary to underscore the work
being done to strengthen the connection linking good
practices, interactive dialogues, preventive diplomacy
and strengthening cooperation and information-sharing
among stakeholders, which have enabled peace and
security initiatives, as well as national ownership
and inclusiveness, to pave the way for consolidating
peaceful solutions and good governance in West
Africa. We commend the electoral processes and the
peaceful transitions of power being realized in The
Gambia, Sierra Leone and Liberia, which illustrate
the people's ownership and creation of institutions to
end divisions and disagreements. We underline all the
work done by UNOWAS in every one of those cases.

We believe that, in order to continue on the path of
stabilization,theparticipation of each and everymember
of the international community is required. To that end,
we include the roles that the United Nations, as well as
regional and subregional organizations - including
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the Group of Five for the
Sahel and other partners - have to play.

Despite that work, we are nevertheless aware
that great challenges remain in the areas of security,
governance, the rule of law and development in West
Africa and the Sahel. As a main factor, violent conflicts
have put the institutions of the countries of the region,
and, consequently, their populations - 150 million
people in all - at serious risk. We reiterate that
it is crucial to look into the structural causes of the
conflicts that have profoundly affected the volatile
security situation in the region.

In that connection, we will tirelessly continue to
make the point that the consequences ofinterventionism
and regime-change policies following the 2011 conflict
in Libya were among the causes that destabilized the
Sahel, entailing chaos, terrorism, militarization and
the tragic repercussions that continue to this day. The
transfer of armed groups from Libya to the Sahel has
also allowed the transfer of high-calibre weaponry
being used currently to perpetrate attacks against
national security forces, United Nations troops and
personnel and civilian populations, in general.

Therefore, we cannot disregard the fact that the
Sahel region suffers from increasing instability and
insecurity due, as has been mentioned, to the presence
of terrorist groups and violent armed groups and to
criminal activities and transnational crime, which
in turn pose a serious threat to the most vulnerable
groups of the population. The crisis and the various
conflicts have a direct and indirect impact on civilians,
in particular women and children. Violence not only
restricts their freedom of movement and economic
activities, but also jeopardizes their lives and their
future. The recruitment of children by armed groups
continues and the participation of women in the
dialogue and conflict resolution stages of conflicts
has been stymied by their low level of involvement in
dialogue leading to agreements. It is vital that women
be included at all stages of the processes of dialogue
and agreement.

The comprehensive implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel is therefore
crucial. We commend the United Nations Support
Plan for the Sahel (2018-2022), which we believe will
strengthen synergies in addressing regional priorities.

In conclusion, we urge all States to address the
issues faced by West Africa and the Sahel through
regional and subregional multilateral cooperation
and dialogue, and to work to strengthen measures to
effectively combat and eliminate violence of all kinds.
Bolivia reiterates its full support for the regional
and subregional architecture that serves to address
conflicts in Africa because it believes that African
vision, wisdom and culture must be reflected in the
implementation of each initiative to bring about lasting
peace in the region.

