Mrs. Craft (United States ofAmerica): I appreciate
the Secretary-General's engagement and the briefings
from our three guests.

1 would like to start by reading a passage that
caught my attention this past weekend.

"There is broad consensus that conflict

prevention, management, or resolution in Africa
requires that Africans themselves act as a rudder,
guiding peace processes forward and working
with local disputants to bring about conciliation.
Outside parties such as the [United States] can
contribute by providing support to propel the
search for peace forward, but peace cannot be
imposed from abroad. Yet conflicts in Africa have
international ramifications, evident in refugee
flows and environmental damage, for example, but
also in purely humanitarian terms.

"Broad consensus also exists that the old adage
of 'an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure"
is especially applicable to conflicts in Africa."

Those words were not written recently. They were not
written this year, or even this decade. They are from a
1994 United States Institute of Peace report on conflict
prevention in Africa. Twenty-five years later, we are
still talking about this. Are we still going to keep having
this same conversation? Are we content with this?

The Security Council meets practically every
week to discuss areas of the world affected by conflict
and instability. But far too often we issue statements,
impose sanctions, create commissions and establish
peacekeeping missions to address conflicts after they
break out. It seems to me that we have got this a little
bit backwards. Therefore, if there is one message I want
to communicate, it is that there is more the Council can,
and should do, to address conflict before it erupts. There
are four actions we can take get out ahead of conflict.

First, we should use resolutions and statements to
target the drivers of conflict. Our resolutions need to
organize specific actions directed at root causes, not
merely assemble pleasant words on paper.

Secondly, we should utilize early-warning systems
and the analytical tools at our disposal to inform our
debates and regional visits. In doing so we will ensure
that we are focused on areas where conflict could
emerge, not where it has already emerged. As fellow
Kentuckian George Clooney stated last month in
comments on South Sudan, "if you don't care [about
the problems in that country], its problems will end up
on your doorstep." He is absolutely right.

Thirdly, because neighbouring countries often bear
the burdens ofspillover from conflict, we should increase
coordination with regional and subregional bodies.
Finally, the Security Council must continue to
integrate the women and peace and security agenda in
all of its work. As President Trump reminded us in his
remarks to the General Assembly, nations that empower
women are wealthier, safer and more politically stable
(see A/74/PV.3). Women's meaningful participation in
peace processes will translate into more sustainable
peace agreements. And as Ms. Mulamula noted, "ifyou
want to get something done, give it to a woman".

The United States is encouraged to see countries
like the Niger working proactively to prevent violent
conflict. Using domestic resources and international
assistance, the Niger has made progress in preventing
violent extremists from moving freely along its border
with Mali. It has also deftly managed ethnoregional
tensions in order to deny terrorist groups new pools of
potential recruits inside its borders. We look forward to
working closely with the Niger to highlight those best
practices when itjoins the Council in January.

In addition, the Council should focus on more
countries like Burundi and Cameroon, where societal
divisions and weak Governments threaten stability.
Upcoming elections could also exacerbate political
tensions and security risks. We should visit and publicly
focus on potential hot spots to proactively shine a light
on areas that could descend into conflict. We have
already done that, to great effect, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

For our part, the United States is deeply committed
to long-term stability and security in Africa. These
are not just words to us; they are the fundamental
reality of our financial and political choices. Much
of our bilateral engagement on the continent focuses
on preventive diplomacy. In Burkina Faso, the United
States is piloting a $13.5 million programme to prevent
conflict. Later this month, a United States delegation
will travel to Burkina Faso to develop programming
alongside the Government, civil society and other local
and international partners.

The United States also invests millions of dollars
in development aid each year to complement our
diplomatic efforts. In dozens of African countries, we
provide funding and technical assistance to cultivate
accountable governance, encourage inclusive economic
growth and support local efforts to seek peaceful
alternatives to conflict.

We have provided similar technical assistance to
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, and several Member States as part of
our support for the Continental Early Warning System.
We have had the same conversation about this
issue for as long as we have because our approach to
problem solving is often too reactive. That may be the
case simply because the work of conflict prevention is
demanding and even burdensome. I do not deny that.
But it is the right work to do. It is the smart work to
do. And it is the work the Council is called to do - not
merely talk about.

