Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Let me start by thanking
the Venezuelan presidency for organizing this open
debate on the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. I wish to express appreciation to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.
In spite of so many challenges and shortcomings,
the United Nations has been and continues to be an
indispensable organization. Its Charter principles
and purposes also remain as relevant today as they
were 70 years ago in safeguarding international peace
and security, promoting respect fo human rights, and
ensuring sustainable development for all. The issue is
how we can apply them, in a manner that is consistent
with the realities of our time, to meet the needs and
aspirations of current and future generations.

We are indeed living in an increasingly
interconnected and interdependent world, and what
happens in one corner of the world - be it terrorism,
climate change or a health pandemic - can easily affect
us all. No one can be immune from these problems, nor
can anyone can claim to have the panacea to address
them alone. We can do so only if we collectively work
together, but that is easier said than done.

That is why we are yet to take full advantage of
what the United Nations can offer to help us overcome
the constraints of self-defeating policies based on
narrow national interest calculations, which ipso facto
lead to double standards, which in turn undermine
the credibility of the United Nations as a custodian
of international law concerning principles governing
inter-State relations. Here, the most critical matter
is to be forthright in our fidelity to the principle of
the sovereign equality of nations without allowing
the principles to be used as a shield - as often
happens - against actions aimed at addressing gross
human rights violations.

As we have witnessed recently, it is indeed possible
to find common ground in addressing some of the most
pressing challenges of our time through dialogue and
negotiation, in line with the principles and purposes
of the Charter of the United Nations. All States, big
or small, have responsibility in that regard. The
Iranian nuclear deal, the Paris Climate Agreement, the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda on financing for sustainable development - all
achieved through painstaking negotiations - no doubt
represent the triumph of the United Nations and
multilateral diplomacy. However, we should not only
draw lessons from our achievements, but also have the
courage to admit our shortcomings and make all the
necessary efforts to redress them.

I wish to conclude my remarks by quoting the
address delivered by Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia
to the General Assembly in October 1963. He stated the
following:
"The Charter of the United Nations expresses the
noblest aspirations of man: abjuration of force in
the settlement of disputes between States [and] the
safeguarding of international peace and security.

"But these, too, as were the phrases of the
Covenant [of the League of Nations], are only
words; their value depends wholly on our will to
observe and honour them and give them content
and meaning....This Organization and each
of its Members bear a crushing and awesome
responsibility: to absorb the wisdom of history and
to apply it to the problems of the present, in order
that future generations may be born, and live, and
die, in peace." (A/PV1229, paras. 5 and 6)

