Mr. Sun (Republic of Korea): The Secretary-
General's report (8/2002/ 1223) on the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) gives
positive indications that Timor-Leste is, by and large,
well on the path towards becoming a democratic and
economically viable nation: legislative networks have
been taking root, administrative structures are
functioning relatively well and the economy is in better
shape.

These initial achievements can certainly be
attributed to the wisdom and aspirations of the leaders
and the people of Timor-Leste, as well as to the
commitment of the international community. In that
regard, my delegation appreciates the leadership of
Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, who has
shown considerable energy and competence.

Half a year has passed since we celebrated the
yearned-for independence of Timor-Leste. My
Government attaches great value to the role of
UNMISET, the successor mission to the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor, in pursuing
a well devised, milestone-based approach towards the
Mission's gradual withdrawal over a two-year period.
In that regard, my delegation notes with satisfaction the
Secretary-General's observation that UNMISET has
been able to adhere generally to the timetables, as that
observation exemplifies the success of the Mission
during the past six months. As one of the major troop-
contributing countries to the military component of
UNMISET, the Republic of Korea will continue to
fulfil its share of the responsibilities until the Mission's
mandate is accomplished.

Noteworthy, too, is Timor-Leste's smooth
integration into the community of nations. The world
welcomed that nation as the l9lst State Member of the
United Nations last September. Timor-Leste has joined
major international and regional institutions, such as
the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank, and,
more importantly, maintains firm diplomatic relations
with regional States, as well as with the wider world at
large. The Republic of Korea has an ambassadorial
representation in Timor-Leste and is committed to
promoting stronger relations with that new nation on
every front.

The Secretary-General's report aptly reminds us
that, even with the steady progress that has
materialized thus far, there remain many challenges to
be tackled. Unfilled vacancies in the Government
sector, insufficient staffing of qualified officials, the
weak judicial system and acute resource constraints in
many parts of the administration are among those
challenges. As has been the case in the past few years,
the Republic of Korea will continue to extend,
wherever possible, its humanitarian and development
assistance to Timor-Leste, including in-kind, financial
and training assistance. We believe that the continued
commitment of the international community is an
indispensable factor in enabling that new nation to
develop as a democratic and prosperous nation.

