Mr. Ward (Jamaica): It is important for the
Security Council to be examining this issue at this
time, just two days after adopting a comprehensive new
approach to peacekeeping operations. The decisions
and recommendations approved by the Council in
resolution 1327 (2000) of 13 November 2000, were an
important first step in improving the capacity of the
United Nations in the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Council's approach to
peacekeeping operations must now be guided by those
concepts, and must be evaluated in terms of how well
we implement them.

We must ask ourselves why it is necessary to
discuss this issue. Why should the Council be
concerned about an exit strategy when considering the
establishment of peacekeeping operations? The answer
clearly lies in the lessons of the past. Had the record of
the Security Council, and the United Nations as a
whole, been irreproachable, then there might not have
been a need for the Brahimi Panel.

Among the conclusions reached by the Brahimi
Panel was that

"In such complex operations, peacekeepers work
to maintain a secure local environment while
peace-builders work to make that environment
self-sustaining. Only such an environment offers
a ready exit to peacekeeping forces, making
peacekeepers and peace-builders inseparable
partners." (S/2000/809, pp. viii-ix)

That conclusion was reached by a Panel described by
the Secretary-General as composed of individuals
experienced in the fields of peacekeeping, peace-
building, development and human assistance. Their
conclusions should be taken seriously.

The paper you provided, Mr. President, on the
theme "No exit without strategy", points to a number
of cases in which the Security Council has terminated a
peacekeeping operation prematurely. The result has
often been a return to conflict situations worse than
those that triggered Council action in the first place.
The evidence abounds in support of this conclusion,
and need not be repeated here. We must now, therefore,
turn our attention to solutions, which will avoid a
repeat of our past mistakes.

Our exit strategy must be guided by a number of
considerations, including the following: the stability of
the region as a whole; the effect of the conflict on
neighbouring States, as well as the effect other external
factors could have on the particular situation following
the termination of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation; the dangers posed to a sustainable and
lasting peace by internal factors, such as debilitating
poverty and underdevelopment; and other root causes
of conflict that could foster a recurrence of the conflict
situation.

I now turn to some of the elements for developing
an exit strategy that my delegation believes may serve
as a way forward. Many are found in the decisions and
recommendations annexed to resolution 1327 (2000),
which provide a new set of principles to guide the
Security Council in the way in which it creates new
peacekeeping mandates to secure lasting peace.

First, the Security Council must seek to ensure
that peace agreements that require United Nations
involvement in peacekeeping provide for a clear
political objective; that they meet minimum conditions
for United Nations peacekeeping operations; and that
such agreements incorporate practical designated tasks
and timelines for implementation and criteria for final
disengagement.

Secondly, the Security Council must clearly
define each peacekeeping mandate, whether new or
renewed, by ensuring that it is credible in relation to
the conditions on the ground and that it is achievable,
taking into account the lessons of the past. For this to
be achieved, the Security Council must be guided by
the best available accurate, timely and comprehensive
information and analysis.

Thirdly, the Security Council must incorporate at
the very outset, or as soon as practicable, on the basis
of the exigencies of the situation, peace-building
measures as an integral part of the planning in the
conceptual stages of peace operations. This requires a
partnership with the Secretariat in developing a
doctrine of peace-building strategies and programmes
in an integrated and comprehensive approach to
conflict situations.

These important steps in the process of
developing an exit strategy are aimed at significantly
reducing, if not eliminating, the possibility of a
peacekeeping operation leaving behind a situation that
threatens to revert to serious conflict.

If we exercise the political will to implement our
own decisions, we will begin to achieve in the next
decade what we have failed to achieve in the last one:
ensuring peace and security for the generations to
come.

