Mr. Kaiser (Czech Republic): First of all, I
would like to thank the delegation of Japan for
organizing this open debate on the implementation of
the presidential note contained in document
S/2006/507. We believe - and today's debate confirms
our conviction - that the topic of the improvement of
the working methods of the Security Council is a very
important one. We acknowledge and appreciate the
long-standing commitment of Japan in this regard,
especially its stewardship of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions.

The Czech Republic fully recognizes the primary
responsibility of the Council for the maintenance of
international peace and security, as stipulated in the
Charter. This role requires the Council to be action-
oriented and efficient in its proceedings. However, this
goal cannot and should not be achieved at the expense
of transparency. The key United Nations organ should
be accountable to the broader membership and the
whole United Nations system; that is the only way to
maintain and enhance its legitimacy when acting on
behalf of us all.

The Czech Republic recognizes that the Council
has already undertaken a number of important
initiatives, including those referred to in the
presidential note. At the same time, we are of the
opinion that further steps are required in order to build
trust among the Member States and create a sense of
ownership of the Council's decisions, which they are
all are obliged to implement.

We have studied with great interest the concept
paper prepared by the Japanese presidency
(S/2010/165), and we agree with its outline of the main
topics: transparency, interaction of the Council with
non-members and, last but not least, efficiency.

I will turn now to the issues of transparency and
access. In our view, more transparency can be achieved
by advancing prompt information-sharing and better
access. All Member States should receive as much
information as possible about the current deliberations
of the Council and its subsidiary bodies. We welcome

the practice of briefings by new Council Presidents, as
well as greater coverage of the subsidiary bodies and
all the improvements in reporting to non-members in
general. Nevertheless, such reporting should be more
substantial and analytical. This applies primarily but
not exclusively to the annual report to the General
Assembly. In this context, let me express appreciation
for the recent increase in open debates of the Security
Council. We welcome this progress and believe that it
should be further developed.

The Czech Republic would also like to welcome
the adoption of resolution 1904 (2009), improving the
transparency of the listing and de-listing procedures in
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
( 1999). We hope that the newly adopted measure - the
establishment of the ombudsperson - will be fully
explored in order to ensure the due process rights of
concerned individuals and entities, including
petitioners filing de-listing requests.

I would like now to say a few words on the other
two issues mentioned in the concept paper, namely,
interaction and effectiveness. There is no doubt that
interaction with the parties that have direct interest in
an issue on the table of the Security Council is of
crucial importance. We appreciate the efforts made so
far in this regard, but there is still room for
improvement. This applies also to the relations
between the Security Council and the troop-
contributing countries. Despite recent important
initiatives, much remains to be done in engaging the
troop-contributing countries in the whole decision-
making process concerning peacekeeping operations,
from the initial phases of shaping their mandates to
their deployment and management.

Regarding a more general problem of dialogue
between the Council and affected or otherwise
interested non-member States, we believe that we can
more benefit from such measures as ad hoc
consultations or Arria Formula meetings.

In the presidential note, the Security Council
expresses its intention to maintain regular
communication with other principal organs of the
United Nations. It is our conviction that enhancement
of the working relations between the Security Council,
on the one hand, and the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), on the other, is a precondition for
making the whole United Nations system more

efficient. We therefore share the opinion expressed by a
number of speakers today that we should further
strengthen the relations between the Council and the
PBC. We believe that the PBC and its country-specific
configurations can contribute substantially to the work
of the Council, specifically on issues relating to
peacekeeping and early peacebuilding.

We believe that it is hardly possible to
overestimate the importance of the interaction of the
Council with regional organizations.

We are convinced that the measures aimed at
increasing transparency and improving interaction
should not be detrimental to the effectiveness of the
Council. On the contrary, they could form the basis for
a better response and a more effective decision-making
process based on better knowledge of the actual
challenges that the Member States are facing. At the
same time, we would like to stress that all efforts
aimed at improving the working methods of the
Security Council are extremely important, but that they
are just part of a more complex task, which is the
adaptation of the Council to the realities of today's
world. In other words, the improvement of the working
methods will bring about meaningful difference only if
the Council itself is reformed to be more representative
and legitimate.

Finally, let me assure you, Mr. President, of the
readiness of the Czech Republic to work with the
Council and all the Member States in further improving
the working methods of this key body of the United
Nations system.

