Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix
and Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for
their particularly insightful briefings on the political,
security and humanitarian situation in South Sudan
and on the work of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS). I would also like to especially
welcome Chairperson Festus Mogae, and thank him for
the clarity and resolve of his briefing, in addition to his
efforts towards the political process.

After more than four years of conflict and many
dashed hopes, the High-level Revitalization Forum is
an opportunity that the South Sudanese parties must
seize in order to finally overcome their differences and
finally commit to the prospect of peace. We welcome
the efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), chaired by Ethiopia and
supported by the United Nations and the African Union,
to bring those parties together in Addis Ababa and lead
the first discussions. The Agreement on the Cessation
of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and Humanitarian
Access, signed on 21 December, was an encouraging
development in itself, but it was immediately undercut
by ceasefire violations.

In that context, the Revitalization Forum is
currently in a key phase and its success will depend
on several factors. On the one hand, it is essential that
all parties respect the cessation of hostilities agreement
that they have signed. In that regard, we commend the
mobilization of IGAD, the African Union, the United
Nations and many partners that have unequivocally
expressed their expectations. We must consistantly and
vigorously recall that such violations cannotbe tolerated.
The Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism must more than ever fulfil its
monitoring role. It must enjoy the capabilities necessary
to fulfilling its mission. Additionally, the parties should
take advantage of the next session of the Forum in early
February to reach a consensus on the revitalization of
the 2015 peace agreement as soon as possible, including
its power-sharing dimensions, governance, security
arrangements and the fight against impunity. That is an
essential issue and the raison d'etre of the Forum.

In any case, it will be essential for the South
Sudanese parties to expeditiously demonstrate their
willingness to move forward on all topics. Hopes
have all too often been left unfulfilled in South Sudan
and political processes too often manipulated by the
parties, which seem to continue to believe in a military
solution and are struggling to sincerely engage in a
peaceful settlement of the conflict. The process cannot
be indefinitely open-ended. Neither the country,
the region nor the community of nations can afford
further procrastination.

We must therefore carefully monitor the South
Sudanese parties. In that respect, as was unambiguously
stated by Chairperson Mogae, in the event of violations
of the cessation of hostilities agreement or the
obstruction of the political process, we must not hesitate

to adopt the measures necessary, including individual
sanctions, to alter the calculations of the parties that
are obstructing the peace process. France counts on
the unification of IGAD countries to keep pressure on
the parties.

France remains deeply concerned by the ongoing
challenges to the United Nations and non-United
Nations humanitarian actors in their efforts to deliver
necessary assistance to millions ofvulnerable civilians.
Ms. Mueller described the myriad obstacles that they
face, including the fees imposed upon on them and
the attacks and harassment they encounter. Fourteen
humanitarian actors lost their lives in South Sudan in
2017, making it the second most dangerous country for
humanitarian action, following Syria. In that regard,
we recall that access to humanitarian aid must be
comprehensive, safe, unconditional and unhindered.
As Ms. Mueller stressed and the Executive Director of
UNICEF pointed out during her recent visit to South
Sudan, children and women are among the first victims
of that unacceptable situation. Rape and sexual abuse
must end. An arms embargo would contribute to the
protection of civilians. France has long supported the
establishment of such an embargo.

France also condemns the impediments that
UNMISS continues to face in the implementation of
its mandate. The blocking of UNMISS patrols and the
arrest and intimidation of its officers and humanitarian
personnel are intolerable. We call on the Government
of South Sudan to fully implement its commitments in
those areas.

The mobilization of the international community
facilitated the convening of the IGAD High-level
Revitalization Forum. More than ever, we must push
forward in that joint effort to put an end to violence
in all of its forms and secure prospects for peace for
the people of South Sudan, who so sorely need it. That
tragedy has lasted for far too long.

