Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): Just over two
years ago, the Georgian Government and the Abkhaz
leadership agreed to a cease-fire and appealed to the
international community to help them to work for a political
settlement. This Council responded by increasing, in both
size and scope, the United Nations military observer
presence on the ground in Georgia. It also made clear to the
parties at that time that it expected them both to work
urgently towards a comprehensive political settlement, and
that such a settlement would have to respect fully the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia within its
internationally recognized borders.

Since then, the Georgian Government has worked
patiently and consistently towards that goal; the Abkhaz
leadership has not. The Abkhaz leadership has failed to
engage constructively in talks, in spite of Georgian
proposals that would entail the widest possible autonomy
for the Abkhaz region. It has blocked any significant return
of non-Abkhaz refugees. And it has refused to face up to
the fact that no country is prepared to contemplate an
independent State of Abkhazia. In doing this, the Abkhaz
leadership has condemned its own people to an
impoverished and uncertain existence.

This Council will shortly extend the current mandate
of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG) for a further six months. That decision
represents the willingness of Council members to continue
to commit scarce United Nations resources in the hope
the current stalemate in negotiations can be overcome. It
also represents the willingness of countries to make
military personnel available. As a member of the Friends
of the Secretary-General for Georgia, and as a leading
contributor of personnel to UN OMIG, we are grateful to
the Special Envoy, his Head of Mission and the Chief
Military Observer, as well as to the members of
UNOMIG, for their work. But UNOMIG must be able to
count on the support of the parties, which requested
United Nations involvement on the ground. The recent
increase in the laying of mines in UNOMIG's area of
responsibility is of particular concern, and we look to the
parties to do all they can to ensure that such activities
cease. We welcome the Secretariat's efforts to redeploy
mine-protected vehicles and to provide UNOMIG with a
mine detection and clearance capability, and we urge
those concerned to work with the Secretariat so that such
measures can be implemented as soon as possible. The
objective is to work towards the restoration of
UNOMIG' s operational effectiveness. The presence of the
peace-keeping force of the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS) is an important factor in achieving this, and
we hope that UN OMIG and the CIS peace-keeping force
will continue to develop closer cooperation to this end.
In addition, reconstruction and respect for human
rights are key elements in developing stability and
allowing the return of normality to the region. In
particular, we welcome proposals to implement a
programme for the protection and promotion of human
rights, and look forward to the Secretary-General's report
on arrangements to establish a human rights office in
Sukhumi.

We believe that UNOMIG continues to have a
valuable role in sustaining the conditions necessary to
allow a lasting settlement to emerge. But - and we
always say this on these occasions - it is up to the
parties, and in particular the Abkhaz leadership, to
demonstrate that they are prepared to work earnestly and
constructively towards a settlement. The British
Government continues to believe that any such settlement,
if it is to be viable, must fully respect Georgia's
sovereignty and territorial integrity within its
internationally recognized borders.

 

