Mr. Hinds: In response to the first question posed
by the representative of Rwanda in relation to progress
in reforming, rebuilding and restructuring the Liberian
National Police and the other security institutions, in
the case of Liberia it was actually a matter of recreating
the security institutions, post-conflict. There has been
steady progress. Over this time, we have seen a police
force that was decimated grow into a force of almost
5,000 officers, who provide a policing service to the
populace of Liberia right across the entire country.
It is a maturing organization. It still has a way to go,
which is why we are still there. Importantly, it works in
partnership with a number of other security agencies:
the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization, the
Drug Enforcement Agency and the Transnational
Crime Unit. Those civilian agencies have responsibility
for domestic security in Liberia, and are all doing their
best, with the limited resources available to them, to
provide a professional response.

The Ebola crisis over the past eight months in Liberia
has seen sustained pressure put on those organizations,
and there have been cracks in what we saw as maturing
institutions with regard to improving performance and
operationalization. What we can try to do is build on
what we have seen as a result of Ebola. We have seen
services that had been delivered at the national level
devolve to the county level. We have seen decentralized
structures, decentralized decision-making and
decentralized resource mobilization right across
Liberia. It has been a challenge to move what has been
an overcentralized and bureaucratic process in the
capital, Monrovia. That has perhaps been seen as one
of the silver linings. In our remaining time in Liberia,
we will look to strengthen those local mechanisms.

We have seen improved relationships with the
community and improved responsiveness on the part
of the security agencies. They have taken on a range
of tasks that are not typically policing functions, but
under the health, humanitarian and other crises that
Ebola has created in Liberia and across West Africa,
we have seen the police perform admirably. Even
though many officers have been affected by the crisis
themselves, with a number ofthese agencies losing lives
to the crisis, they are still committed to their role and
function and to improving and professionalizing their
organizations. We will continue to work with them.

