Mr. Al Hussein: I am delighted to see you,
Madam President, presiding over the Council this
month. I wish you the best of success. I am also grateful
for the opportunity to address the Council on the human

cost of the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation
and misuse of small arms and light weapons.

The bloodshed and devastation caused by these
weapons never fail to elicit unanimous declarations of
dismay, but when the international community is called
upon to control more effectively the production and
trade of small arms and light weaponry, States push for
loose definitions, as well as numerous exclusions and
loopholes, and enforcement remains weak. The reason
is clear. The trade in small arms is a multi-billion-dollar
business. And yet, the human and economic cost
of armed violence also runs into the hundreds of
billions of dollars. These are the weapons of the easy
kill - the most portable, most easily accessible, most
casual instruments of death. Even a small child can,
with its tiny muscles, vanquish a life. In war, however,
appallingly, it is often the child that receives the bullet.

The vast majority of victims are not the live version
of the silhouetted man on a white sheet of paper holding
a gun, which law enforcement and militaries the world
over use for target practice. The live version is very
different. The majority of bullet-ridden and mortar-
blasted humans are ordinary people, not combatants
in armed conflict. They tend to be among the poorest
or most vulnerable members of society: older people,
women, children and people with disabilities.
Frequently, they are the left-behinds - people who
cannot flee when danger looms because they have
nowhere to go or because they are not physically able
to move. Many are killed; countless others are maimed,
and may be permanently disabled.

If they were to reflect reality more closely, the
silhouettes used for target practice would not then be
menacing gunmen, but terrified people hiding under
tables, or cowering in the corners of dark rooms with
their families, or lying face down in a ditch. And
why? Because war is not just the clinical fulfilment
of some military or strategic objective; war, in the
killing zone, often means a gruesome showcasing of
human cruelty, for reasons we still do not yet properly
understand. Why does it have to be violent to civilians
and non-combatants?

The pathologies of human behaviour have yet
to determine why. But we do know that, if the oldest
companion of war is war crime, its bride is the profiteer.
There are simply too many who will indulge in the
commerce of death and in the illicit business of arms
transfers, which is undeniably damaging to human
life. Yet we rarely see those responsible for facilitating
and abetting serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law held accountable in any
way. We must place the protection of human life and
human rights at the centre of this discussion.

The contrast is also breathtakingly stark between
the comfortable profits of the brokers of these
weapons - not to speak the accompanying lifestyles
of the more successful of them - and the victims of
their use, who in the majority of cases are likely to find
no recourse or remedy for the torment and disabilities
these arms and weapons have caused them.

We are all aware small arms do not only make easy
the taking of lives, and the maiming of lives, they also
kill economies and the social bonds on which every
kind of collective institution and progress rely. Their
ubiquitous availability can contribute to the sustained
denial of human rights, including to education and
health; the lethality of criminal behaviour; the
breakdown of social structures; the illicit plundering
of natural resources; decreasing trade and investment;
rising violence against women and girls; gang violence;
the collapse of the rule of law; and a generalized sense
of impunity, opening up in many parts of the world
completely lawless landscapes.

My Office welcomes the convening ofthis meeting.
We appeal to the Security Council to continue to build
on resolution 2117 (2013). We also note the upcoming
second open-ended meeting of the Group of Experts
in a few weeks' time, and hope it will make serious
progress.

The recent entry into force of the Arms Trade
Treaty (ATT) is a real source of hope, if more Member
States ratify it and agree to implement it genuinely,
particularly articles 6 and 7, which provide for the
human rights safeguards that are the treaty's heart. The
Security Council should continue to provide strong
support to the ATT, and it should mandate United
Nations operations to build ATT implementation
capacity into their regional and national assistance,
hand-in-hand with capacity-building for human rights
and rule-of-law institutions.

When in came to the ATT, my predecessor, Navi
Pillay, proposed to the Council in August 2014 that

"where there are concerns about human rights in
States that purchase arms, one condition of sale
would be that they accept a small human rights
monitoring team". (S/PV. 7247, p. 5)
I, too, believe this form of innovative thinking deserves
further elaboration. I urge the States parties to explore
it, along with the members of the Security Council.

