Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to convey to you, Sir, to the Ministers,
to the Secretary-General and to the representatives of
member States the best wishes of Mr. Farouk Al-Shara,
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic. As he could not
be present today, he has asked me to deliver the
following statement on his behalf.

"I am pleased to see France, a country that
has ties of friendship with Syria, presiding over
the Security Council for this month. I welcome
the initiative of Mr. De Villepin, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of France, to convene this
meeting at the level of Foreign Ministers to
discuss an important issue: cooperation in the
combat against international terrorism. In a
telephone call last Wednesday, I personally
expressed to Mr. De Villepin my deep
appreciation for this initiative.

"Our region is now living in a dangerous
situation. Syria and some of the countries
neighbouring Iraq that would be directly and
dangerously affected by potential events in Iraq
are currently striving to reach a peaceful
settlement to the problem of Iraq. Such efforts are
linked to the Security Council's efforts to
implement its resolutions, particularly resolution
1441 (2002). It is for those reasons that I was
prevented from joining my Foreign Ministers
colleagues in this meeting. I hope that your
efforts will succeed in resetting priorities for
combating international terrorism, particularly as
terrorism does not target any specific country,
religion or people.

"Syria stresses the role that the United
Nations must play in mobilizing the efforts of all
Member States to counter international terrorism,
based on the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter. Such principles acquire
further significance when our world is facing
greater dangers and risks.

"The United Nations, and the Security
Council in particular, took serious measures to
fight international terrorism after the tragic events
in the United States of America. We all
condemned those attacks. Regrettably, terrorism
did not start with those events. Unfortunately,
neither did it end with them. In today's world,
justice is mixed with injustice, freedom with
oppression and principles with double standards.
Briefly but more significantly, truth is mixed with
falsehood.

"There is no doubt that resolution 1373
(2001) constitutes the cornerstone of our efforts
to fight international terrorism. We must pay
tribute to the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee under the chairmanship of
Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock. Syria has
cooperated with the Committee both through its
membership on the Committee and through the
reports it submitted in full to the Committee. We
hope that the Committee and its new bureau will
continue to supervise all aspects of the
implementation of that resolution.

"However, have all the measures taken so
far been reassuring? The seriousness of
international terrorism calls for collective efforts
to make the issue a top priority of the
international community so that we do not stop at
addressing the issue in a superficial and
temporary manner. We must look at the causes of
terrorism. In other words, we have to diagnose
the phenomenon so that we can address it and
eradicate it.

"There are increasing concerns about the
possible link between terrorism and weapons of
mass destruction. The draft presidential statement
before the Council makes clear reference to that
potential link. We in Syria share the concern
about a possible link between terrorism and
weapons of mass destruction, especially in the
region of the Middle East, where both terrorism
and weapons of mass destruction are a threat. For
that reason, for more than two decades Syria has
called attention to the gravity of this situation.

"First, Syria has called for the convening of
an international conference under the auspices of
the United Nations to define terrorism and to
distinguish between terrorism and a people's
struggle for freedom. Syria has contributed to the
negotiations currently under way in the General
Assembly on a comprehensive draft convention
against terrorism that asserts the international
community's understanding of the legitimate
struggle against foreign occupation - a right that
was guaranteed by the Charter of the United
Nations - and condemns as terrorism all acts of
violence outside occupied territories. Syria
believes that we should reach agreement on that
common ground. Otherwise, we cannot truly be
serious about fighting terrorism.

"Secondly, since 1989 we have called for
the declaration of the Middle East as a zone free
of nuclear, bacteriological and chemical weapons
of mass destruction. Many Arab and Islamic
countries in the region have joined us in that
appeal, and my country has worked towards that
objective during recent years. However, that goal
has so far remained elusive due to Israel's refusal
to join the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons on the pretext that it is waiting
for the conclusion of peace between it and its
neighbours. Successive Israeli Governments have
made such a peace truly elusive through their
refusal to withdraw from the Arab territories
occupied since 1967.

"If the international community truly wishes
to separate terrorism from weapons of mass
destruction and to fight both in parallel, we now
have a very precious opportunity that we must not
waste. Let us work together to fight both in
parallel through the initiative of Syria: a call for
international conferences to define terrorism and
to make the Middle East a zone free of weapons
of mass destruction, without the exception of any
State.

"Important proposals have been advanced in
our region - and even outside it - stressing that
it is extremely important to counter violence
while Israeli settlements and occupation persist.
Therefore, working seriously to arrive at a just
and comprehensive solution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict will effectively contribute to the efforts
to fight international terrorism.

"Syria, which has been a victim of terrorism
since the 1980s, succeeded in harnessing the
country's potential to address and to eradicate
terrorism. It worked within the League of Arab
States, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the United Nations to fight
international terrorism. Towards that goal, Syria
undertook bilateral cooperation with many States.
We shall continue to cooperate with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and all other sincere
international efforts to realize that noble
objective.

"Once again, I wish you success in your
efforts in the service of our common good."
