Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my appreciation to you, Sir, for convening
today's open debate on this important subject. I will
circulate my statement but, to save time, I will speak
only to the most salient points.

I believe that there is a consensus within the
Organization that peacekeeping operations constitute
the most important tool the United Nations has for
maintaining international peace and security, and that
this tool should be constantly reviewed and improved.
The challenge before us is how to make United Nations
peacekeeping operations more sustainable with respect
to both financial and human resources.

In that connection, I would like to touch upon
the latest development concerning the United Nations
peacekeeping budget for 2014-2015. After lengthy
debate, the budget was finally adopted on 3 July.
For the first three days of the month, there was no
budget to pay for United Nations peacekeepers. While
acknowledging the difficulty of the negotiation and
the severe financial conditions faced by many of us,
including Japan, in coping with the ever-increasing
size of the peacekeeping operations budget, it is our
collective responsibility to ensure that such an anomaly
does not arise again.

Let me turn to the main topic of today, namely, the
partnership between the United Nations and regional
arrangements. Regional and subregional organizations
can provide vital capabilities for peacekeeping
operations. Their deep knowledge and understanding
of regional matters, as well as of local networks,
significantly improve the effectiveness of United
Nations operations in a synergetic manner within the
United Nations. Japan welcomes the adoption today of
resolution 2167 (2014) and appreciates your leadership,
Sir.

Nine out of 16 current peacekeeping missions are
operating in Africa and their personnel and budget
make up more than 70 per cent of the whole. That
reflects how crucial peace and security in Africa are
for international peace and security. I would like to
highlight two points regarding the way forward on the
partnership between the United Nations and regional
arrangements, particularly in the context of Africa.

My first point concerns enhanced coordination
between the United Nations and regional arrangements.
Regional arrangements are often the first groups
to respond to regional crises. Therefore, they are
indispensable partners in helping the United Nations
to fulfil its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. In Africa, we
see several key developments concerning such a
partnership: the first is the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur; the second is
the re-hatting of African-led missions to the United
Nations peacekeeping missions in Mali and the Central
African Republic; and the third is the provision of
logistical support to the African Union Mission in
Somalia by the United Nations. Japan welcomes recent
efforts to coordinate partnerships, including the annual
consultative meetings between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council, and
looks forward to seeing further developments in that
regard.
My second point is on the importance of support
for regional arrangements. In order for regional
arrangements to fulfil their role as first responders in
maintaining regional peace and security, it is essential
to strengthen support for regional capacity-building. In
that regard, Japan has been supporting Africa through
two approaches. The first is support for the activities
of the African Union in peace and security. For 17
years, Japan has been supporting the African Union in
that area through contributions to its Peace Fund. The
total contribution is approximately $12 million dollars.
The second approach is support for enhancing African
regional capacities, particularly in human resources.
Since 2008, we have provided a total of $37 million
and dispatched our trainers to 13 African peacekeeping
training institutions. Among those, I would like to
elaborate today on our support to Rwanda, the country
of the presidency.

In 2008, Japan provided $3 million to support to
the establishment of the Rwanda Peace Academy. The
Academy has conducted 25 courses and workshops
covering a wide range ofissues related to peacekeeping
operations, such as the protection of civilians, security
sector reform, and peacebuilding. Since 2010, more
than 700 personnel have received training through the
Academy. They are mainly from African countries,
but also include peacekeepers from other regions.
The Rwanda Peace Academy has become one of the
regional centres of excellence for training and serves to
strengthen regional peacekeeping capabilities.

In my View, Japan's approach, which I have outlined,
is in line with the resolution adopted today. Japan wishes
to contribute to peacekeeping operations by broadening
its involvement, in conjunction with strengthening its
cooperation with regional arrangements, under the
banner of a proactive contribution to peace.

In closing, I would like to express my sincere
appreciation to all peacekeepers and offer my deepest
condolences for those peacekeepers who have made the
ultimate sacrifice.

