Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
thank the Polish presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this open debate on upholding international
law within the context of the maintenance of
international peace and security. The presence of the
President of Poland among us, as well as his outstanding
conduct of our work, illustrates the special interest that
Poland attaches to respect for international law, which
is an essential condition for strengthening international
peace and security.

My delegation also thanks Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General, Judge
Hisashi Owada, former President of the International
Court of Justice, and Judge Theodor Meron, President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, for the quality of their briefings.

On 23 September 2017, the Special Chamber
of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea
ruled in favour of Ghana, a neighbouring country of
Cote d'Ivoire, in a dispute between our two countries
over the delimitation of our maritime boundary. Cote
d'Ivoire, respecting international law, accepted the
decision of the Tribunal. As part of implementing the
decision, the two countries established the Ivorian-
Ghanaian committee for the implementation of the
decision of the International Tribunal for the Law of
the Sea, whose first meeting was held in Abidjan three
days ago, on 14 May. Well before the establishment of
the committee, Cote d'Ivoire and Ghana, concerned
about preserving peace, decided to strengthen their
cooperation through a strategic partnership agreement,
concluded on 17 October 2017. By accepting the verdict
of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea,
Cote d'Ivoire thereby demonstrated that respect for
international legal norms can contribute effectively to
the maintenance of peace and security in the world.

Today's debate is extremely relevant in an
international context marked by numerous conflicts,
leading to serious violations of international law,
including human rights and international humanitarian
law. To that end, Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the important
role of the Security Council, as the guarantor of the
maintenance of international peace and security, in
promoting the rule oflaw as a element ofpeace, stability
and development.

At the end of the post-electoral crisis that my country
experienced, we resolutely committed to a policy of
post-crisis reconstruction and national reconciliation
with a view to strengthening peace. That policy is
based on three essential pillars, namely, economic and
social recovery with a view to equitable development;
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of ex-combatants, as well as security sector reform;
and combating impunity through the impartial justice
necessary to reconciliation. The implementation of the
third pillar in a post-crisis context meant restoring the
judicial system. My delegation would like to reiterate
its thanks to the United Nations and the international
community for the many initiatives that have been
taken to strengthen the rule of law, including security
sector and justice system reform.

The Charter of the United Nations, which underpins
our collective action, provides for tools to strengthen
the rule of law and promote international law. Among
other things, they include the powers of the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the International
Court of Justice. With regard to the General Assembly,
the powers granted it in Article 11 of the Charter provide
for it to study and discuss all issues and principles
relating to the maintenance of international peace and
security and to bring them to the attention of Member
States and the Security Council. With regard to the
Security Council, Article 24 of the Charter entrusts
it with primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, with specific powers
defined in Chapters VI, VII, VIII and XII.

As for the International Court of Justice, it has
the power to interpret and apply international treaties
and international law in general. However, since the
jurisdiction of the Court depends on the principle of
the consent of States, in practice the administration of
international justice may prove difficult. As a result, it
is up to States to avail themselves of this judicial body,
which makes a significant contribution to ensuring
international peace and security. In that regard, my
delegation strongly encourages all Member States
that have not yet done so to recognize the jurisdiction
of the Court as the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations.

Respecting the Charter of the United Nations
and promoting international law in the context of
maintaining international peace and security also
call for a strong commitment to multilateralism in the
spirit of collective security, and for refraining from the
unilateral use of force in the settlement of disputes. In
promoting the rule of law, the international community
must not lose sight of the importance of respect for the
sovereignty, equality and territorial integrity of States,
which are the founding principles of the maintenance of
international peace and security.

When considering countries in conflict situations,
most Council members have often expressed concern
about violations of human rights or international
humanitarian law and have consistently called for
the effective implementation of the principle of
accountability. In that regard, my country encourages
States to fulfil their obligation to end impunity and to
prosecute, with thorough and impartial investigations,
those suspected of committing war crimes, genocide or
other serious violations of international humanitarian
law. In this context, cote d'Ivoire would like to
stress the importance of the prevention of crises and
of ensuring the responsibility to protect, among the
various challenges facing our Organization.

In promoting international law, the United Nations
has the advantage of being extraordinarily productive,
and its impressive number of international legal texts
reflects the vigorous activity of the Organization in this
realm. The real challenge for us all, however, lies in
implementing and upholding those texts.
