Mr. Mukerji (India): Let me begin by expressing
our appreciation to the delegation of the United States
for convening this quarterly open debate, which will
allow the Council to take stock of recent developments
in the Middle East, including the State of Palestine.
I would like to thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, for his
comprehensive briefing.

We welcome United States efforts, including the
visits of Secretary of State John Kerry, to re-engage
Israel and Palestine in direct talks. We hope that the
recent announcement of the two sides of their intention
to restart direct talks, after perhaps one of the longest
periods of stalemate since the signing of the Oslo
accords, will lead to concrete results. In that context,
it is necessary to address the issue of Israeli settlement
activities, which have continued unabated and remain
a serious obstacle. Those activities are not only illegal,
but also pose a serious threat to the two-State solution.
We join others in urging Israel to halt settlement
activities.

The blockade of Gaza is also continuing and
adversely affecting essential services, economic
activities and infrastructure development. While we
appreciate the measures taken by Israel to allow the
flow of essential goods into Gaza, those measures
cannot be a substitute for lifting the blockade.

The Palestinian Authority continues to face one of
its worst financial crises, which threatens to erode the
progress made in building Palestinian State institutions.
It is important that the international community
continue to support the financial needs of the Palestine
Authority.

As a member of the Council in 2011 and 2012, India
supported Palestine's bid for full and equal membership
in the United Nations. Continuing its support, India
co-sponsored General Assembly resolution 67/19
in November 2012, which upgraded the status of
Palestine to that of non-member observer State. India
continues to partner with the Palestinian Authority
in its socioeconomic development, including through
the provision of direct budgetary grants, training
programmes and projects led by the India-Brazil-South
Africa Dialogue Forum.

India also continues its consistent support for a
negotiated solution to the Israeli-Palestinian issue,
resulting in a sovereign, independent, viable and united
State of Palestine, living within secure and recognized
borders with East Jerusalem as its capital, side by
side and at peace with Israel, as endorsed in various
United Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map. We call on the international
community to redouble its efforts for an early resolution
of the conflict.

Before I conclude, let me express our deep
concern at the deterioration of the situation in Syria.
We look forward to an early holding of the "Geneva
II" conference, which should help to commence a
Syrian-led, inclusive political dialogue that resolves the
current crisis and meets the legitimate aspirations of all
sections of Syrian society. Any further militarization
will only exacerbate the conflict and must be avoided
by all parties concerned, internal as well as external.

