Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for having organized this meeting
to assess the developments in the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo following the recent
visit by the Security Council delegation to Africa. It is
true that today's meeting is being held within a
particularly serious context, at a time when the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone is being severely
tested and when armed confrontation between Ethiopia
and Eritrea has resumed, ending the de facto ceasefire
which held for more than a year. Despite the appeals
for a ceasefire by the Security Council and the
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), fighting that has caused considerable
loss of life continues to rage, and we can only express
our dismay and sadness at this tragedy, which the
OAU, with the support of the United Nations, the
United States and the European Union, had for months
sought to prevent by patiently laying the groundwork
for dialogue between the opposing parties.

Four months since the special meeting, organized
by the Security Council on 26 January, major progress
has been made in the implementation of the process to
bring about a settlement of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo by the parties and
the international community alike. That special
meeting, in which the American presidency of the
Council invested so much, has actually started to have
an impact and to be reflected in concrete actions on the
ground. This progress should be preserved and
strengthened so that the momentum of peace created in
this matter can be maintained and preserved.

The recent useful and in many respects timely
visit which members of the Council made to the region
is precisely within this context. We would have wished
that the ambassadors who visited Africa would be
present today to hear our views on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I realize that they
must be occupied with other important tasks, but I
would have hoped that they would have been here to
hear the views of the OAU. The Council's visit,
nevertheless, has enabled the representatives of the
Council - and we welcome this - to transmit a
message of the commitment of the international
community to peace in the Congo and in the Great
Lakes region in general, and also to take note once
again of the formal commitment of the parties to the
faithful and complete implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement and to note firsthand the obstacles that
emerge on the path to peace.

The report prepared following that visit clearly
shows that the rapid and complete deployment of phase
II of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) remains
more than ever the absolute priority. Its
accomplishment as quickly as possible will actually
make a decisive contribution to strengthening the
current ceasefire, to developing confidence among
parties and thus to the orderly implementation of all the
other provisions of the Lusaka Agreement, which
remains the only guarantee of a return to peace in the
region.

In this connection, we welcome the entry into
force of the ceasefire and disengagement agreement
concluded at Kampala on 8 April 2000 by the Political
Committee, and the signing of the status-of-forces
agreement between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the United Nations. These two important
achievements reflect the determination of the parties,
including the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
move forward in the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement and constitute fresh proof of their
commitment to peace.

In its capacity as an African country and as
Chairman-in-Office of the OUA, Algeria is following
with special attention developments in the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
which, as members know, it actively contributes,
whether through military observers or financing of the
Joint Military Commission. It is in this context that the
Chairman-in-Office of the OAU took the initiative of
organizing a summit meeting on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in Algiers on 30 April, in which
the Presidents of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Mali, Mozambique, Nigeria and South Africa,
the representative of the President of Zambia, the
Secretary-General of the OAU, the facilitator, Mr.
Masire, and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations participated.

The Algiers summit made it possible to carry out
an exhaustive evaluation of the progress achieved in
the implementation of the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, to reiterate the
validity of the Lusaka Agreement and to call upon all
the parties to the conflict to respect its provisions until
peace is restored in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes region. The Algiers summit
also issued an appeal to States members of the OAU to
contribute to the peace efforts in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and announced the offers of
troops made by South Africa and Nigeria to the United
Nations.

While stressing the need to accelerate
preparations for creating the conditions necessary to
holding the inter-Congolese dialogue under the
facilitation of Sir Ketumile Masire, the summit
appealed to the Council to hasten the deployment of
MONUC, a prerequisite for consolidating the ceasefire
and strengthening the peace efforts.

The implementation of resolution 1291 (2000), in
which the Security Council authorized the deployment
of phase II of MONUC, should indeed be accelerated if
we wish to avoid new disappointments in the Congo. In
this connection, we are aware of the efforts being made
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
complete the preparations for this deployment. We also
know that the preparation of the groundwork for
sending troops and equipment for phase II has made
major progress. We wish to encourage this while
adding our voice to those who recommend that the
lessons learned from other peace missions be taken
fully into account in the context of the Congo. In
stressing the need for speed in the deployment of the
protection and logistic units of MONUC, we wish to
emphasize the importance of the equipment and
weapons that this force must have if it is to fulfil its
mandate in the best possible conditions.

The precarious state of the infrastructures and
means of communication in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo requires movement and transport
capacities to be strengthened and adapted. An
additional effort is essential in this respect to make
these means available on time in order to ensure the
deployment of forces within the agreed time-frame.

We pay tribute here to all countries that have
contributed troops to MONUC. Their commitment is
what has allowed the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to prepare for phase II. We wish to stress in
particular the contribution made by Italy of air and
river transport units, which will be decisive to the
success of the Mission. On this occasion, we invite
other countries with the means and equipment
sufficient and appropriate to MONUC's needs to follow
Italy's example. Similarly, we hope that the appeals
regularly issued by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations for specialized units and equipment for air
traffic control, fuel storage, first aid and fire-fighting
will soon be heeded, especially by the developed
countries.

We are particularly encouraged by the progress
achieved in recent weeks in the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In this regard, the
conclusion of an agreement between Rwanda and
Uganda on the practical modalities for their 100-
kilometre withdrawal from the Congolese town of
Kisangani, as well as the provisions made in the course
of the Security Council mission to the region last week,
reflect the will of the parties to move irreversibly
forward to strengthen the ceasefire and to create
conditions conducive to deploying MONUC.

The visit of Sir Ketumile Masire to rebel-held
areas - his first since his designation as facilitator of
the inter-Congolese dialogue - also represents a
positive development following the commitment
undertaken by Mr. Kabila, during both the Algiers
summit and the Security Council mission, to extend his
Government's support to the facilitator. This is an
important development that should help launch
dialogue among the Congolese, the success of which
will surely ensure the success of the peace process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo as a whole. We
believe that the settlement of practical matters relating
to this, such as the choice of venue, participants and
timetable for the dialogue, should be made as soon as
possible.

In this connection, the importance of this aspect
of settling the conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo requires the international community to give
facilitator Masire its full political and financial
support. The success of the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo depends on it.

