Mr. Fernandes (Brazil): I thank Ambassadors
Puri, Wittig and Sangqu for their valuable briefings and
able chairmanship of their respective Committees. We
commend the ongoing cooperation among these
Committees, which play a central role in the broader
United Nations counter-terrorism efforts.

There is no excuse for terrorist acts. Brazil has
historically condemned terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. We are party to all relevant
international conventions and protocols against
terrorism and fully support the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The repudiation of
terrorism is enshrined in the Brazilian Constitution as a
fundamental principle of our international relations.

Brazil values the important work carried out by
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities. We believe that its
ongoing efforts to improve its working methods are
crucial to strengthening its legitimacy. As we begin
discussions on a revision of the work of the
Committee, it is important to keep fairness and respect
for due process as our guiding principles. In that
regard, we believe that the recent proposals by a group
of like-minded countries regarding listing and
de-listing procedures, access to information and the
activities of the Ombudsperson deserve careful
consideration.

Brazil also commends the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) and Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate. We also appreciate the CTC's
outreach activities, especially the technical assistance
provided to Member States.

The risk of terrorists' gaining access to weapons
of mass destruction will be completely eliminated only
when these weapons no longer exist. The complete
elimination of weapons of mass destruction must be
our ultimate objective. In this sense, resolution 1540
(2004) remains an important tool for keeping non-State
actors away from weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery. In order to preserve its widely
recognized legitimacy, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and its Group of
Experts must continue to act in a transparent way and
in particular reinforce their dialogue with the wider
United Nations membership.

Brazil reaffirms its commitment to a coordinated
and multidimensional response to the challenges posed
by terrorism. Addressing the root causes of this scourge
is also of the essence. The United Nations should be at
the forefront of these efforts. The Security Council,
through the work of the three Committees, must
continue to strive to help bring terrorism to a definitive
end.

Finally, we once more extend our heartfelt
solidarity and sympathy to all those who have suffered
from the devastating impact of terrorism.

11-3390]
