Mr. Buffin (Belgium): Mr. President, I thank you
for giving me the floor and for allowing me to explain
the position of the Belgian Government with regard to
resolution 2166 (20140, which was adopted today and which Belgium decided to co-sponsor. Last Friday,
before the Security Council, Belgium supported the
Australian proposal for a Security Council resolution.
We are grateful to Australia for preparing the text that
was adopted today and would like to thank all countries
that expressed support for it.

Belgium has condemned in the strongest terms the
downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7. Belgium
reiterates its call of last Friday for an immediate, full,
thorough and independent international investigation,
led by Ukraine in close cooperation with the
International Civil Aviation Organization. Despite
some recent positive developments, Belgium remains
very concerned about the continued lack of full
access to the crash site. Belgium is deeply disturbed
about the reports of representatives of armed groups
meddling with wreckage, equipment, debris, personal
belongings and remains. Our first priority now must be
the identification and repatriation of the bodies of the
victims. We demand that this be done in a dignified,
respectful and professional manner. Belgium stands
ready to support all efforts in that regard.

We call on all parties, especially those in the region,
to use their influence on the actors on the ground to allow
for immediate access and the start of the international
investigation. The adoption by consensus of resolution
2166 (2014) today should contribute to that. We also
call for international and regional cooperation and
commend, in particular, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe for the constructive role it
has played so far.

Today is Belgian National Day, but our nation is
still in mourning for the six Belgians who lost their
lives in this terrible incident and for all the victims,
wherever it was they called home. Our special thoughts
and sympathy go to the families and friends of the 193
victims of the Netherlands, a country that is particularly
close and dear to us.

