Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank all the
briefers. I will divide my remarks between what we
heard from Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and what we
heard from Ms. Gamba, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
and Ms. Luqman, Chairperson, Food for Humanity. They
all made compelling points. I thank Under-Secretary-
General Mark Lowcock, Mr. Griffiths and Lieutenant
General Lollesgaard, Chair of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee, who we will hear from later,
for their tireless efforts to push the implementation of
the agreements reached in Stockholm.

The testimony of Ms. Luqman was very powerful,
but we know that the United Nations has been working
very hard for implementation. I believe that I speak for
everyone in the Council in saying that it really wants
to stay united behind the Special Envoy in pushing for
that. As he said, the fact that agreements on the concept
of operations for phase 1 have been achieved is helpful.
I do not think that we underestimate the scale of the
task. The Special Envoy referred to the fact that it
would be the first time that there have been voluntary
withdrawals in the Yemeni context. We appreciate the
scale of the task. But, at the same time, we want the
parties to be aware that the lack of implementation is
very worrying, and we urge them all to put in place
whatever steps need to be taken to achieve the full
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement. We
also look to the parties to remove all impediments to
the United Nations ability to operate effectively in
Al-Hudaydah. We will have a couple of questions to
follow up on when we go into closed consultations.

I wanted to turn to what Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock said. I think that it is shocking that we cannot
get access to the Red Sea Mills after all this time.
After the last briefing (see S/PV.8464) we were very
hopeful but it is very disappointing to hear that those
obstacles still continue. I just want to echo Mark's
call that if it is possible for the grain to be salvaged,
even at this late stage, we should look to the parties to
redouble their efforts to work with the United Nations
to ensure that can happen. Clearly, the contrast between
the figures that he provided regarding the 80-per-cent
drop in humanitarian assistance and what we know is
already the greatest humanitarian crisis in the world is
extremely alarming. I am running out of superlatives to
echo how worrying that is.

There have been some very welcome pledges from
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. They have
just announced dispersing $200 million of the pledges
that they have made. But there is still a $1.5 billion-dollar
funding gap in the humanitarian response plan. For our
part, we have pledged $300 million and we have brought
forward our disbursement so that we can support the
United Nations. But I would like to encourage all
donors today to disburse their funds rapidly and to
pledge additional funds throughout the year.

Turning to the very powerful testimonies that we
heard from the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Ms. Luqman, I thank them for placing the
focus on children. Today is a very good moment to reflect
how desperate the plight of children is in Yemen. I would
also like to pay tribute to the Permanent Representative
of Belgium and his Mission for all the work that they
have done regarding children in the Yemeni conflict.
We need to consider very carefully what he told us. We
heard a very graphic account from Ms. Luqman of what
the continuing conflict means for individuals. I think
she is quite right to hold the Council to account and to
ask us to work with the United Nations to do more. We
will take that very seriously and will do what we can.

Finally, I wantedto endbyreturning to the Stockholm
Agreement. It was designed to build confidence and to
prepare the road for a comprehensive political process
to end the conflict. That is a very important goal. The
stakes are too high for us to let that fail. In our view,
the Council should be ready to take stronger measures
ifthere is no progress by our next meeting. I would like
to follow that up in today's consultations.

