Mr. She Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): It is an honour and a
great pleasure for me to participate in this Security
Council meeting on the situation in my country, the
Democratic Republic of Congo, and on the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO). I would like also to discharge my
duty to congratulate the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
your country, Mr. President, on its accession to the
presidency of the Council for this month of March and
to convey to you our deep appreciation for the manner
in which you are presiding over our debates. I would
once again like to express to the Council the gratitude
of the Congolese people and its Government for the
efforts that the United Nations continues to deploy in
the quest for solutions to bring about a lasting peace in
my country.

Iwould also like to take this opportunity to commend
the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, and to
express our appreciation to him for his commitment to
defending and promoting the purposes and principles of
the Charter and the cause of my country.

I must also thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of MONUSCO, for his presentation of the report of
the Secretary-General on MONUSCO (S/2018/174).
Although I rightly appreciate the content of the report,
nonetheless Iwould briefly like to state my Government's
views on a number of the issues addressed therein.

The political aspect, as the Council is aware,
remains dominated by the electoral process. Following
the completion on 31 January of voter registration,
the Independent National Electoral Commission
will undertake in coming months, in keeping with
the electoral calendar, to identifying and registering
Congolese abroad. In the meantime, in order to
strengthen confidence, dispel doubts and maintain
contact with the various stakeholders in the process
of ensuring that credible and transparent elections are
held, the Commission has undertaken an awareness-
raising and educational campaign on technical and
operational questions relating to the elections, in
particular relating to voting machines, with parties and
political groups in the opposition, the majority and civil
society. Since 1 February it has undertaken to clean up
the electoral register, which will enable the Parliament
to adopt a law on the distribution of seats during its
current session. This stage will be the last institutional
requirement for the holding of elections, in line with
the electoral calendar.

As I underscored on 12 February during a meeting
on the electoral process in my country, in order to ensure
that the elections are well organized and to create a
climate conducive to their success, the Government is
working to fulfil the tasks that have been conferred on

it. In that context, the Government and MONUSCO, in
the quest for a solution to the thorny issue of political
de-escalation, met on 25 and 31 January to address,
inter alia, issues relating to political demonstrations,
the media and the release of so-called political prisoners
and prisoners of conscience. The conclusions of the
meeting came out in the form of a report that is to be
signed by the stakeholders.

Furthermore, the Government is concerned at the
improper use of the concept of political de-escalation
in a charged context dominated by opposition-led
insurrectional politics aimed at upending the
established legal order, in violation of the Constitution
and the Agreement of 31 December 2016 to hold a
peaceful, credible and transparent elections. Political
de-escalation should not be considered as a unilateral
requirement that the Government alone should uphold.
Inflammatory rhetoric seeking to undermine the
institutions of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
calls for insurrection and popular revolt by using places
of worship and unjust targeted sanctions that violate
the norms of international law do not contribute to the
goal of easing the pre-electoral climate. De-escalation
must concern all stakeholders: those of the majority,
the opposition and civil society, including the Catholic
Church, as well as international partners, which must
act in the desired way, namely, to constructively and
peacefully support the political process leading to
elections.

On human rights, as I already told the Council,
the situation regarding fundamental freedoms in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is not part of
a deliberate policy to violate human rights. When
such violations occur, they are solely the acts of the
individuals involved and must not go unpunished.

Regarding the events of 31 December 2017 and
21 January 2018, the Government on 1 February 2018 set
up a joint commission of inquiry with representatives
of the Government, the National Human Rights
Commission, non-governmental organizations that
champion human rights, the United Nations Joint
Human Rights Office and the African Commission
on Human and Peoples' Rights. The Commission's
mission is to consider the issue of loss of life and other
related issues. The Commission is also charged with
investigating the events of 25 February. Following the
investigations, its conclusions will be communicated to
the Ministry of Justice, which will transmit them to the
judiciary.

Nonetheless, concerning the specific events of
25 February, it should be underscored that the two
presumed suspects in the murders of two compatriots,
in Mbandaka and Kinshasa, have been arrested.

On the justice system, it is important to recall
that the trial on the murder of the two United Nations
experts has been under way since 5 June 2017 at the
military tribunal of Kananga, Kasai Central, which
is holding its twenty-eighth public hearing. Twelve
suspects are appearing and 13 others have fled and
are being actively sought; they are being tried in
absentia. Tshidima Constantin Bula Bula, accused
of ordering the murders, was arrested at the end of
December and is currently being questioned by the
prosecutor general, who will then make him available
to the competent court. Contrary to what some people
are saying, it is precisely in order to cooperate fully
with the Democratic Republic of the Congo follow-
up mechanism - negotiated between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Secretary-General of
the United Nations, with the appointment of a special
prosecutor - that the trial has slowed down, because
we are awaiting new evidence, to be provided by the
investigating team of the special prosecutor.

Indeed, the prosecutor considered that he had
collected enough evidence to go to court, and it was
under these conditions that the hearings I spoke of took
place. They were moving towards an indictment by the
public prosecutor and arguments for the defence when
the military tribunal was asked to suspend the hearings
while it awaited, as I noted, new evidence from
international experts. Nonetheless, since it arrived in
Kananga, in Kasai Central province, the Robert Petit
team has been working in close cooperation with the
high-level military investigation. The investigators
returned to Kananga on 20 February, after having gone
home for the New Year's holidays.

As for the four Congolese who accompanied
the two experts, an investigation is under way at the
military court in Kananga. It is also being conducted
jointly with the monitoring mechanism of the Special
Prosecutor of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

On the security front, the Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC) are
continuing their operations to rid North and South Kivu
provinces ofnegative forces and reassert State authority
in the Kasai area to restore peace and security.

The Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), which
recently stepped up their attacks against the FARDC,
peacekeepers and civilians, is a source of great concern
that deserves the attention of the entire international
community. For our part, on 13 January, the FARDC
launched a vast military offensive, which unfortunately
is being carried out without MONUSCO, to neutralize
that negative force. The notable results of that operation
included the death of ADF senior commander Muhamad
Kayira, on 22 February during an operation to seize
the Mapobu Valley. He was on a list of 26 Rwandan,
Ugandan and Tanzanian nationals wanted by Congolese
courts for war crimes and crimes against humanity in
the region. As we have often pointed out, the ADF is
using asymmetrical methods in their attacks. Special
training and appropriate equipment are required to
combat it.

As to the Forces democratiques de liberation du
Rwanda (FDLR), although they are weakend, the
FARDC continues to carry out the operations it started
as part of its Operation Sukola II in order to completely
eradicate it. As part of those efforts, my country calls
once again for the involvement of the Security Council
and the international community, in accordance with the
recommendation of the eighth high-level meeting of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, which was held
in Brazzaville on 21 October 2017, for the unconditional
repatriation to their country of origin, no later than
20 October, of disarmed FDLR ex-combatants and their
dependents who are still in transit camps in Kisangani,
in Tshopo province, and Kanyabayonga and Walungu,
in North and South Kivu provinces. That unconditional
repatriation also concerns ex-combatants of the former
Mouvement du 23 Mars. In the same vein, all foreign
fighters in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including combatants from the Sudanese People's
Liberation Movement/Sudanese People's Liberation
Army in Opposition, were asked to return to their
countries.

With regard to the humanitarian aspect, while
recognizing the prevailing situation in the conflict-
affected parts of our country, on which the Government's
attention is focused, we believe that there is a great
disparity between the statistics presented by some
foreign partners and those provided by the Congolese
public services in charge of humanitarian issues. In
that regard, my Government believes that there is a
need to strengthen collaboration and partnership in our
humanitarian work in order to clarify the number of
people, Congolese and others, in need of assistance. It
should be noted that, in order to deal with the situation,
the Government has established the National Fund for
Humanitarian Solidarity. It goes without saying that
any external support in this area is always welcome.

Thanks to the systematic work in the fight against
impunity carried out by the judiciary in general, and
by the military judiciary in particular, my country
has made enormous progress in the fight against
sexual violence, which is recognized by the Secretary-
General in his letter of 27 April 2017 and in his
various reports. Taking into account that situation, the
Secretary-General has shown willingness to remove
the FARDC and the Congolese National Police from
the list of country security forces listed for rape. My
country therefore continues to wait for that willingness
to materialize and for the FARDC and the Congolese
National Police to be effectively delisted.

With regard to the case of sexual violence referred to
in paragraph 30 of the report under review (S/2018/ 174),
my Government regrets that the information provided
by MONUSCO did not respect the requirements of
the national strategy to combat sexual violence, which
calls for the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)
and the Congolese Ministry of Gender to be the only
institutions charged with producing data on cases of
gender-based violence in general, and sexual violence
in particular. In order to avoid contradictions in the
statistics published by various United Nations bodies,
United Nations agencies and MONUSCO must interact
and communicate with UNF PA prior to publishing any
reported case that falls under the category set out in the
joint communique signed on 30 March 2013 between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations to combat conflict-related sexual violence.

In March 2017, my Government asked that the
renewal of the mandate of MONUSCO take into
account the expectations of the Congolese people,
whose most ardent wish is to see the negative forces
and various armed groups that are attacking the eastern
part of the country totally eradicated. To that end, it
is crucial to strengthen the operational effectiveness
of United Nations forces, primarily those of the Force
Intervention Brigade, the only offensive force that can
counter those armed groups. In View of the situation on
the ground, that wish remains in effect.

Considering that situation, my Government calls
for a qualitative resizing of the MONUSCO force with
fewer, but more specialized, troops who are able to
track down armed groups and capable of dealing with
asymmetrical threats. For the Mission's new mandate,
those troops must work in close collaboration with
the FARDC, enjoy greater flexibility and mobility,
and be equipped with appropriate equipment for
greater efficiency. Priority should therefore be given
to the Force Intervention Brigade, the spearhead of
that MONUSCO-FARDC partnership. In that regard,
MONUSCO units that are not essential to military
operations against armed groups and that are present
in areas where a MONUSCO force is not justified, and
where the concentration of forces is greater than the
level of the threat, must be withdrawn to reduce the
number of troops and adapt the force to the tracking of
armed troops.

Returning to the Force Intervention Brigade, which
operates in a partnership, my Government regrets
that it has not been consulted on important issues
affecting peace in the region, such as the withdrawal
of Tanzanian artillery and South African aviation unit,
as well as its relocation from the command centre
of the Rapid Intervention Brigade in the theatre of
operations to a fixed base in Goma, which undermined
its effectiveness. As we just mentioned, it is important
to equip it with appropriate equipment to make it more
effective.

With regard to disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation, I am sure the Council
will agree with me that this programme is of great
importance in terms of reintegrating ex-combatants
to prevent them from being recruited again by armed
groups. That programme should be one of the priorities
in MONUSCO's new mandate.

Discussions on the partnership between the
Democratic Republic of Congo and MONUSCO should
continue in the context of dialogue and the strategic
review, the objective of which is the reorganization
of human, financial, logistical and other resources, in
accordance with the new mandate that the Security
Council will entrust to MONUSCO. In those exchanges
between our country and the United Nations, the
review should focus on practical arrangements and
planning for the gradual and permanent withdrawal of
MONUSCO troops. Indeed, MONUSCO's goal is not
to remain ad infinitum in the Democratic Republic of
Congo. We must therefore hash out together a negotiated
withdrawal strategy within a reasonable time frame.
For the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Force Intervention Brigade should be the
last to leave the country, along with civil services and
various offices supporting democracy building, which
can continue to carry out their activities after the end of
the tracking operations against the armed groups.

We will have succeeded together in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo when the renewal of MONUSCO's
mandate no longer needs to be discussed, which is the
wish of the Congolese people and of my Government.
We hope that this will be the penultimate renewal and
will definitively contribute to the return of peace for the
people of the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
The crucial mandate entrusted to MONUSCO
cannot be successful without eradicating armed groups,
whose activities constitute the main threat to civilians.
The terms of reference of the new MONUSCO mandate
must therefore absolutely include the imperative of
eradicating armed groups among the priorities of
the strategic partnership and under the leadership of
the FARDC. In order to be effective, the partnership
must have the appropriate resources to carry out
unconventional warfare and combat the asymmetrical
methods of armed groups.

In conclusion, I wish to express my Government's
appreciation to Mr. Maman Sambo Sidikou, former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
the work he carried out during his term in office at the
Head of MONUSCO to restore peace in my country.
My Government sincerely thanks him. In the same
vein, my Government welcomes the appointment of
Ms. Leila Zerrougui as the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. My Government assures her of the same
support given to her predecessor to enable her to carry
out her duties.

