Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I will speak in only one of
the official languages of the Organization.

Bolivia wishes to express its gratitude for the report
presented by the Assistant Secretary-General for the
Rule of Law and Security Institutions, Mr. Alexander
Zouev (S/2018/623), and we also thank the President and
the delegation of Russia for scheduling today's meeting.

Today marks one year since the adoption of
resolution 2365 (2017) (see S./PV.7992), which, as the
first Security Council resolution dealing with mine
action issues, was a milestone. The report submitted
by the Secretary-General in the framework of that
resolution allows the members of the Security Council to
take a comprehensive look at the threat that landmines,
explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive
devices pose to civilians during armed conflicts, and
even many years after their conclusion. As an example,
the report notes that, in Cambodia, despite the fact
that the ceasefire was signed more than 25 years ago,
2017 was the first year in which there was a full month
without any record of casualties due to landmines or
unexploded ordnance.

Unfortunately, the number of victims of landmines,
explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive
devices continues to increase. In 2017, there were more
than 8,600 victims, more than double the number in
2014. We must emphasize that the indiscriminate use
of such devices disproportionately affects the civilian
population, with frightening consequences, particularly
for children, who are killed or maimed. This situation is
exacerbated by the ongoing urbanization of conflicts.

Improvised explosive devices also have a negative
impact on the performance of peacekeeping operations
and pose an ongoing threat to the lives of their
members and of humanitarian workers. By way of
example, since the establishment of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali in 2013, the Mission has recorded more than
350 victims, 65 per cent of whom lost their lives due to
improvised explosive devices. In addition to posing a
threat to humanitarian workers, improvised explosive
devices hinder the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
They also limit the movement of internally displaced
persons and restrict their return home.

Mine action is crucial to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, since programmes in those areas
allow public services to be rebuilt, foster sustainable
development and prevent weapons and explosive
material from being used by armed groups and terrorist
groups. For example, land is used for farming, children
can return to school, and water and electricity can be
restored only after an extensive clean-up operation.
There is therefore an intrinsic link between mine action,
security and development. It is for those reasons that we
underscore the work conducted by the United Nations
Mine Action Service in coordinating mine action in 17
countries, territories and peacekeeping missions and
special political missions.

In the light of all this, mine action is key to
protecting civilians, both during and after conflict. The
implementation of resolution 2365 (2017) is therefore
crucial, as it calls upon all parties to conflict to put
an immediate and permanent end to the indiscriminate
use of improvised explosive devices and protect the
civilian population from the threats they pose. We also
believe that it is necessary to continue including, where
appropriate, the issue of mine action in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
The issue of mine action should also be included in
the earliest stages of mission planning, programming
and operating concepts We also believe that mine
action should be included, as needed, in the agendas of
Security Council missions.

We also stress that a mine action component should
be included in peacekeeping operations, special political
missions and issues on the Security Council's agenda.
For example, it should be recalled that improvised
explosive devices must be removed in Iraq and Syria.
The clean-up of areas contaminated with landmines
is under way in Cyprus, Western Sahara and Abyei.
Risk education programmes are being conducted in
Somalia. The Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, signed in
Colombia in 2016, recognizes the issue of demining
as a precondition for post-conflict rural development.
Following the exit of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti and the United Nations Operation in
cote d'lvoire, ammunition was destroyed, thereby
enabling the civilian population to use areas formerly
employed by those missions in discharging their duties.

Mine action should therefore continue to feature
prominently on the Security Council's agenda. We
underscore the recommendation of the Secretary-
General, which encourages the Security Council to
consider the issue through an annual report on the
implementation of resolution 2365 (2017). To that end,
in the weeks ahead, bearing in mind the input of today's
meeting and the various statements made by delegations,
my delegation will submit a request for an annual report
on the topic. In addition to the request for an annual
report, we believe it is important to delve deeper into
the issue of mine action, given the Security Council's
efforts in areas such as the protection of civilians,
humanitarian action and the security of the members of
peacekeeping operations, through the implementation
of national mine action plans and the early inclusion of
the issue of mine action in mission planning.

We take this opportunity to reiterate our call to
all States party to the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-Personnel Mines and Their Destruction, known
as the Ottawa Convention, to honour their obligations
and unite efforts to ensure its full implementation. We
call on all States that have not yet signed or ratified the
Convention to join this important instrument.

In conclusion, we echo the words of Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres who said that peace without
mine action is incomplete peace.

