Mr. Burian (Slovakia): I would like to join
previous speakers in thanking the head of the Council
mission, Ambassador Verbeke, and his team for all
their hard work and for their skilful leadership of the
mission, as well as for the excellent manner in which
they handled the preparation of the report
(S/2007/356).

My delegation shares the observations and
conclusions contained in the report. We consider the
report to be an important element paving the way for
further informed discussion within the Security
Council and an integral part of the background
information on the Kosovo issue provided in all the
relevant official Council documents and reports.

The activities and outcome of the mission have
strengthened our belief that the issue of Kosovo
requires urgent attention and action by the Council. We
believe it is time for the Council to assume its
responsibility by taking an appropriate decision
concerning the future status of Kosovo, thus
strengthening the security and stability of the region. In
that context, I would like to reiterate our position,
stated during consultations held on 3 April, in
particular regarding the necessity of moving fairly
swiftly towards the start of negotiations on a new, fully
fledged draft resolution.

As we have already pointed out several times
before, we believe that our commonly desired objective
is the preservation and strengthening of the multi-
ethnic nature of Kosovo. In practice, this will be
measured by, among other things, the number of
returns of Serb refugees and internally displaced
persons. We believe that, to ensure the success of this
endeavour, it is crucial to make further improvements
in the complex conditions on the ground. In our view,
this should be facilitated by the international presence
in Kosovo for a further period. We are pleased to note
that this is also one of the most important conclusions
based on the outcome of the Council mission. In that
connection, we would like to express our readiness to
consider additional measures that could help us ensure
better conditions for the return of internally displaced
persons and for their lives.

In conclusion, let me say again that Slovakia
supports the main European Union (EU) approach to
Kosovo status determination. In our view, this should

naturally be embodied in the wider prospects of a
European future for the whole region, in line with the
conclusions reached at the EU-Western Balkans
Summit of Thessaloniki.

