Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, Mr. President, to begin by commending you
for the excellent and timely initiative taken by your
delegation of having us once again consider the
question of the prevention of armed conflict. Allow me
also, through you, to convey my delegation's thanks for
the presence of the Secretary-General and for his
statement, which yet again will serve to enlighten and
inspire our debate.

Armed conflicts not only kill people, they also
destroy a country's infrastructure, squander resources
and change people's lives, especially those of women
and children, critically affecting health and education.
Hence the need to prevent them.

It is clear that in order to prevent conflicts, we
have to understand the causes from which they sprang.
Of course this is a complex matter, and every conflict
has its own characteristics. The causes of conflicts may
be immediate or deep-rooted. However, taking into
account the experience with the conflicts which the
Organization has been called upon to address, we can
broadly identify three basic causes.

First, there is the lack of economic opportunity
and there are social inequities, because war is the
greatest enemy of development. Second is the
excessive and destabilising accumulation of
conventional weapons, in particular small arms,
because these are the tools of violence. Third is the
illegal exploitation of and trafficking in natural
resources, especially diamonds, because these provide
funds for the purchase of weapons.

Given this state of affairs, we must as a matter of
priority instil a culture of conflict prevention based on
coordination and cooperation among the Members of
the Organization, its various bodies and regional
organizations and agreements, making it possible to
develop and implement appropriate strategies.

Among the components of this culture of
prevention of armed conflicts, we might think of early
warning, preventive diplomacy, preventive deployment,
preventive disarmament and post-conflict peace-
building. We should also include the use of Security
Council missions, reports by the Secretary-General, the
development of confidence- and security-building
measures, and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants in post-conflict
situations, together with the use of civilian police to
prevent a resurgence of those conflicts.

If a culture of prevention is to be successful, it
must have two elements. The first is financial resources
in order to carry out these measures, and in this regard
we welcome the contributions made to the Trust Fund
for Preventive Action. The second element is real
political will on the part of the parties to a conflict to
overcome that conflict, as there is little that can be
done by those outside a conflict, even if they have the
best of intentions.

The Charter of the Organization eloquently
articulates our commitment:

"We the peoples of the United Nations
determined to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war" (Charter of the United Nations, Preamble).

On this premise, it is incontestable that the United
Nations- and the Security Council in particular-
has a moral and legal obligation to prevent conflicts.

The presidential statement that we will adopt
reflects our will and determination to adopt concrete
measures to make progress in establishing a culture of
prevention. Let us keep that will and determination in
focus. There is no doubt that the costs will be
significant, but they will be amply offset by the
promise of a better future free from conflicts.

