Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere thanks and
appreciation to Ambassador Llorentty Soliz, Permanent
Representative of Bolivia, for his valuable briefing and
outstanding work as Chair ofthe Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), particularly
those efforts aimed at preventing non-State actors'
development, acquisition, production, possession,
transfer or use of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
and their means of delivery. We hope today's meeting
will convince Member States to step up their efforts
to implement resolution 1540 (2004) as intensively
as possible, so as to achieve full implementation of
the resolution's provisions and universality for its
very important guidelines, which represent a road
map for Member States to develop national strategies
and legislation designed to prevent the proliferation
of these weapons to non-State actors and promote a
future free of WMDs. We call on the 13 non-reporting
States to submit their first reports as soon as possible.
I would also like to welcome the new members of the
Committee's Group of Experts. We wish them every
success in their work.

The agreement reached by the members of the
Council on the Committee's 2018 programme of work,
after more than two months of consultations, is a clear
manifestation of the important role played by the
Committee's members. It highlights the sectors that
are most urgently in need of attention in the light of
new proliferation risks, as well as the national plans
and regional visits by the Committee and its Group of
Experts. It also addresses the special circumstances
of certain States with regard to the implementation of
measures to combat proliferation and enhance the role
of civil society in combating the proliferation ofWMDs.

We are all aiming to improve the performance
of the 1540 Committee and its four working groups
and to operationalize its mechanisms at the national,
regional and international levels, which have become
a fundamental part of international efforts to achieve
non-proliferation. That is extremely important for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
State of Kuwait is deeply concerned about the current
challenges to the WMD-non-proliferation regime. The
Council has already met more than four times this
month to discuss the use of WMDs in more than one
country. The entire international community is aware of
the recent tragedies in Syria, the latest of which centres
on the ongoing uncertainty about the use of such lethal
weapons in Douma last Saturday.

In conclusion, I reiterate that the State of Kuwait
aligns itself with the position of the League of Arab
States on freeing the world from nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction, beginning in
the Middle East. We are therefore eager to improve
the Committee's work and performance. The State of
Kuwait recently established a national point of contact
with the Committee in accordance with paragraph
6 of resolution 2325 (2016). We will submit our
second voluntary report soon, in cooperation with
the Committee's Group of Experts and its relevant
Secretariat departments, the Office for Disarmament
Affairs and the Department of Political Affairs.

