Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to commend you, Foreign Minister Portas, for
organizing this important meeting. I also thank
Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Mr. Antonio Guterres and
Ms. Margaret Chan for their comprehensive briefings.

The modern world is in a process of constant
change. That inevitably brings new global challenges,
some of which have the potential to pull entire regions
into conflict. The Security Council's growing focus on
the evolving nature of challenges in recent times
signifies that a comprehensive and combined approach
is needed to maintain international peace and security.
In light of that, this debate is particularly important as
an opportunity to assess possible ways of addressing
those issues.

Transnational organized crime, as one of the new
threats to peace and security, flourishes in
environments lacking adequate State authorities. It uses
the advances in globalization to undermine State
institutions, thus creating increased vulnerability and
instability. Organized crime represents a threat not only
to democracy, the rule of law, human rights and
socio-economic development but also to peace and
security. In that regard and bearing in mind the
important role of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC), the development assistance
community should continue to support UNODC in its
efforts to help improve criminal justice systems in
vulnerable countries, especially in Africa. The Security
Council should continue to promote cooperation
between UNODC and different parts of the United
Nations Secretariat aimed at addressing the cross-
cutting nature of organized crime. We furthermore
consider the strengthening of international, regional
and subregional cooperation to be of paramount
importance in combating transnational organized
crime.
In an increasingly interconnected world, growing
populations and the increasing demand for resources
can generate social tensions, political unrest or even
conflict. In that context, possible the link between
climate change and security risks should be taken into
consideration. The adverse impact of climate change
can contribute to aggravating existing threats to
international peace and security. The Security Council
should therefore be aware of the possible security
implications of climate change, including potential
humanitarian crises, migration pressures and external
shocks, on States heavily affected by climate change.

Relevant United Nations bodies should
strengthen their capacity to deal with crises resulting
from climate change, focusing their efforts on
predicting, preventing and handling climate change-
related issues. The importance of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change cannot be
overemphasized, as it calls for the widest possible
cooperation by all States.

Conditions of Violence and instability can
exacerbate the spread of diseases, such as HIV/AIDS,
tuberculosis or malaria, by increasing the risk of
exposure through large movements of people,
widespread uncertainty, reduced access to medical care
and conflict-related sexual violence. Populations
fleeing conflict areas, displaced persons and refugees
in camp settings are particularly vulnerable. At the
same time, the spread of diseases has a negative impact
on all sectors of society, as well as on peace and
security.

Peacekeeping operations and their personnel can
play an important role in disease prevention in post-
conflict settings, especially in raising HIV awareness.
In that regard, we commend efforts by the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations to educate and train
peacekeepers in gender awareness, child protection and
the ability to recognize and respond to sexual violence
and exploitation.

Complementarity and cooperation among United
Nations bodies and agencies are needed in efforts to
prevent the spread of diseases. The Security Council,
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and other bodies, such as the United Nations
Population Fund, UNICEF and the World Health
Organization, need to harmonize their activities and
work closely with local communities targeting
vulnerable categories.

We wish to emphasize that the primary
responsibility in identifying priorities and strategies for
potential challenges to international peace and security
rests with the States concerned. If countries lack
knowledge or resources, the role of the United Nations
and international and regional organizations is to
support and complement the functions and activities of
national Governments, as appropriate.

International and regional organizations and
United Nations agencies should continue to monitor
situations that pose potential risks to civilian
populations and peace and security. Appropriate
planning and design of strategies to mitigate those
challenges must be a priority, particularly in light of
the importance of conflict prevention. Sufficient and
appropriate funding also needs to be provided.

Cooperation at the international, regional and
sub-regional levels is crucial in addressing cross-
border challenges. The implementation and further
development of international instruments will assist
countries in tackling the various security challenges.

As the main body responsible for international
peace and security, the Security Council should be
receptive to warning signs of potential threats. Timely
decision-making processes should be based on verified
and reliable information, so that the measures imposed
can be effective. Strengthening cooperation between
the Council and relevant regional and subregional
organizations will give more importance to those issues
and keep them constantly on their agendas.

We firmly believe that the Security Council is
committed to addressing challenges that may arise and
to seeking solutions for the threats discussed today.
This debate is an expression of our collective
determination to maintain international peace and
security. For its part, Bosnia and Herzegovina remains
strongly committed to that aim and stands ready to give
its full contribution.

