Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic):
On behalf of the delegation of Kuwait, I should like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. You have shown
that great efficiency and ability are permanent
characteristics of your work, and we are confident that the
Council will achieve success under your effective
leadership.

I should also like to thank your predecessor,
Ambassador Kovanda of the Czech Republic, for his
presidency of the Council last month.

The countries of the Middle East, indeed the whole
world, had great hopes when the peace process that was
launched in Madrid began to bear fruit, in the form of the
Israeli-Palestinian and Israeli-Jordanian agreements. The
Arab countries were keen to give this long-awaited
process every chance of success. Many unprecedented and
courageous steps have been taken to promote and
entrench this process and not derail it by deviating from
its main elements: the principle of land for peace: the
relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973); and the principle
that comprehensive progress must be made on all tracks.
To take anyone of these elements without the others must
be considered a setback for the process in that to do so
weakens all the results achieved on the other tracks.

The duties and responsibilities of the parties towards
and in the peace process are mutual, integral and equal.
No party to this process should be allowed to take steps
under any pretext that would undermine the agreement at
its foundations or in its essence. This meeting of the
Council to discuss the confiscation by Israel of land in
Al-Quds Al-Sharif is very significant in this respect,
because the question at issue in our deliberations here
carries within itself very serious accusations directed at
Israel in respect of its forcible measures, its lack of
respect for Muslim and Arab feelings and its lack of
respect for the Declaration of Principles agreed upon with
the Palestinian side.

The accusations are, firstly, that Israel is altering the
status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, whereas it had been agreed
that Israel would not prejudice the city's demographic or
political status and that the final status of the city should
be dealt with within the framework provided for in the
Israeli-Palestinian Declaration of Principles; secondly, that
there has been a resumption in establishing Israeli
settlements, whereas establishing such settlements is
considered by the Security Council and the General
Assembly as illegal, as undermining peace and security
and as Violating Palestinian territorial, demographic and
political rights; and, thirdly, that the forcible confiscation
of land has been conducted in order to make political
gain, affect the future status of the city and change its
demographic composition.

Kuwait, given its well-known position in respect of
the peace process and its support in both words and deeds

 

for the basic principles of the peace agreement, which
agreement it regards as a first, important, step in the peace
process - for which we wish success on all tracks based
on the tenets of justice, equality and international law -
calls upon Israel to rescind the confiscation orders and to
desist henceforth from its illegal confiscation of Arab lands,
be they in Al-Quds Al-Sharif or in other occupied Arab
territories.

Kuwait believes that the issue of Al-Quds Al-Sharif is
in fact the cornerstone of the whole peace process and the
continuation thereof.

Israel must not think that the legal, political and
demographic status of the city has been resolved in
accordance with its wishes. Jerusalem has an international,
Muslim, Arab status that cannot be bargained away,
involving as it does the deepest, most sensitive feelings of
the Muslim and Arab worlds. The Security Council has
declared that

"all measures taken by Israel which purport to
alter the status of Jerusalem are invalid".
(resolution 267 (1969), para. 4)

Kuwait therefore expects the Security Council, whose
resolutions constitute the foundations upon which the peace
process is built, to take specific measures, calling upon
Israel to rescind its order to confiscate lands in Jerusalem
for whatever purpose, and reaffirming that any unilateral
Israeli action in respect of Jerusalem is invalid and in
contravention of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.
The Council should furthermore call upon Israel to desist
from any action that could damage the climate needed for
the peace process to move towards its objectives; it should
insist that, at every level, the peace process must be
revitalized and not deviate from its foundation in the
resolutions of the Security Council and in international law.

Kuwait considers that the Security Council should not
allow the Palestinian people to fall victim to frustration and
lose their interest in and support for the peace process.
Kuwait also believes it necessary for peace to prevail in the
Middle East, and is doing its best to devote resources to the
economic development of the region in the service of
security and stability for its inhabitants.

