Mr. Morales Lopez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for convening this annual debate on the working
methods of the Security Council, which is in and of
itself a tangible demonstration of the commitment that
the most important body in maintaining international
peace and security should demonstrate to the principles
of transparency, inclusiveness, accountability and
efficiency. We are particularly grateful to Mr. Ian
Martin for his briefing.

My country is convinced that this exercise is far
from merely an administrative or technical one: this
annual review of the progress and challenges in the
working methods of the Security Council is no small
matter insofar as the Council's ability to effectively
carry out its work has a global impact beyond the
walls of this Chamber. In this regard, we welcome the
consistent work and receptive aptitude of its current and
past members towards the concerns of the rest of the
membership and the fact that they have incorporated
practices, such as more active participation by
non-members of the Council as co-penholders of
resolutions, greater publicity of its meeting and
instances of greater transparency with respect to the
activities and documents of the Council, inter alia,
which have democratized the Council's work and made
it and its impact more efficient, as mentioned in the
concept note by the presidency of Kuwait (S/20l8/66, annex) and the note of the presidency of 30 August 2017
(S/2017/507).

The institutional relationship and interaction
between the Security Council and the General
Assembly, especially this year when we are seeking to
adopt and implement the process of reforming the peace
and security and development pillars of the Secretary-
General, is undoubtedly an ongoing process that should
be subject to ongoing review and improvements.

Improving transparency, efficiency, inclusiveness
and accountability in the Council's working methods
is essential to achieving a better alignment between the
Security Council's decisions on peace and security and
the support these decisions receive from all Member
States, particularly those that are not part of the
Council. The four elements mentioned are, in our view,
essential to building a decision-making culture that is
in line with our collective interests.

With regard to communications, Colombia
recognizes the efforts made by the various presidents
of the Security Council, especially the meetings
with the President of the General Assembly and the
organization of open and public briefings, which make
the discussions on the most pressing problems and
situations more democratic. Furthermore, with respect
to documentation, we reiterate that it is essential
that the annual reports submitted by the Council to
the General Assembly have an appropriate level of
specificity that contributes to a better understanding of
the decision-making process for the general public and
non-member delegations in order to ensure that they are
genuinely informative and not merely descriptive.

Finally, I must refer to the role that the General
Assembly's revitalization process has played within the
United Nations in ensuring that the Organization can
meet the huge challenges we place on its substantive
agenda. Thanks to the decision of the President of the
General Assembly, Colombia will have the opportunity
to co-Chair, with Croatia, the Ad Hoc Working Group
on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly. In the revitalization process, all Members
of the United Nations have provided unanimous
guidance on the way forward on the various issues that
have modernized and made the United Nations more
effective, based on the inclusive management of our
discussions. Recent evidence ofthis could be seen in the
process of selecting a Secretary-General, in the more
equitable regional and gender representation among
senior management, and in the greater efficiency and
democracy of some processes within the Commissions,
to mention just a few.

Therefore, I have no doubt that we have made
significant progress, but we still have a long way to go
to achieve our shared goal of a Security Council that is
aligned with the objectives established in the Charter to
work towards international peace and security.

