Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
Today's debate - which we are pleased to be holding
under your presidency, Mr. Minister - provides us
with an opportunity to take a useful snapshot of the
situation and to consider the Security Council's actions
in humanitarian crises. I would like to thank Jean-
Marie Guehenno for the insight he provided us at the
beginning of the meeting.

First, I would like to provide some historical
background. What seems legitimate today has not
always seemed so. The principle of Security Council
intervention in humanitarian crises is a recent one,
taking us back to the implementation of resolution 688
(1991) of 5 April 1991, by which the Council
addressed the tragedy then under way in Iraqi
Kurdistan. But we have come a long way since then.

Today, the Council can no longer stand aside
from humanitarian tragedies affecting entire
populations, who are direct or indirect victims of
deadly conflicts. I shall not list the many such Security
Council interventions in recent years. In our View, this
development represents progress not only for the
Council but for the entire Organization.

The means for intervention too have become
more diverse. To be sure, much remains to be done to
further enhance international community action. The
avenues identified by the Greek presidency for
preventing humanitarian tragedy and the recurrence of
conflict, as set out in the draft presidential statement
that we shall adopt at the end of today's meeting,
appear to us to be the right ones.
Let me touch briefly on the question of Security
Council action at the very time that a crisis erupts.
Further debate has been sparked on the political need
to intervene in humanitarian crises and in the conflicts
to which they give rise, and a consensus is now
emerging on the concept of a "responsibility to
protect". That principle, which has arisen in the context
of the General Assembly's preparations for the
September summit, is in no way synonymous with
interference. It reaffirms the primary responsibility of
States and Governments to protect civilian populations
in their territories. But when the State in question fails
to meet its responsibility in the face of a very serious
situation resulting from crimes against humanity,
serious human rights violations or ethnic cleansing, the
international community is duty-bound to act. That is
not so different from the current practice of the
Security Council. France earnestly hopes that will be
possible to reach agreement on this principle at
September's summit of heads of State or Government.

That said, we should bear in mind that each crisis
situation is, by definition, unique: different from the
others. The correct response to the Darfur tragedy is
not the same as the one needed in any other grave
humanitarian crisis situation.

The range of action available to the international
community in humanitarian tragedies is broad. The
choice depends on the circumstances: as I noted,
humanitarian crises are dissimilar. Very specific
problems arise. I am thinking in particular about
ensuring that peacekeeping operations have secure
access to vulnerable populations. The Council should
constantly adapt its response to the problem before it.
To do this, the Security Council's practice is to
diversify its sources of information; we see that as a
good thing. To mention only a few very recent
examples, last month the Council welcomed to the
Chamber Mr. Jan Egeland, the Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his six-monthly briefing on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (see S/PV.5209) and Mr. James Morris, Executive Director
of the World Food Programme (see S/PV.5220). Their
briefings provided valuable insights that supplemented
those provided through statements by Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General. The United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights is
another valuable source of information for the Council.

I will conclude with a general comment on the
responsibility borne by the entire international
community. The Security Council is indeed at the centre
of the action in crisis situations. Yet the Council is far
from the only United Nations actor that must respond to
humanitarian crises. The agencies of the United Nations
system, States, non-governmental organizations and
society civil all have a central role to play.

