Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me at the outset welcome you, Sir, to preside over this body. We also welcome the Prime Minister of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and other honourable Ministers to the Council. I thank the Secretary-General and Mrs. Mary Robinson, Chair of The Elders, for their briefings. Indonesia echoes their call to reaffirm the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and renews its commitment to promoting the pacific settlement of disputes. Indonesia aligns itself with the statements to be delivered by the representatives of Azerbaijan, on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and of the Philippines, on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), respectively. The Charter of the United Nations embodies our collective hope and determination to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war. At the same time, it provides a rules-based platform for dialogue and cooperation, bringing together nations large and small based on sovereign equality. Three-quarters of a century have passed since the adoption of the Charter, and it is saddening that we are seeing growing resort to unilateralism, countries withdrawing from internationally agreed commitments, and increasing use of coercive measures to achieve national policy objectives. We have witnessed such activities recently in the Middle East and many parts of the world. While we commemorate theseventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations Charter in 2020, it is ironic that we are also starting the year on a very sombre note. The very Charter that we hold dear is in jeopardy. It is being violated again and again. We cannot afford to become spectators and let our collective efforts of the past three-quarters of a century be forgotten or see our future generations lost to the scourge of war - the very thing that we, the peoples of the United Nations, committed to avoiding. It is essential that we take action. First, we must stop unilateral actions in violation of the Charter. Instead, we should promote dialogue and the peaceful settlement of disputes. The use of force has never been a solution and never will be. Indonesia calls on all Members of the United Nations to fully comply with the Charter and its implementation. To those that are not complying, we join the Secretary- General in the clear message that he sent very recently: "Stop escalation, exercise maximum restraint, restart dialogue and renew international cooperation." Secondly, we have to fully and faithfully implement the Charter through our renewed commitment to multilateralism. No nation, no matter how powerful, can effectively address global challenges on its own. We need inclusive and mutually beneficial collaboration and dialogue among nations, as well as the sharing of national best practices and lessons learned. To underpin multilateralism, we need to also continue strengthening the role of regional and subregional organizations. Neighbours know best. In line with Chapter VIII of the Charter, we recognize the important role of regional and subregional organizations in maintaining international peace and security, as we have strived to do in our ASEAN region. We need to ensure that all agreements, resolutions, decisions and declarations that we have agreed upon as a collective family of nations are faithfully implemented, whether they relate to economic and social issues, climate change or the issue of Palestine. There can be no exceptions. We cannot talk about upholding the United Nations Charter if we fail to address the question of Palestine. Our seventy-fifth anniversary is being celebrated in many places, but not in Palestine, which still lacks a homeland. Prevailing disrespect for international law and the principles of the Charter has further diminished the chances of achieving the two-State vision for sustained peace and stability in the region. Thirdly, We need to reaffirm our collective support to the United Nations and its three pillars: peace and security, development and human rights. All of them should be promoted equally and moved forward at the same pace. Each organ of the United Nations has its own unique mandate based on the Charter to do that. We continue to support the United Nations reform, as it is critical to ensuring the Organization remains relevant and fit for purpose and has impact on the ground In conclusion, the Security Council needs to be reminded not only of our political commitments, but also of our duty to implement those commitments, to ensure the primacy of human safety and security. The United Nations was established upon the mandate of "We, the peoples of the United Nations". We cannot afford to let our peoples down.
