Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I should like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his informative briefing. I also
thank the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dacie, and
Ms. Vlora Citaku for their statements.

Resolution 1244 (1999) remains the internationally
accepted legal basis for resolving the situation in
Kosovo, including strict respect for the principle of
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Serbia. As
Council members are aware, Uruguay has maintained
its position of not recognizing Kosovo, underscoring
the principle of the territorial integrity of States
as a paramount standard of international law. That
principle constitutes a central element for the peaceful
coexistence and cooperation among the members ofthe
international community.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/407) describes the political situation as being
marked by tension and discord against the backdrop of
the election by the Assembly of Kosovo of Mr. Hashim
Thaci as the new President of the province of Kosovo.
Uruguay is concerned about the impact of political
tensions on the security situation in Kosovo, as there
have been a significant number of incidents, including
violent protests, attacks and threats against civil
servants and damage to State and private property,
that are detailed in the report and that have spread
throughout Kosovo. Uruguay regrets the occurrence
of such incidents and encourages all efforts to find
inclusive and peaceful forms of dialogue that will
facilitate a solution to the problems facing Kosovo.

Uruguay also notes with concern outstanding
issues in Kosovo in the area of the rule of law, such
as accountability, impartiality, the effectiveness
and independence of judges and prosecutors; the
mistreatment of detainees, poor physical conditions,
drug abuse, corruption and favouritism that prevail in
prisons; prolonged pre-trial detention; and demands
for compensation that are still pending. In that regard,
Uruguay recognizes the important work of UNMIK in
overcoming some challenges in the area of oversight
and roll-out of certain rule of law functions, as well
as its technical cooperation with the institutions of
Belgrade and Pristina and its facilitation of requests
for reciprocal legal assistance from States that do not
recognize Kosovo.

Uruguay attaches great importance to combating
sexual violence in conflict. In that regard, we welcome
the regulation signed on 2 February by the Prime
Minister of the province of Kosovo, establishing
a Government commission and procedures for the
verification and recognition of the status of survivors
of conflict-related sexual violence as civilian victims.
In particular, we welcome the fact that the reparations
outlined in the law include access to pensions, free
medical treatment, employment, income-generating
activities and education.

Uruguay notes with satisfaction the promotion
by UNMIK of activities with a youth and gender
perspective, such as the organization of a round table
on the role of young women in reconciliation. We also
welcome the progress achieved by UNMIK on behalf
of the International Human Rights Working Group with
the Office of the Prime Minister in order to consider
its recommendations on the draft Kosovo human rights
strategy (2016-2020).

In conclusion, I reiterate that Uruguay values the
role played by UNMIK in promoting security, stability
and respect for human rights, and acknowledges the
important role of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Kosovo Force, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the United
Nations agencies present on the ground. In particular, I
wish to acknowledge the important work of the women
and men of UNMIK, whose efforts and dedication
contribute to furthering the principles for which the
Mission was created.
