The Deputy Secretary-General: I welcome this
Security Council meeting on the human rights situation
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. This is
a matter of great concern that demands our attention.
As members may recall, the magnitude and scale
of abuses suffered by the people of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea were documented by the
commission of inquiry in 2014. The Commission noted
that the violations, "reveal a State that does not have
any parallel in the contemporary world" (A/HRC/25/63, para. 80). The Commission's recommendations were
instrumental in reframing the United Nations efforts
to improve the country's human rights situation. The
commission of inquiry concluded that crimes against
humanity have been committed and rightly called
for accountability.

The Security Council carried this process further
last week by adopting resolution 2321 (2016). That was
the first time that the Council specifically requested
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to respect
and ensure the "welfare and inherent dignity" of people
in its territory, in paragraph 45 of that resolution. The
General Assembly, in its resolutions on this issue have
repeatedly encouraged the Security Council to ensure
accountability, including by considering to refer the
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
to the International Criminal Court.

The patterns of grave violations of human rights
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea have
repeatedly been established. The authorities have
given no effective commitment to remedy the situation.
People inside the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea are unable to make their voices heard because
of the restrictions and the risks that they face if they
exercise their rights. The most vulnerable continue to
suffer from a cruel network of political prison camps,
an exploitative economic system and widespread
discrimination based on social status.

Two days ago, the Office ofthe High Commissioner
for Human Rights issued a report that assessed the
different ways in which families have been separated
since the 1950-1953 Korean War. The report found that
involuntary separation is not just the consequence of the
war but also the result of structural forms of exclusion,
impunity and disempowerment. Furthermore, the
country is experiencing a humanitarian emergency.
Approximately 70 per cent of the population of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea - 18 million
people - are considered food insecure. A quarter
of the population has inadequate access to health
services. A fifth of the population lacks access to
clean water and proper sanitation. The impact on
children, whose developing bodies are vulnerable to
lasting damage, is simply ruinous. Stunted growth is a
rampant phenomenon.

Those persistent humanitarian needs are exacerbated
by recurring natural disasters, such as the floods
that devastated the northern part of the country in
September and affected 600,000 people. In line with
the no-one-left-behind principle of the Sustainable
Development Goals, it is imperative to decouple
geopolitical considerations from United Nations
humanitarian and development support to people
in need. Resolution 2321 (2016) underlines that the
measures imposed were not intended to have adverse
humanitarian consequences for the civilian population.

I urge members of the Council to ensure that
the already critical humanitarian situation does not
deteriorate further owing to such measures. Funding
for relief activities in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea is essential, in particular to ensure that
vulnerabilities do not increase in the face of stricter
sanctions. Assistance has steadily declined regretfully
over the past decade, preventing humanitarian agencies
from responding effectively to the needs of the most
affected. Approximately $145 million are required to
address the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
critical humanitarian needs. I count on Member States
to support those life-saving activities.

History teaches us that serious human rights
violations are warning signs of instability and
conflict. The abduction of foreign nationals, enforced
disappearances and people fleeing desperate situations
all demonstrate the links between human rights,
humanitarian crises and internationalpeace and security.
Any attempt to achieve lasting peace and stability
demands justice and redress for victims inside and
outside the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. It is
very difficult to obtain up-to-date and comprehensive
information about human rights developments in that
country. The information we have, however, reveals a
continuing pattern of serious human rights violations,
and we see very few, if any, signs of improvement. The
Democratic People's Republic of Korea has obligations
under international law. We call on its Government to
abide by them. But the international community also
has collective responsibilities - first to protect the
country's population from the most serious violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights;
secondly to live up to the principle and norm of the
responsibility to protect; and thirdly to consider the
wider implications of the human rights situation for
regional stability.

The United Nations has taken a number of steps
recently to address the human rights situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The new
Special Rapporteur presented his report (A/71/367)
to the General Assembly in October, and during the
same month, the Secretary-General also issued his
report (A/7l/439) to that body. The Third Committee
has agreed on a draft resolution (A/C.3/71/L.23) that
will be adopted by the General Assembly next month.
In response, the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea has maintained its strong objections to country-
specific resolutions and mandates. While expressing
hope for dialogue and cooperation on human rights,
the representative of the Permanent Mission of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea has said it will

"take all appropriate measures vis-a-vis the hostile
acts against the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea that become increasingly aggressive under
the pretext of human rights".

During his 10 years in office, Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon has made extensive efforts to promote peace
and reconciliation, as well as development and respect
of human rights in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea. We must remain committed to pursuing
peaceful, diplomatic and political paths forward
towards dealing with this complex and dangerous
situation. The United Nations will continue to work
towards ensuring a genuine and lasting improvement
of the human rights and humanitarian situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. We stand ready
to help in all possible ways. That could include human
rights dialogues, visits to the country with sufficient
access to assess conditions on the ground, cooperation
initiatives and people-to-people contacts.

To conclude, let us use all the tools at our
disposal - the Human Rights Council, the General
Assembly, the Security Council and United Nations and
other international entities - to take action to build a
better future for the people of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea.

