Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman
for his briefing. I welcome the presence of the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, Australia,
Luxembourg and Malaysia at this meeting. I would also
like to thank the international team for its work and
expertise on the Dutch investigation.

We take note of the fact that the information in
the report is preliminary and that the information and
results may be subject to change if additional evidence
emerges. First, we welcome the work being done in
searching for and identifying the bodies of the victims,
and hope that the work is concluding so that the bodies
may be returned to the families for dignified burial.
However, we also note that the report indicates that the
damage to the airliner suggests that it was penetrated
from the outside by a large number of high-energy
objects. In that regard, we urge that the investigation
continue so that those responsible can be identified and
the victims compensated. It is time for justice to be
done. Since our last meeting on this matter (S/PV.7253),
in August, we note that the parties have made efforts to
ensure security at the crash site and the integrity of the
area, so that investigations pursuant to resolution 2166
(2014) can continue.

The progress made in this area contrasts with the
political and security situation in Ukraine, particularly
in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions in the east. In spite
of President Poroshenko's peace plan of 16 September,
which included a ceasefire, we are informed that the
ceasefire is continually being violated on the ground,
with hundreds of civilian and military every day.
We welcome the spirit of compromise shown by the
Ukrainian Government in the Verkhovna Rada's vote
on 16 September on a special statute giving the Donetsk
and Luhansk region more autonomy and independence,
as well as a conditional amnesty for combatants in the
eastern part of the country.

In conclusion, we urge the parties to the conflict
to act with restraint in order to seek a political solution
to the crisis, which should be achieved through direct,
inclusive dialogue that respects the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of a unified Ukraine, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations.

