Mr. Djinnit: I have the honour to introduce the
tenth report of the Secretary-General on the activities of
the United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA),
covering the period from 1 July to 31 December 2012
(S/2012/977).

Since my last briefing to the Security Council, on
11 July 2012 (see S/PV.6804), West Africa has continued
to face significant challenges to governance, peace
consolidation and conflict prevention, as illustrated by
the ongoing crisis in the Sahel, especially in Mali, as
well as in Guinea-Bissau, and the overall threat posed
by transnational organized crime and terrorism.

In Mali, in conformity with resolutions 2056 (2012)
and 2071 (2012), I have continued to work closely with
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and other stakeholders to support the
implementation of the various pillars of the Strategic
Concept adopted at the meeting of the Support and
Follow-up Group on Mali, held in Bamako on 19 October
2012.

Since the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in West Africa was issued, I have undertaken
a series of consultations in the subregion aimed at fast-
tracking the implementation of resolution 2085 (2012),
especially the political process as the preparations for
the military deployment were ongoing. I travelled to
Bamako on 20 and 21 December 2012 to encourage
the Malian authorities to strengthen the much-needed
national cohesion to move forward with the transitional
tasks, in particular with regard to the adoption of the road
map to end the transition, including through the holding
of elections, as well as to prepare for negotiations with
armed groups willing to cut off ties to terrorist groups
and to recognize the unity and territorial integrity
of Mali. Following my visit to Bamako, I supported
the efforts of the ECOWAS mediation with a View
to preparing for a subsequent round of negotiations,
initially scheduled for 21 January, in Ouagadougou.

However, the decision of Ansar Dine to renounce the
cessation of hostilities that was agreed on 4 December,
under the auspices of the ECOWAS mediation, and the
advances southward by extremist elements precipitated
the acceleration of the military track. Those advances
prompted the Malian authorities to seek the assistance of
France in order to stop the progression of the extremist
groups. The subsequent decision of France to launch a
military intervention in Mali to pave the way for the
deployment of the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali (AFISMA) was widely supported by
the international community.

All those developments have marked a turning
point that has shifted the focus to the military track. As
the hostilities continue, I call on all parties and forces to
ensure full compliance with international humanitarian
law and international human rights norms.

Since the beginning of the hostilities, I have
visited Ouagadougou and Abuja, on 13 and 14 January,
respectively, to engage with the ECOWAS mediator
and the President of the ECOWAS Commission. I also
visited Bamako, on 17 January, to meet with President
Dioncounda Traore and other Malian interlocutors.
Moreover, I also travelled to Abidjan, on 18 and
19 January, to participate in the ECOWAS Mediation
and Security Council, as well as the Extraordinary
Session of the Authority of ECOWAS Heads of State and
Government. The summit confirmed the readiness of
the Heads of State of the subregion to deploy AFISMA,
but also highlighted some of the key challenges ahead,
including in terms of logistical support, as well as
coordination and command and control, for which
the support of the United Nations and partners was
requested.

I wish to praise the commendable mobilization of
the countries of West Africa in rapidly deploying troops
on the ground and in accelerating the operationalization
of AFISMA. Following the recent ECOWAS summit,
the Chairman of the ECOWAS Authority, President
Alassane Ouattara, requested me to underscore to the
United Nations in New York the importance that West
African leaders attached to the immediate provision of
logistical and financial support by the United Nations
to facilitate the deployment of AFISMA. I hope that
their request will be considered favourably and swiftly
as the Security Council considers the letter submitted
by the Secretary-General on 19 January.

I welcome the commitment that Council members
have consistently expressed in their support for the
military and political tracks to proceed hand in hand.
As reiterated by the recent Extraordinary Session of
ECOWAS, we must ensure that the political process
is not neglected and that efforts to consolidate and
strengthen the transition process continue. It is now
essential that the Malian authorities finalize the road
map to end the transition through an inclusive and
consultative process before its adoption. I welcome the
consultations led by Prime Minister Diango Cissoko
to that effect. I encourage him to ensure that the
consultations are as inclusive as possible so as to create
a broad consensus on the way forward in fulfilling the
objectives of the transition.

Likewise, it is important that the preparations for
the holding of elections continue in earnest to ensure
that the polls can be held as soon as feasible. In addition,
it will also be necessary to eventually pursue a broad
reconciliation process that strengthens the foundations
for national cohesion in Mali. The recently deployed
United Nations team in Bamako will be fully available
to support that process, and I will personally continue
to support those efforts.

Moreover, in line with resolution 2085 (2012) and
further to the call made by the 19 January ECOWAS
summit encouraging the ECOWAS mediators to
persevere in their undertaking until the resolution of
the institutional and security crises in Mali, in the
coming weeks I will support mediation efforts that
involve engaging with non-terrorist groups and other
representatives of the northern population of Mali
towards achieving a lasting solution to the issue in
northern Mali.

I wish to stress that the situation in Mali exemplifies
the fragility and vulnerability that prevail in the whole
of the Sahel region, while at the same time the Malian
crisis has far-reaching implications for the subregion.
As developments unfold in Mali, the risks of infiltration
and destabilization are real in some countries bordering
Mali, as illustrated by the efforts of neighbouring
countries to tighten security along their borders. The
overall terrorism threat in the subregion has also been
heightened by the situation in Mali. I encourage the
efforts of Mali's neighbours and other West African
countries to step up preventive security measures.

However, we must remain mindful of the
limitations faced by the neighbouring countries of Mali
and enhance the international community's support
in the areas of border control and counter-terrorism,
among other priorities. All of the above highlights
the importance of the United Nations initiative on the
Sahel, spearheaded by Special Envoy Romano Prodi
and his team, whom my Office and the United Nations
regional team back fully.

Beyond the crises in Mali and the Sahel, the region
continues to be confronted with the threat posed by
piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea.
That phenomenon has a significant potential to impact
economic progress in both coastal and landlocked
countries, as well as to disrupt international maritime
trade routes that transit the area. Since my last briefing
to the Council, UNOWA has facilitated, together
with the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa, the convening of two meetings of the Steering
Committee on the implementation of resolution 2039
(2012), in Libreville and, more recently, in Abidjan.

I am pleased to report that it has been agreed to
hold a ministerial conference of the States of the Gulf
of Guinea in Benin, in March, to be followed by a
summit of Heads of State in Yaounde, hopefully in
April, to launch the process of finalization ofa strategic
framework for the fight against piracy and maritime
organized crime. In preparation for those meetings, the
Steering Committee has endorsed a draft memorandum
of understanding between the Economic Community of
Central African States, ECOWAS and the Commission
of the Gulf of Guinea on safety and security in the
maritime space of West and Central Africa, as well as
a draft political declaration, expected to be adopted by
the summit of Heads of State.

The tensions along the borders between Liberia
and Cote d'Ivoire and with other neighbouring
countries remain a source of concern. I welcome the
cooperation extended by Cote d'Ivoire's neighbouring
countries and encourage them to continue their efforts
to foster lasting peace in that country and in the region
as a whole. Building on the inter-mission cooperation
between the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
and the United Nations Mission in Liberia, UNOWA is
promoting the development of a subregional strategy to
address the threat of cross-border movements of armed
groups and weapons, as well as trafficking, in line with
resolutions 2000 (2011) and 2066 (2012). I am pleased to
report that the President of the ECOWAS Commission
has confirmed his agreement to our proposal for the
holding of a meeting that brings together ECOWAS,
the Mano River Union, UNOWA and other United
Nations entities to better define the process towards
the development of such a strategy. At the same time,
UNOWA, the peace missions in West Africa and the
rest of the United Nations system continue to assist the
Governments of the Mano River Basin in preserving
the hard-won achievements of the peace gains of recent
years.

The Office is also engaged in efforts to strengthen
security sector reform (SSR) in the subregion by
supporting ECOWAS'S development of a subregional
SSR strategy and by providing direct assistance to the
SSR process in Guinea. In addition to the anticipated
United Nations engagement in Mali, UNOWA is
exploring other entry points for the promotion of
security sector reform in the subregion.

The situations in Guinea-Bissau and in Mali
continue to illustrate the extent to which organized
crime has developed its activities and extended
its reach, thus threatening to seriously undermine
governance and security in the subregion. At the same
time, some positive steps to counter their impact have
been taken during the past six months. In particular, the
ECOWAS Commission, with the support of the United
Nations and that of other bilateral partners, has begun
to take encouraging steps towards the implementation
of its Regional Plan of Action to address the growing
problem ofillicit drug trafficking, organized crime and
drug abuse in West Africa.

In the light of those new dynamics, and
building on our mobilization efforts described in
the Secretary-General's report, together with our
core partners in the West Africa Coast Initiative
(WACI) * namely, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and INTERPOL - we are exploring the
possibility of convening a donors conference to garner
additional support for the ECOWAS Regional Plan
of Action and for WACI. Furthermore, I am strongly
encouraged by the increasing involvement of West
African civil society organizations in confronting this
threat. UNOWA is engaging different partners in the
subregion to further raise awareness, including the
Kofi Annan Foundation, which has taken initiatives in
that respect.

With regard to electoral processes in the subregion,
I wish to stress the need to remain vigilant to avoid
elections-related violence. I also wish to commend the
successful holding of general elections in Ghana and
Sierra Leone, and to praise the supportive role played
by ECOWAS in that regard. Their successful outcome,
including the fact that challenges were addressed though
the legally established channels, provides reason for
hope. At the same time, concerns remain with regard to
developments in other countries in West Africa where
elections are to be held in 2013, including Mali, Guinea
and Togo. It is essential that genuine dialogue among
Governments, the opposition and civil society be
pursued in a spirit of goodwill and cooperation to create
conditions for the holding of peaceful and credible
elections. On its part, UNOWA will continue its good-
offices efforts to encourage dialogue whenever needed.

UNOWA strongly believes in partnerships in
meeting its responsibilities. I am pleased to report that
UNOWA's cooperation with its regional partners, in
particular with ECOWAS and the Mano River Union, as
well as with the African Union, remains very promising.
That was illustrated by the review meeting I recently
had with the President of the ECOWAS Commission,
Mr. Kadre Desire Ouedraogo, and his colleagues in
which we considered the situation in Mali, obviously, as
well as cross-cutting issues, including drug trafficking
and organized crime, piracy and maritime organized
crime, the situation in the Mano River Union and the
need to establish a strategy for that region, counter-
terrorism and governance in the security sector.

Finally, I Wish to remind the Security Council of the
very important progress that has been achieved in the
demarcation of the boundary between Cameroon and
Nigeria through the efforts of the Cameroon-Nigeria
Mixed Commission, which have been facilitated
by the United Nations from the beginning. To date,
1,845 kilometres have been assessed and agreed, out
of an estimated total of more than 2,000 kilometres.
I wish to praise the commitment of the parties to that
process, while encouraging them to resolve the status
of the outstanding areas in order to conclude the field
assessment of the boundary. I also encourage the
Governments of Cameroon and Nigeria to increase
efforts to enhance cross-border confidence-building
measures that address the security and well-being of
the populations affected by the demarcation process.
The United Nations is supporting the formulation of
confidence-building measures with the Governments
of Cameroon and Nigeria, in order to give a human
dimension to the political process of the demarcation.

Allow me to conclude my briefing by stressing that
the situation in West Africa remains at a crossroads.
On the one hand, the leaders of the region have made
significant progress towards the promotion and
consolidation of peace, and are making decisive efforts
to address the pressing challenges to peace and security
in the region. On the other hand, the situation in Mali
and in the Sahel, combined with other cross-cutting
threats in the region, including drug trafficking and
piracy, has the potential to undermine security in West
Africa, while the root causes ofinstability in the region
are yet to be fully addressed. The continued attention
and support of the international community, in
particular the United Nations and the Security Council,
to ECOWAS leaders and countries remains essential to
achieve lasting peace, stability and development in the
subregion.

