Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for your
initiative and your presence here today to preside over
our meeting.

(spoke in Spanish)

I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Guterres; Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Mali, in his capacity as Chair of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel); Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission; and Mr. Angel Losada Fernandez,
European Union Special Representative for the Sahel,
for their briefings.

Uruguay has been very involved in the complex
problems on the African agenda and once again
underscores the commendable initiative of the
countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel to form a
multinational Joint Force to fight terrorism, in a clear
example of taking national ownership in the face of
the multiple challenges confronting the region. The
terrorist threat in the Sahel region knows no political
borders, and we should not lose sight of the fact that
the challenges that those countries are facing are
factors that affect stability at both the regional and the
international levels.

My delegation has repeatedly expressed the
view that it fully shares the observations contained
in the report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peacekeeping Operations (S/2015/446) on United
Nations peacekeeping operations, in particular that
they should not be mandated to conduct counter-
terrorism activities. With that in mind, we believe that
the multinational initiatives, such as the multinational
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), represent important tools for addressing those
issues. With the deployment of the Joint Force of the
G-5 Sahel, it will be possible to give the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) greater room to manoeuvre
in the full implementation of its mandate, which has
been an impossible task to date owing to the multiple
operational challenges that the Mission faces. With
adequate coordination at the level of their command
structures, the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel and
MINUSMA will be able to complement each other and
improve their effectiveness.

With regard to MINUSMA's mandate, I would
like once again to express a more general opinion. I
believe that it is essential that deployed peacekeepers
be adequately equipped, trained and prepared to carry
out all the tasks set forth in their mission's mandate.
Bearing that in mind, the national restrictions - the
so-called caveats - whether they are declared or, even
worse, not declared, such as the absence of effective
command and control, the refusal to obey orders, failure
to respond to attacks against civilians, or inadequate
equipment, cannot be tolerated, since they negatively
affect shared responsibility for effective fulfilment
of mandates.

With regard to the deployment of the Joint Force,
we believe that it is necessary for the international
community to lend its support and stand shoulder to
shoulder with the G-5 Sahel countries in their initiative
to support such regional efforts. It would be dishonest
to say that such challenges should be borne only by
the countries of the Sahel region, which is why the
support of the international community is, we believe,
essential and self-evident. Accordingly, we commend
the generous contributions made by international
partners to date. At the same time, we underscore
that it is important to continue providing support to
the Joint Force until it reaches its full and sustained
operational level.

Uruguay fully shares the Secretary-General's view
that the Security Council should provide ambitious
support to the Joint Force through the support module
recommended by the Security Council. We believe that
the international community must undertake a strong
commitment to that end so that positive and lasting
results can be achieved as quickly as possible.

Regardless of the way in which the United Nations
provides support for the ramping-up of the Joint Force,
Uruguay believes that it will be essential to have a
monitoring, supervision and accountability mechanism
to deal with compliance with international human rights
standards and humanitarian law. All security activities,
including those in the fight against terrorism, will have
to be carried out in strict adherence with standards
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. Similarly, appropriate guarantees of
due process will have to be provided to the victims of
such violations.

I would also like to draw attention to the
multiplicity of factors that aggravate the crisis in
the Sahel region, which are not limited solely to the
terrorist threat or the absence of State control over
the full territory of the countries in question. As the
members of the Council were able to see during their
recent mission to Mali, Mauritania and Burkina Faso,
as well as during their visit last March to the Niger
and Chad, the difficulties encountered encompass a
very broad range of challenges that are intrinsically
related to the development of the region. Terrorism
and trafficking networks operating in the region are
paralysing Governments and societies and are delaying
the development of these five countries.

Our assessment would appear simplistic if we
focused on security as the main and sole priority in the
Sahel region. Taking initiatives to improve security is
important in order to pave the way for us to implement
policies on development, the promotion of the rule of law,
institution- and capacity-building, and strengthening
the resilience of the various communities in the Sahel
region. Such combined efforts will be precisely those
that lead to the sustainable peace that will enable the
G-5 Sahel countries to focus on their political stability
and their economic and social progress.

