Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for
his useful briefing on recent developments in Mali,
particularly in the wake of the presidential elections
held in July.

Since Ambassador Issa Konfourou, Permanent
Representative of Mali, is here with us today, I take
this opportunity to congratulate President Ibrahim
Boubacar Keita on his re-election as Mali's Head of
State. I also express my country's satisfaction regarding
the fact that the electoral process was transparent and
credible, and commend the efforts of the Government
and all political stakeholders, as well as international
partners, to that end.

I would like to address three aspects of the subject
under discussion today.

First, with respect to the political situation, we
have closely followed recent political developments
in Mali and also listened to the address delivered by
the President of the Republic of Mali to the General
Assembly during the general debate last month (see A/73/PV.8), in which he presented his Government's
priorities for the upcoming period, including its focus
on the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali and the serious steps taken by
his Government in that regard. Kuwait welcomes this
positive development.

During the past few months we have witnessed the
restoration of Government authority in northern and
central Mali, and we also note that the Government
has prepared a national strategy for security sector
reform. We further commend the efforts of Prime
Minister Maiga to achieve stability. He recently visited
central Mali, a region that is suffering from instability
and an absence of State authority. He is also working
to expedite the implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme.

We welcomed the signing last Monday of the pact
for peace between the United Nations, the Government,
the Platform Platform coalition of armed groups and the
Coordination des mouvements de l'Azawad, renewing
the commitment of all parties to the implementation of
the 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation, in
implemention of paragraph 5 of resolution 2423 (2018).
We want to emphasize the important role played by
the international mediation team, under the leadership
of Algeria, in monitoring developments and making
tangible progress.

With regard to the presidential elections held in
July, we commend the efforts of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) and Special Representative
Annadif for their efforts during and after the election
process, including the provision of technical, logistical
and security support with a view to reducing tensions
between the various parties. We urge everyone to
respect the election results and prepare for the upcoming
parliamentary elections, which were postponed until
next year with the approval of all stakeholders. We
hope that the postponement will allow enough time
to implement the necessary reforms in the country,
pursuant to the Peace and Reconciliation Agreement,
and with the participation of all political parties.

Secondly, concerning the security and humanitarian
situations, we are still concerned about the unstable
security situation in some regions of Mali. The threats
posed by terrorist groups still exist, and we have seen
their impact on the most recent electoral process. We
value the efforts of the Malian forces and MINUSMA to
contain those threats and prevent the security situation
from deteriorating further. However, the terrorist
groups are not only a threat to all military forces, but
are increasingly threateningcivilians. We deeply regret
the killing of 287 civilians during the reporting period.
Terrorist threats also led to the displacement of large
numbers of Malians. The number of those in need of
humanitarian aid amounts to nearly 5.2 million people.
We are also concerned about the increasing threats
targeting humanitarian workers, who are undertaking
efforts to alleviate the suffering of the Malian people.

We have seen an increase in the use of improvised
explosive devices in 2018, rising to almost 130
incidents. However, the number of related casualties
has decreased. We apreciate the efforts of MINUSMA
in training and awareness-raising, and we encourage
it to pursue those efforts in the future. We also
underscore the importance of ensuring coordination
among the different active forces in Mali. We commend
the continuous support of MINUSMA to the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Joint Force, which
plays an essential role in combating the threats in the
Sahel region. We look forward to strengthening it to
the fullest.
Thirdly and lastly, with regard to the next steps,
we are aware that the Malian Government is in need of
time and resources to achieve security and stability and
restore the rule oflaw in Mali. After the latest presidential
elections and the reappointment of Prime Minister
Maiga, who has facilitated progress since the beginning
of his term, we look forward to a more focused approach
by the Government to ensure the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Kuwait
stands ready to cooperate with all Council members to
take the necessary measures in order to facilitate that
process. We urge all parties to build on the progress
attained so far.

Achieving sustainable development is essential
to the realization of peace and stability in Mali and
the region. It is also important to improve economic
conditions, because that would give Malians greater hope
for job opportunities and a better future. We welcome
the new strategic framework of the Government, which
is based on achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals and the vision for Mali 2040.

