Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. We would also like to express our appreciation
to you for organizing today's meeting on this important
subject.

Terrorism today constitutes the most pressing
challenge to international peace and security. It is a
scourge that undermines peace, democracy and freedom
and that endangers the foundations of democratic
societies. It is a global threat that recognizes no border,
nationality, ethnicity or religion. There is hardly
any region of the world that has not been scarred by
terrorism.

My own country, India, has faced the scourge of
terrorism for over two-and-a-half decades. Indeed,
our entire region, South Asia, has been wracked
by the activities of the biggest terrorist actors in the
world, be they Al-Qaida, Lashkar e Toiba, Jamaat-ud-
Dawa, elements of the Taliban and others. Terrorism,
extremism and radicalization continue to pose a serious
challenge to peace, progress and prosperity in the
region.

Over the years, the visible landscape of
international terrorism has vastly changed. In our
globalized world, terrorists are also globalized in their
outreach and activities. They recruit in one country,
raise funds in another and operate in others and are
waging an asymmetric warfare against the international
community.

The veritable nexus of terrorists with transnational
organized crime and drug and arms trafficking is now
well established. Terrorist financing, illicit money
laundering, drug trafficking, piracy and the illicit arms
trade remain intertwined in a complex web of toxic
relationships. There is also the growing risk of weapons
of mass destruction of different kinds falling into the
hands of terrorists. The misuse of cyberspace and
related technologies by terrorists and their supporters
is also a matter of increasing concern.

India condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. No cause or grievance canjustify taking
recourse to terrorism. India has been at the forefront of
global counter-terrorism efforts and is part of all major
initiatives against international terrorism, including the
Financial Action Task Force.

I had the privilege to chair the Counter-Terrorism
Committee during the past two years. We endeavoured
to provide renewed momentum to global counter-
terrorism efforts and to promote a culture of zero
tolerance towards terrorism.

During that period, three special meetings of the

Committee were held, with the participation of the

wider United Nations membership and international,

regional and subregional organizations. The Committee

held a special meeting in New York in September 2011

to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption

of resolution 1373 (2001) and the establishment of the

Committee, and at that meeting it unanimously endorsed

a zero-tolerance approach towards terrorism in its
outcome document. The Committee organized another
special meeting in New York last November that focused
on prevention and suppression of terrorist financing,
with the participation of expert bodies 4 the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF), FATF-style regional bodies,
the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
The meeting was immensely helpful in putting a
spotlight on the issue of terrorist financing, which lies
at the heart of resolution 1373 (2001).

We fully support all efforts that strengthen
international and regional cooperation and, most
importantly, help ensure the effective implementation
of relevant Security Council resolutions, including
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). We also support the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy in an integrated manner in all its
four pillars. We believe that apart from law enforcement
measures, the preventive aspect is equally important.
Development, education, social integration, tolerance,
the rule of law and respect for human rights are the
integral components of such an approach.

The United Nations has played a seminal role in
combating terrorism, facilitating technical assistance
and capacity-building for Member States. Success in the
fight against terrorism goes hand in hand with progress
in strengthening counter-terrorism cooperation and the
exchange of information at the international, regional
and subregional levels. A large number of terrorist plots
can be neutralized by the sharing of information and
effective international cooperation.

We have witnessed important progress at the
international and regional levels, including the recently
established Global Counter-Terrorism Forum. We
will need a scaling-up of some of the concrete ideas
emerging from those processes.

Despite the progress achieved so far, the efforts
of the international community continue to face many
challenges. Foremost is the need to remove the moral
and legal ambiguities that allow terrorists to gain
succour and legitimacy. Progress under mutual legal
assistance and extradition cases is still sketchy and is
yet to be fully mainstreamed as part of regional and
international counter-terrorism efforts. We need to
strengthen enforcement efforts to destroy terrorists'
safe havens, financial flows and support networks.
The mechanisms that have been developed to pool
the resources and the knowledge of the international
community need to be augmented and made more
effective.

India has long held the beliefthat the United Nations
also needs to strengthen the normative framework for
its counter-terrorism strategy through the adoption of a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
I could not agree more with my friend Gert Rosenthal,
Permanent Representative of Guatemala, on his
emphasis earlier today on the need for such a convention
and the added value through its early adoption. I can
only echo the Secretary-General's words earlier today
that the time has come for a comprehensive convention
on international terrorism to be adopted.

The fight against terrorism has to be unrelenting and
fought across all fronts. The international community
cannot afford selective approaches in dealing with
terrorist groups or in dismantling the infrastructure of
terrorism. Terrorism is a Frankenstein monster. Resort
to the use of terrorism as an instrument of State policy
is short-sighted. Indeed, those who have taken recourse
to it have invariably themselves suffered immensely
from it, proving the age-old dictum that those who live
by the sword will also perish by it.

