Mr. Somdah (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
On behalf of my delegation, allow me first of all to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your country's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
We would also like to thank you for convening this
debate on the impact of transnational organized crime
on peace, security and stability in West Africa and the
Sahel region. I would also like to take this opportunity
to congratulate the delegation of South Africa for the
manner in which it carried out the Council's work
during the month of January. I welcome the
participation and important statements by the
Secretary-General and the other participants in this
debate.

The topic of this debate - which is
complementary to, and takes further, the consultations
of the Council during January on the activities of the
United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) and
the report (see S/2012/42) of the assessment mission of
the impact of the Libyan crisis on the Sahel region -
provides an opportunity to comprehensively and
holistically review the security issues facing the States
of the region. The issues of insecurity in the Sahel, as
well as an upsurge in drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime in West Africa have become potential
sources of insecurity and instability for States of the
region, as well as for the international community as a
whole.

Those issues are compounded by a food crisis in
the Sahel region and by piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
They clearly demonstrate the interlinkages between
security and development, in particular at a time when
people's fundamental needs have become increasingly
urgent. At a time when the States of the region are
obliged to channel their energies into priorities in
development, security issues jeopardize the progress
made and endanger State institutions, peace and
security.

Along those lines, the agenda of the fortieth
Summit of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) was essentially devoted to security
issues in the subregion, in particular to insecurity in the
Sahel and to the spike in piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
The interaction between drug trafficking and related
criminal activities - such as the funding of conflicts,
transnational organized crime, illicit trafficking in

weapons and money laundering - further weaken
those regions, in which a number of States are still
emerging from conflict or are currently experiencing
crises.

Mindful of the impact of such transnational
activity on security and development, Burkina Faso
convened in 2009, for the first time, a thematic debate
on drug trafficking and the threat to international peace
and security. It is both urgent and important that the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, continue to take action to provide
appropriate responses to those issues.

It is a welcome fact that, during its consultations
on 26 January, the Security Council took up the issue
of the exacerbation of the security situation in the
Sahel region in the aftermath of the Libyan crisis, and
that it underscored, in so doing, the need for a
coordinated approach that would bring together all
stakeholders, including the United Nations.

My delegation supports that approach and
remains convinced that only heightened cooperation at
the subregional, regional and international levels will
make it possible to tackle criminal and terrorist
activities, which threaten the stability and security of
the States of the Sahel and West Africa. We commend
and encourage the activities of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL, the West
Africa Coast Initiative and the relevant departments of
the Secretariat in support of the efforts of the States of
the region, in particular with respect to implementing
the ECOWAS action plan for combating drug
trafficking.

We believe that the recommendations contained
in the report of the inter-agency mission have already
addressed some concerns, in particular with regard to
United Nations capacity-building support to Member
States and subregional and regional mechanisms for
cooperation, as well as with regard to the
implementation of strategies and programmes that
address the root causes for upswings in transnational
organized crime in those two regions. It is primarily
the responsibility of the heads of State of the region to
enhance their cooperation at all levels. But it is also the
responsibility of the international community, in
particular that of the Security Council, to support State
efforts to combat such indiscriminate threats. We
therefore fervently hope that the appeal launched by
ECOWAS during its fortieth Summit will receive
effective and prompt support from the international
community, especially from the United Nations.

For its part, Burkina Faso is an active participant
in the activities and initiatives undertaken regionally
and subregionally in order to combat criminal and
terrorist activities, in particular those that pertain to
drug trafficking in West Africa, as well as the regional
legal cooperation platform that brings together three
other countries, namely, Mali, Mauritania and Niger.
Burkina Faso is also prepared to cooperate
subregionally in the framework of the joint strategy for
counter-terrorism.

We must not overlook the impact of the grave
food crisis on the countries of the Sahel region. While
we welcome the solidarity already demonstrated by
several partners, agencies and countries following the
urgent appeal for humanitarian assistance launched by
several countries of the region, we nevertheless
encourage the international community to support the
efforts of affected countries.

In conclusion, we call upon the international
community to become part of a holistic and
comprehensive approach in order to provide adequate
solutions to the security issues in the Sahel region and
in West Africa, and to understand that they are
everyone's responsibility. The conclusions of this
debate should go along these lines.

