Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): I am grateful for this
opportunity to address the Security Council. I would
like start by thanking Mr. Ian Martin for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in Timor-
Leste. Mr. Martin is an old friend of Timor-Leste, and
it is good to see him once again. I also take this
opportunity to commend Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
his staff for their work and for the sacrifices they have
made throughout this difficult period. I assure them of
our willingness to continue to cooperate closely with
the United Nations on the ground and to support the
United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) and
United Nations agencies in Timor-Leste.

Portugal concurs with the statement which the
representative of Austria will soon make on behalf of
the European Union. In my national capacity, I wish to
make the following remarks.

When I addressed the Security Council at its
public meeting of 5 May (see S/PV.5432), I underlined
that Timor-Leste had been an important responsibility
and a very large investment by the international
community and the United Nations. I also said that we
should do everything in our power to secure that
investment and strengthen the fragile peace and
democracy in Timor-Leste. In the light of recent events
and as stated by the Secretary-General, we need to
carefully assess the lessons of the current unrest to see
whether we have withdrawn the United Nations
peacekeeping forces too soon. Like Mr. Ian Martin, we
think also that the T imorese need to be assured that the
United Nations will be with them in the present and in
the future.

A Portuguese gendarmerie force totalling 127
personnel arrived in Dili on Saturday, 3 June. In
accordance with the memorandum of understanding
signed between the Governments of Portugal and
Timor-Leste on 25 May 2006, this paramilitary police
force is to operate in Dili and its surroundings, under
the authority of President Xanana Gusmao and Prime
Minister Mari Alkatiri, and with Portuguese
operational command. It will also provide, in the
future, assistance and training to the Rapid Intervention
Unit of the Timor-Leste police. In an attempt to
improve cooperation and coordination between forces
on the ground, an interim arrangement has been agreed
upon regarding operations by the Portuguese
gendarmerie force and interaction with the other
international forces.

The international forces were deployed to assist a
sovereign country, on the basis of bilateral
arrangements and with the support of the Security
Council. However, the current turmoil shows the need
for renewed long-term involvement by the United
Nations in Timor-Leste. In defining the future mandate
of the United Nations presence in Timor-Leste, we
should first and foremost listen to the views of the
Timorese, as we just did. We should respect Timorese
ownership, since the Timor-Leste of today is not the
Timor-Leste of 1999. Since 20 May 2002, Timor-Leste
has been an independent, sovereign country. As
mentioned by the Secretary-General in his most recent
reports, Timor-Leste has made impressive progress in
many areas of governance and institution-building,
with the support of UNOTIL and bilateral and
multilateral partners.

Timor-Leste needs our help. Timor-Leste is not a
failed State. We are dealing with a deep political crisis
which is having very serious security and humanitarian
repercussions. That crisis is far from over. Also,
thousands of weapons are missing and could be used in
further actions of violent destabilization throughout the
country.
Reconciliation will be a long and difficult
process, but it is a first, much-needed, step for

S/l'V.5457

 

Timorese society to take. Political solutions can then
be sought, and hopefully found, by the Timorese
themselves. The Timorese should remain the masters of
their choices regarding the governance of their own
country. The support of Portugal for Timor-Leste will
continue to be guided by that fundamental principle.
There is a clear need for continued multilateral and
bilateral assistance and support. But, as in any
sovereign and independent State, in the end it will be
up to the Timorese to decide, in accordance with their
constitutional and democratic system, on issues like
justice, the nature and role of the armed forces and the
police, economic governance, administration and so
on.

Timor-Leste is a child of the United Nations. It
therefore needs the universality and impartiality of the
United Nations, which must once again take a leading
role. In our View, that new mission should be able to
facilitate political dialogue and reconciliation, restore
and maintain security and ensure that the 2007
elections will be peaceful, free and fair. That is what
the Timorese expect from us, and therefore that should
be our mission as soon as possible. In that regard, I can
assure you and members of the Council, Madam
President, that Portugal stands ready to contribute with
forces to serve under United Nations command and
control.

Justice is a key element for long-lasting political
reconciliation. It is important to establish the truth
regarding recent violence, namely, that which occurred
on 28 April and 25 May. We welcome the request for a
special inquiry commission as outlined in the letter of
Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta to the Secretary-
General of 9 June 2006. We especially welcome the
fact that all relevant actors consider that a necessary
step to reach a settlement and uphold the rule of law.

We are also concerned by the recent attacks on
and looting of the Ministry of Justice, the General
Prosecutor's office and the records of the Serious
Crimes Unit, particularly the records regarding the
crimes of 1999. It is reassuring to know that the United
Nations has backup copies of those records. Those sad
events underline the need to ensure that all those
responsible for the serious crimes committed in Timor-
Leste are held accountable, so as to respond to the
legitimate desire for justice of all those affected by the
violence. We therefore continue to look forward to the
report of the Secretary-General outlining a legally
sound and feasible approach to the question of
accountability in Timor-Leste.

Portugal recalls the responsibility of the
international community and of the Security Council in
relation to Timor-Leste. Portugal will remain
committed to the consolidation of peace, democracy
and full political independence of Timor-Leste.

