The President: I should like to inform the Council
that l have received letters from the representatives of
Angola, Brazil, Lesotho, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique,
Namibia, Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe, South Africa,
the United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Van-Dunem
"Mbinda" (Angola) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Amorim (Brazil), Mr. Mochochoko (Lesotho), Mr.
Chimimba (Malawi), Mr. Wan Chat Kwong
(Mauritius), Mr. Dos Santos (Mozambique), Mr.
Andjaba (Namibia), Mr. Catarina (Portugal), Mr.
Ferreira (Sao Tome and Principe), Mr. Jele (South Africa), Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of
Tanzania), Mr. Kasanda (Zambia) and Mr.
Mapuranga (Zimbabwe) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III),
document S/ 1996/ 1000. Members of the Council also have
before them document S/ 1996/ 1026, which contains the text
of a draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations, on the basis of the draft resolution
submitted by Portugal, the Russian Federation and the
United States of America.
Members of the Council have received photocopies
of the letter dated 11 December 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/l996/1029.

The first speaker is the Permanent Representative of
Angola, on whom I now call.


