Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I would like to
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed; the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Zeid Ra'ad
A1 Hussein; and the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Kyung-wha Kang for their
briefings. We welcome the update on the first round
of talks in Switzerland, as well as the forthright nature
of the briefings on the human rights and humanitarian
situations in Yemen.

All of us here would have wished to see greater
progress made in the past week's talks. Even so, it is
welcome that the parties have found some important
areas of agreement and that there is a commitment to
resuming talks in mid-January. It is vital that both sides
remain committed and engaged, without preconditions,
to achieving a negotiated solution to the crisis, and to
working to ensure progress towards that goal at the next
round of talks. We agree with the Special Envoy that
the Security Council must support his efforts. We call
on all sides to engage meaningfully. Those who may
seek to undermine the talks or the ceasefire should
know that there will be consequences.

The violations of the temporary ceasefire on both
sides are very disappointing. We commend, however,
the efforts of humanitarian agencies to reach those
in need during the window provided. It is important
now that the ceasefire be extended and respected,
both to facilitate further humanitarian access and to
provide the resumed talks with the best prospects for
success. Given the fragmented nature of the forces on
the ground, we call on all sides to exercise restraint in
responding to provocations in the weeks ahead in order
to give the ceasefire a chance to take hold.

The situation in Yemen has deteriorated very
seriously during 2015. A country that was already
seriously impoverished has now suffered egregiously
due to serial failures in its leadership and sectarianism.
The longer this conflict continues, the more the Yemeni
people suffer, and the greater the threat to the stability
and security of neighbouring countries. It is in the
interests of all sides in the conflict to end the fighting
and instability as soon as possible and work towards
an inclusive and sustainable political solution. Only
then can the work of the political transition resume and
the country's leadership begin to address the multitude
of political, security, economic and humanitarian
challenges that await.

Hostilities in and around civilian areas, including
the use of heavy weapons and cluster munitions, as
well as air strikes and anti-aircraft fire, have inflicted
an unacceptably high toll on the civilian population.
Weapons flows from Yemen into Somalia and elsewhere
threaten regional stability. There is mounting evidence
that extremist groups, such as the Yemeni incarnations
ofAl-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
are the primary beneficiaries of continued instability
and conflict. Neither Yemen nor its neighbours can
afford this conflict.

Efforts to prevent the flow of arms into the country
continue to inhibit access for desperately needed
imported goods. New Zealand supports, both politically
and materially, the development of the United Nations
Verification and Inspection Mechanism, and hopes that
with its implementation the passage of commercial
supplies into Yemen will be significantly improved.
We are very encouraged that the parties have agreed
to remove barriers to the safe, rapid and unhindered
access of humanitarian supplies to all parts of Yemen.
These commitments must be honoured by all sides.

As we have heard, serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law have
been committed. To avoid deepening the divisions
within Yemeni society, it is essential that the national
commission of inquiry independently and thoroughly
investigate violations by all sides and share its findings
with the international community. Against that
background, the focused discussion of the Security
Council today is significant. Since the beginning of
its political transition in 2011, the United Nations and
the Security Council have played a significant political
role in Yemen. And since April this year, resolution
2216 (2015) has been prominent in the Yemeni political
discourse.

Ultimately, there will have to be an inclusive solution
that provides for broad participation in governance
arrangements. Any agreement will necessarily have
challenging and complicated security arrangements
that provide for the disarmament of armed groups and
the re-establishment of State authority. The Council
must be ready to support such efforts with the same
commitment we have been able demonstrate on other
regional issues.

