Mr. McKell (United Kingdom): Ithank Ms. Bensouda
for her report and for the briefing today. Sadly, we have
not seen an improvement in the situation in Darfur since
she last addressed the Council in June (see S/PV.6974).
The situation in Darfur remains a serious concern. Over
the past six months, we have continued to see heavy
intercommunal fighting and sporadic clashes between
Government and rebel forces, and we have received
reports of continued aerial strikes by the Government
of the Sudan. It has been reported that over 460,000
individuals have been newly displaced between January
and November of this year.

Humanitarian aid workers and peacekeepers
continue to be attacked throughout Darfur. In
particular, we would like to take this opportunity
to condemn the attack on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
on 24 November, which resulted in the death of one
Rwandan peacekeeper, bringing the total killed in the
past year to 13. Many others were injured in that attack,
and we wish them a speedy and full recovery. Such
attacks against UNAMID are unacceptable. We hope
that the ongoing review of the Mission will address the
challenges facing UNAMID. We call on all parties to
ensure that the Mission is granted full and unfettered
access across Darfur.

We thank the Prosecutor for her updates on the
trial of Abdallah Banda and on the termination of

proceedings against Saleh Jerbo following reports of
his death.

It remains a matter of deep concern, however, that
the Government of the Sudan continues to frustrate the
pursuit of justice for the people of Darfur by shielding
all of the others currently indicted by the International

Criminal Court (ICC). The Government of the Sudan
has a clear and indisputable obligation to cooperate
with the Court pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). It
has consistently and repeatedly failed to do so. We call
once again on the Government of the Sudan to meet its
obligations and to cooperate with the ICC, including
with respect to the enforcement of the five separate
arrest warrants issued by the Court.

During the reporting period, we once again saw
some ICC States parties regrettably fail to comply
with their obligations under the Rome Statute by not
implementing the arrest warrants when visited by
someone indicted by the Court. The United Kingdom
urges all ICC States parties to meet their obligations
under the Rome Statute with respect to the travel of
fugitives from the Court.

The references in the report to crimes of sexual
violence in Darfur are disturbing. We are grateful to
the Office of the Prosecutor for its ongoing work in that
regard. The United Kingdom believes that there is more
that can and must be done to combat sexual violence
and address the culture of impunity that has been
allowed to develop for such crimes. That culture must
be replaced with one of accountability. We encourage
all States to cooperate with the Court so as to ensure
that the alleged perpetrators of those and other serious
crimes of concern against the people or Darfur are held
accountable for their actions.

In a presidential statement in February this year
(S/PRST/2013/2), the Council reiterated its previous
call for States to cooperate with Courts and Tribunals,
and expressed its commitment to an effective follow-up
to Council decisions in that regard. It is now high time
that the Council did so by looking urgently at what it
can do to assist the Court so that it can complete the
task we gave it when we referred the situation in Darfur
to the Court over eight years ago.

