Mr. J eremie (Serbia): I would just like very
briefly to make a clarification about the Court's ruling.
A few members of the Council have said today
that the advisory opinion of the Court stated that the
unilateral declaration of independence was in
accordance with international law. That was not
actually the case. If one reads the Court's findings,
they very clearly say that the declaration of
independence did not violate international law. In legal
terms, that is very different from being in accordance.

But with regard to remarks by some Member
States that Kosovo is a unique, sui generis case, I
would like to draw the attention of the Council to the
fact that the Court elaborated in its conclusions on the
position that Kosovo is a sui generic case, which was
put forth by some States in the oral proceedings before
the Court. In its conclusions, the Court did not find any
support for that. Kosovo is therefore not a unique case.

Of course, Serbia deeply respects the
International Court of Justice and embraces everything
that it says. The Court said that the text of the
declaration of independence itself did not violate
international law - which Serbia accepts - and so,
according to the Kosovo template, neither would
anybody else's declaration of independence that may
be made in the future. The question is whether that gets
one recognition and statehood. That is a question that I
think needs to be addressed by Member States.

I would like to remind the Council that never in
the history of the United Nations has a territory
achieved statehood by seceding from a parent State that
did not give its consent at the end of the process. It is
up to us to decide whether the time has come for that to
happen for the first time in history. Serbia believes that
is not the case.

I want to underline once again that we are totally
committed to peace, dialogue and resolving all
outstanding issues - from small ones to big ones -
through peaceful dialogue. We believe in the European
future of the entire Western Balkans. We welcome the
appeal by European Union member States to the parties
to look to the future. Serbia is ready to look to the
future. Serbia wants to work with the international
community so that this issue is resolved through
peaceful dialogue. I just wanted to point out certain
facts with regard to the International Court of Justice
opinion.

