Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking ourbriefers for their statements,
and in particular by commending Mr. Michael
Keating for his leadership, clear mindedness and the
perseverance he demonstrated as Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia for nearly three
years. I also welcome the presence of the Executive
Director ofUN-Women at today's meeting. Ijoin others
in welcoming the new Permanent Representative of
Ethiopia, Ambassador Taye Atske Sellassie Amde.

The stability and security of Somalia remains
a priority for France. We are all aware of what is at
stake concerning regional security and, more broadly,
successfully combating terrorism at the international
level. In that context, France attaches particular
importance to the gradual transition of the country's
security responsibility to the Somali security forces,
which must be part of a clear and precise timetable
and adhere to the national security architecture . At
the high-level security meeting on Somalia in May, we
welcomed the finalization of the transition plan of the
Somali Federal Government. It is now essential that
progress be made in the implementation of the plan in the
pilot areas. We welcome the recent transfer of security
responsibility for the Mogadishu stadium, which must
enjoy the necessary security guarantees. Needless to
say, the transition will succeed only if the national
security architecture becomes a reality in Somalia. Its
implementation must be stepped up, especially with
regard to the various areas highlighted in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/800), including the
integration of regional forces into national security
forces, the delineation of responsibilities between the
various federal and regional security services and
defining the chain of command.

The second key element to ensuring the transition's
success is the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), which continues to play a primary role in
Somalia's security, given the persistent threat posed
by Al-Shabaab, and, in that regard, we pay tribute to
the Mission's troop-contributing countries. We know
that, in order for it to succeed, AMISOM. must be
reconfigured to support the Somali transition plan in
accordance with the request of the Security Council via
resolution 2431 (2018), adopted in July. Although the
Council decided to postpone reducing the AMISOM
troop ceiling until February 2019, continuing the
gradual, organized and conditioned drawdown of
AMISOM. remains important. It is also essential to
abide by the new deadlines pursuant to resolution 2431
(2018). I would mention in particular the AMISOM
operational readiness assessment and the technical
evaluation, which should review the status of the
Mission's reconfiguration.

Clearly, AMISOM. must continue to be supported
throughout the transition. Nevertheless, France believe
that the European Union can no longer continue to
finance the bonuses of AMISOM. soldiers alone. As
the reports of the Special Envoys of the United Nations
and the African Union on funding AMISOM. point
out, it is now essential that new partners contribute
to financing the Mission. More generally, in keeping
with remarks made earlier, all partners in Somalia must
improve coordination, as was underlined at the Somalia
Partnership Forum held in Brussels in July.

The third, and most basic, key to success involves
the country's political and economic integration and
unification. Somalia must face up to major challenges,
such as deepening federalism, the constitutional
review, the holding of the 2020-2021 elections,
based on the one-person-one model, and pursuing an
economic reform agenda. In that regard, we welcomed
the outcome of the meeting of the National Security
Council held in Baidoa in June, which marked the
resumption of discussions between the Somali Federal
Government and the federal member states. We are,
however, concerned about the communique issued
on 8 September by the Presidents of the five federal
member states announcing the suspension of talks with
Mogadishu. We therefore call on all Somali actors to
resume their dialogue around crucial issues as soon as
possible, including devising the electoral model and
sharing revenue generated by natural resources. We
also call for the cessation of all outside interference in
the internal affairs of Somalia.

Overall, concerning the political process, in
keeping with what Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka said earlier, I
should like to stress the importance that France attaches
to greater women's participation. As we know, the
full and effective participation of women in political
processes is a prerequisite for ensuring lasting peace
and reconciliation.

I thank Michael Keating for having pointed out that
Somalia is an example of a situation of vulnerability
to climate events. The Security Council must keep that
reality in mind. With respect to that issue and to the
participation of women, I agree with the suggestion
made by the Permanent Representative of Sweden that
it could be useful for the Council to have access to
analytical datat on these conflict-related factors.

I conclude by welcoming recent regional
developments, such as last week's signing of a
cooperation agreement between Somalia, Ethiopia
and Eritrea, and the holding of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development summit yesterday, marked
by the return of Eritrea and the consultations held
upstream between the Djiboutian and Eritrean
authorities. These developments open real prospects for
the stabilization of the entire Horn of Africa and, we
hope, for Somalia too.

