President Tadie (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English text furnished by the delegation): I would like
to thank the Council on behalf of the Republic of
Serbia for the opportunity once again to present to it
the position of my country on the need to resolve the
future status of Kosovo and Metohija through
compromise. All participants in that process must
approach this problem carefully and with a great
degree of responsibility.

In the past two years, the Republic of Serbia has
taken part in the negotiations on the future status of its
southern province in a constructive way. We have put
forward a number of proposals that favour the greatest
possible autonomy as the best solution for Kosovo and
Metohija. Substantial autonomy has figured in various
models as a functioning, sustainable and successful
solution. It has been proved that such solutions are in
accordance with international law and that they are the
only way to arrive at a compromise in conflicts similar
to the Kosovo conflict.

It is for that reason that the Belgrade negotiating
team has measured its proposals for substantial
autonomy against the manner in which China has
resolved the question of Hong Kong and Macau and
Finland has resolved the status of the Aaland Islands.
Subsequent analysis has corroborated arguments
maintaining that a solution to the future status of
Kosovo and Metohija can be similarly found. I believe
that it is in the general interest that we examine all the
possibilities and lessons. We can find something new in
each example that will help us open the door to a
situation on which we will all agree. The history of
Europe in the past 50 years is rife with unique
examples that demonstrate how sovereignty can be
harmonized with self-government.
08-2088]

The fact is that the Serbian negotiating team has
invested enormous efforts in reaching a compromise.
Unfortunately, the negotiations conducted under the
auspices of the international mediating troika failed to
yield results. It is also a fact that the Pristina side has
refused to talk about the future status of Kosovo, which
had been defined as a basic topic for negotiations
beforehand, and tried instead, unsuccessfully, to
impose negotiations on relations between independent
States. That obviously was prevarication vis-a-vis a
clearly set goal of the negotiations.

The only argument that the other side put forward
was that Slobodan Milosevic and his regime were the
party guilty for the situation in Kosovo. It also alleged
that, because of the mistakes of the former regime,
Kosovo deserved independence. Let me therefore
remind the Council that Serbia and its people
experienced very trying times in the last 10 years of the
twentieth century due to the tragic mistakes of the past
regime. Sanctions, conflict, killings, poverty, fear and
uncertainty were the daily way of life of the Citizens of
Serbia for more than a decade.

The consequences of a bad and irresponsible
policy culminated in the unjust punishment of Serbia
during three months of bombing in the spring of 1999.
Indeed, citizens were punished while the regime went
soot-free. That is, until the people of Serbia threw it
out, in October 2000, in defence of their will
democratically expressed in elections. Serbia has now
been a democratic and peaceful country for eight years
and has negotiated hard and offered solutions and
compromises. There exists no justifiable reason or
legal argument why Serbia and its people should be
unjustly punished again because of a flawed policy ofa
bad regime almost a decade ago.

If the community of European nations was
created 50 years ago on the basis of a project to
establish lasting peace and solve all problems through
agreement, it is necessary that that great civilizational
value and principle also take root in the Balkans today.
We must make every effort to solve the
misunderstandings and conflicts in our part of Europe
peacefully and by agreement alone, not by making
unilateral moves. Unilateral recognition of Kosovo's
independence would no doubt be a precedent. No one
has the right to destabilize Serbia and the Balkans
through hasty and unilateral decisions, which would
also have unforeseeable consequences for other regions
fraught with problems related to ethnic separatism. On
08-20881

a number of occasions, we have made clear our
position that a solution must be in accordance with
international law, that it must be a result of
compromise, that it must be acceptable to both sides
and that it must bring about long-term peace and
prosperity for all of my country's citizens and for the
region.

The vision and methods that we have learned
from the history of Europe since 1945 make it possible
for us to aspire to a future in which we solve problems
patiently and by agreement, for the benefit of all. We
must bear in mind that the common goal of all the
peoples of our region is to find solutions that will
prepare us for a future in the European Union.

We therefore believe that additional efforts are
needed in order to arrive at a mutually acceptable
solution so as to ensure, in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999), substantial and functioning self-
government that would guarantee all rights to the
Kosovo Albanians. Such a solution is possible and
attainable.

The Security Council can count on Serbia's entire
willingness to take part in a constructive and
responsible manner in resumed negotiations, which
could be held in Belgrade, Pristina or anywhere else in
the world and in any form that this United Nations
body might deem appropriate.

Here, I would like to point out to Council
members once again that the Charter of the United
Nations guarantees the principle of respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of internationally
recognized States, and that Serbia is such a State. To
deprive a legitimate democracy of an integral part of
its territory contrary to its will would constitute a
violation of the Charter, would call the world
Organization's credibility into question and would
undermine the foundations of international law, which
support the entire world order.

I believe that all members of the Security Council
are aware that resolution 1244 (1999) guarantees the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia.
Therefore, I call on the Council to prevent the
promotion and adoption of a unilateral measure on the
independence of Kosovo. I call on the Council to
prevent any violation of resolution 1244 (1999) or of
the Charter of the United Nations.
3
For its part, Serbia respects the Charter,
resolution 1244 (1999), the Helsinki Final Act and all
other relevant valid international documents. That is
telling evidence of our full commitment to
participating constructively and responsibly in the
continued quest for a stable and mutually acceptable
solution.

Serbia will never recognize Kosovo's
independence and will preserve its territorial integrity
and sovereignty through all democratic means, legal
arguments and diplomacy. I thus reaffirm once again
that Serbia will not resort to violence or war.

Let me point out that the State institutions of the
Republic of Serbia continue to engage in good
cooperation with the International Security Force in
Kosovo (KFOR). I should like to recall that diplomatic
efforts and the cooperation that I have mentioned saved
many lives on 17 March 2004, when militant and
extremist members of the Albanian community in
Kosovo burned 35 churches and monasteries and 800
houses and expelled 5,000 Serbs and other
non-Albanians from their homes in only three days.
Although we insisted throughout the negotiations that
the other negotiating party renounce violence and the
threat of force, it failed to do so, in contrast to the
Serbian side.

If any violence should break out in Kosovo, and
if KFOR should not be able to appropriately react and
protect the Serbs, we would be ready to assist and
provide protection to the threatened population,
with- and I stress this - the agreement of the
relevant international institutions and with strict
respect for international law.

Let me also say a few words about the report of
Mr. Joachim Riicker, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, on the situation with
regard to standards implementation. The report does
not accurately reflect the real situation. I shall refer
only to the most painful issues, such as the security of
the Serbian population and the return of internally
displaced persons.

The basic human right to freedom of movement is
being denied to members of communities in Kosovo
and Metohija suffering ethnically motivated
discrimination. The fact is that a basic human right,
denied only to prisoners in United Nations Member
States, is being denied to Serbs in Kosovo and
Metohija merely because of their ethnicity.
The process of return is an area in which
Kosovo's Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
and UNMIK have made no progress. That is the main
indication of the failure to build a multi-ethnic society
in Kosovo and Metohija. According to data issued by
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
eight years after UNMIK'S arrival in Kosovo and
Metohija, 207,000 persons remain internally displaced
in Serbia. In Kosovo and Metohija itself,
approximately 22,000 persons have been expelled from
their own homes and moved to other places in the
province. The right of return is based on the
international principle of the protection of basic human
rights and fundamental freedoms and on humanitarian
norms included in the document entitled "Guiding
Principles on Internal Displacement".

Permit me to summarize a few facts that call into
question the proclaimed multi-ethnic nature of the
current situation in the province. There are 250,000
expelled persons, 207,000 of whom are internally
displaced in Serbia and all of whom have been waiting
to return to their homes. Members of Serbian and other
communities suffering from ethnically motivated
discrimination continue to experience human rights
violations and restricted freedom of movement. There
is constant intimidation of Serbs, including attacks on
their property and their cultural and religious heritage.

Here are some other hard facts: as of January
2007, more than 7,000 ethnically motivated attacks had
taken place; 581 Serbs and 104 members of other
communities experiencing ethnic discrimination have
been killed since the arrival of UNMIK and KFOR in
1999; 841 Serbs have been abducted; and 960 persons
have been seriously wounded. Nearly 18,000 houses
have been destroyed and the same number looted,
while 27,000 apartments and houses have been
appropriated. Those are some of the facts in a sea of
data that speak volumes about the real situation in
Kosovo.

A solution to the future status of Kosovo and
Metohija must be found by the Security Council, just
as this organ must agree to any change in the
composition of the civilian and military presences in
the province.

The people of Serbia are firmly committed to
maintaining the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
their country while continuing the process of European
integration in order to achieve a better life and

08-2088]
economic prosperity. I therefore call on the Security
Council to listen to Serbia's position and to decide to
resume the negotiations on the future status of Kosovo
and Metohija. We are ready for an immediate
resumption of negotiations. Serbia is ready and willing
to participate as a partner of the Security Council in the
quest for a compromise and sustainable solution that
will ensure long-term peace and stability in the
Balkans and a better life for all its inhabitants.

Since this Security Council meeting is devoted to
the implementation of standards in Kosovo and
Metohija, I should like to read out a letter from a girl
from Kosovo and Metohija that I received just before
this meeting. It accurately reflects the situation of
standards implementation in Kosovo and Metohija.

"Mr. President:

"Having been told that you will speak
before the Security Council on the situation in
Kosovo and Metohija, I am writing this letter to
you in total darkness, since there is no electricity
once again. I plead with you to read it to the
Council, if possible.

"As I write to you, I feel like a leaf in the
wind that does not know in which direction it will
be blown away. I have no protection at all. Who
will protect me? I have no father; he disappeared
in 1999.
08-20881

"I am 15 years old. I was born in Kosovo
and Metohija and still live there, though not in
the house in which I was born, which was burned
to the ground. My childhood differs from that of
children in free countries. All children throughout
the world have friends; my inseparable friend is
fear, which is with me from dawn to dusk.

"That is why I call on you, Mr. President, to
transmit this message to the world, because all
these childhood fears, afflictions and early
wounds remain painful and will not heal. We
have been denied the right to a carefree
childhood, freedom and happiness. We have been
denied the right to the warmth of our family. Let
them not deprive us of the right at least to live in
our own country.

"I thank you for your attention.
"Sincerely, Slobodanka Tasic"

