Mr. Vale de Almeida (spoke in French): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union and
its member States. I thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2017/840) and Ms. Honore for her briefing
and her work as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.

The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and the European Free Trade
Association country of Liechtenstein, member of the
European Economic Area, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.

On 13 April, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2350 (2017), which extended for the last
time the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) by a further six months.
The resolution contains the legal framework for the
transition to the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), whose role will be to
strengthen the police and the rule of law, and to defend
and promote human rights.

MINUSTAH played a key role in the field of
citizen security in Haiti, including by ensuring security
during particularly difficult times, such as during the
recent elections.

The long period of institutional instability that has
characterized the political process in Haiti finally seems
to be behind us, at least with regard to the electoral
process. This has made possible the transparent and
credible election of a President who, despite a very
low turnout, obtained a broad majority of votes. The
National Assembly was also renewed, and the new
Government's programme has been given a vote of
confidence. Despite major difficulties and weaknesses
in the system, we congratulate the country on its return
to constitutional order based on the will of voters. This
was urgently needed in order for Haiti to be able to
address the numerous political, economic, social and
environmental challenges facing the country.

However, the return to constitutional order is not
enough to guarantee the democratic stability and the
development that the country needs. Bold reforms of
the Constitution, the electoral system and the judicial
system are needed to restore the confidence of the
Haitian people in their democracy and in the political
system in its entirety. It is particularly important to
ensure genuine access to equitable justice for all. Signs
of a willingness to reform have been shown, but they
must be pursued, and the historic opportunity offered
by this period of stability and legitimacy must not
be lost.

As in recent years, the efforts of all parties to
guarantee the stability and security of Haitian citizens
continue to be crucial elements for the process of
democratic consolidation. A thorough and consensual
reform ofthe electoral system is necessary to avoid fresh
crises and to regain the confidence of the population.

The European Union remains a faithful partner of
the Republic of Haiti and remains determined to support
the country in this sensitive phase, in consultation with
other partners, including as part of this indispensable
reform process. We would also like to recognize the
presence here of the Permanent Representative of Haiti.

Resolution 2350 (2017) closes out MINUSTAH
on 15 October and replaces it with a reduced mission,
MINUJUSTH, which focuses on supporting the Haitian
police. The European Union believes that the security
situation in Haiti remains very fragile. We therefore
deem it essential to complete the strengthening and
professionalizing of the Haitian National Police. During
the transition period, it will be key to ensure continuity
by preparing for it thoroughly. The security and well-
being of citizens and the stability of the country are
at stake.

In conclusion, allow me to express once again the
gratitude of the European Union for the contribution
made by MINUSTAH in terms of security and
consolidating democracy and the rule of law in
Haiti. We welcome the preparations for a transition,
which must be designed carefully so as to ensure the
continuity of our joint efforts. The series of events
that will culminate in making the Haitian State fully
responsible for the security of its citizens and civilian
protection will need to be clearly defined, planned and
implemented, with particular attention paid to respect
for human rights in the security sphere and access to
impartial justice for all. It is essential that the Haitian
police and judicial system be adequately prepared,
including in these key areas, for the time when they
will have to assume all the tasks currently undertaken
by the United Nations Mission.

The European Union, together with the United
Nations and the international community, will
support the Haitian authorities in consolidating their
commitment and their efforts aimed at ensuring a
better future ofpeace, democracy and well-being for all
the Haitian people. It is also important that the United
Nations apply to future missions best practices and
lessons learned from the missions that, as MINUSTAH
is doing, are now drawing down.

