Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
welcome President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud to New
York and thank him for being here. We appreciate
the important work he is doing, his optimism about
Somalia's future and the clear portrait he has painted of
the opportunities and the challenges his nation faces at
this pivotal moment. I would also like to thank Special
Representative Keating for his briefing and for his
efforts to galvanize and ensure the coherence of the
international effort in Somalia.

I also thank Ambassador Antonio for his briefing;
certainly the strong partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations has been one of the keys
to the successes we have achieved to date, and this
partnership will be critical as we move forward. To
this end, at our next discussion on Somalia, we would
welcome the chance to hear from Special Representative
Madeira, whose insights into the situation in Somalia
could be useful for us to consider as we approach the
mandate renewal for the African Union Mission to
Somalia (AMISOM) next month.

One thing is certain - the Somali people are
fighting for the future of their country. The Al-Shabaab
campaign of terrorism, which has cost the lives of so
many people, must only strengthen our determination
to make progress in securing a peaceful and prosperous
future for the Somali people. To achieve success, we
need to act purposefully, quickly and collectively in
order to help the Somali people build strong institutions
of democratic governance and rule of law, to continue
taking the fight to Al-Shabaab and to help the nearly
5 million Somalis who cannot meet their basic daily
needs without assistance.

It is an election year in Somalia, as the President
has stated and as we all know, and the Government's
tenacious work to reach an agreement on an electoral
model was an important step forward. Our hope is that
the Somali Parliament can finalize the implementation
plan quickly and that the next steps can proceed swiftly
in the spring and summer - steps such as launching
voter-education programmes, vetting candidates,
finalizing financing and security modalities and other
efforts to help put voting structures in place. This
year's vote is essential, not just in itself but because it
is a critical step towards universal elections in 2020,
based on one person/one vote.

Against that backdrop, the United States welcomes
the progress that the Somali Government has made with
the state-formation process over the past three years.
For the first time in decades, the map of Somalia's
Federal states is nearly complete. We encourage the
Government to continue those efforts and to finalize
the formation of the Hiiraan and Middle Shabelle
regions. As the election season approaches, time is
of the essence, if Somalia is to ensure that those two
regions can also take part in the electoral process later
this year. Their transition to Federal state status is part
of that.

Creating an atmosphere where inclusive politics
can thrive requires security, and there major challenges
persist. There is no question that, thanks principally to
the efforts of the African Union and the countries of the
region, acting through the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and with the support of the United
Nations, security in Somalia has improved considerably.
We commend the bravery of the AMISOM. troops
and the Somali soldiers and pay particular tribute to
the willingness of Ethiopia and Kenya to continue to
lead the fight against terrorism in the Horn of Africa.
For its part, the United States will continue to use the
tools at its disposal, financial, diplomatic, intelligence
and military, to help dismantle Al-Shabaab and other
terrorist groups.

Both AMISOM. and the Somali National Army must
press the offensive against Al-Shabaab. In particular,
we urge them to initiate coordinated planning aimed at
recapturing the Juba River Valley. Their success will
create much-needed space for political and economic
development throughout the country. As part of that
effort, we echo the call of President Mohamud and
Mr. Francisco Madeira, Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia, for enhanced international support for
the creation of a capable, professional and inclusive
Somali National Army that respects international
humanitarian law.

In order to achieve that ambitious goal, the unique
partnership among AMISOM, the Somali National
Army, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia and the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia requires close cooperation and coordination.
That includes a number of steps, including making sure
that AMISOM. has the right equipment and that it is
operationally sound, including through the provision of
critical enablers to the Mission. That support is vital to
ensuring that both AMISOM. and the Somali National
Army can bring further military pressure to bear on
Al-Shabaab and avoid costly losses such as the harrowing
ones they have suffered in recent months. What comes
after an area is liberated from Al-Shabaab has a direct
connection with how we, Somalia and the international
community, can combat terrorism. We agree on the
imperative of creating space for inclusive politics,
pursuing economic recovery, reducing unemployment
among young people, enhancing education and
encouraging further defections from Al-Shabaab by
providing a future for disengaged combatants.

Those are very difficult steps, to be sure, but
they can be helped by promulgating a coordinated
and comprehensive national security policy that
includes the establishment of clear police, justice
and corrections models for Somalia in the context of
federalism. Security advances will not be sustainable
and cannot take root unless respect for human rights
and international humanitarian law is central and
safeguarded. In connection with that, we encourage
the Federal Government of Somalia to set up a human
rights commission to ensure respect for the freedom of
expression, make additional progress on ending the use
of child soldiers and hold security forces accountable
for violations, including those related to sexual
exploitation and abuse. All security forces in Somalia,
including the Somali National Army and AMISOM,
must respect human rights.

In the face of the challenges we are confronting,
the international community must do its part to
support Somalia's progress by engaging in actions that
empower rather than exploit the nation's economy. With
that in mind, we emphasize that illegal, unreported
and unregulated fishing in Somalia's waters has the
potential to stoke instability in an already fragile nation.

Lastly, the chronic humanitarian crisis in Somalia
demands our attention. Too many people, some 40 per
cent of the population, are in need of humanitarian
assistance; too many, more than 1.1 million, are
suffering from displacement; and too many children are
malnourished. Those challenges have been exacerbated
by the effects of the El Nifio weather phenomenon.
The United States has been at the forefront of raising
international awareness about El Nifio's impact
in Africa, while partnering with governmental
and non-governmental aid operations to prevent,
mitigate and respond to emergency needs related to
food, water and health. In addition to strengthening
financial institutions in Somalia, the United States
Government has provided more than $240 million
in humanitarian aid since October 2014, supporting
emergency food assistance, nutrition interventions
and health-care programmes, among other forms of
lifesaving assistance, and has invested in resilience
programming to help bolster the ability of households
and communities to weather such shocks. Together, we
must do more. We urge the international community to
support the humanitarian response plan for 2016.

In conclusion, while we have made truly important
gains, we have a long way to go. We must maintain
a sharp focus, steady coordination and a steadfast
commitment to ensuring that stability takes root
and that ultimately peace prevails once and for all in
Somalia, for all Somalis.

