Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Like the previous
speakers from the United States, Japan and France,
the United Kingdom condemns in the strongest
terms the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
flagrant violation of unanimous decisions of the
Security Council.

Despite our repeated condemnation and successive
Security Council resolutions, the leadership of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea has persisted in
pursuing its illegal programmes in misguided pursuit
of a nuclear weapons capability. This is simply not
acceptable. We have seen an unprecedented number
of ballistic missile tests over the past year, including
ground testing. However, with this launch of an
intercontinental ballistic missile, the Council should
note that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
clearly intends to threaten directly an ever greater
number of States and indirectly the whole world.

All such ballistic missile activity by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea is in violation of binding
Security Council resolutions, and any capability that
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea develops
to threaten the security of other States is of grave
concern. Our response must be strong and clear. The
international community must redouble its efforts.

As the Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom
has said, North Korea strains every nerve and sinew
to build nuclear weapons and launch illegal missiles,
even as the people of North Korea endure starvation
and poverty. Amid reports of widespread hardship and
human rights violations in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, Pyongyang's priority should be
the health and welfare of North Korean people, not the
continuation of the nuclear programme.

We continue to urge the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to return to credible and authentic
multilateral talks on its nuclear and ballistic programmes
and to abide by its obligations under Security Council
resolutions. The United Kingdom has today summoned
the Ambassador of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea in London, conveying in the strongest terms our
views of this reckless behaviour.

We will also be redoubling our efforts with partners
to seek strong enforcement of measures that aim to
bring the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to
the right path. Increased vigilance is needed. We will
continue to encourage partners globally to take effective
action to understand and, when necessary, disrupt
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's illegal
proliferation and other sanctions-evasion activity. We
will also work with allies and partners around the world
to consider the fullest range of measures to increase
diplomatic pressure.

The primary responsibility lies with the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, but all members of the
international community must further strengthen
their resolve to enforce existing measures fully and
effectively without delay. We also urge all States to
comply with the Security Council's requirements for
reporting on the implementation of measures. But as
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's own
statements of defiance make clear, even these steps will
probably not be enough. Faced with these provocations,
we must toughen our resolve. The United Kingdom
supports new binding measures to raise the cost
further for these illegal actions. The Security Council
should start work immediately on a new resolution to
achieve this.

