Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
Judge Carmel Agius and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz
for their respective reports and interesting and insightful
briefings on the ongoing work of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. At this
juncture, I want to reaffirm Indonesia's commitment
to strengthening the rule of law and promoting justice
by supporting the work of the Mechanism as an
instrument of the Security Council for ending impunity
and ensuring accountability. Today I will focus on
three issues.

My first point concerns the Mechanism's
functional activities. We are encouraged by the
Mechanism's priorities, and especially its focus on
the timely completion of its judicial proceedings,
while maintaining the highest international standards
for due process and fair trials. We also commend the
determination of the principals, judges and staff of the
Mechanism to deliver meaningful justice and to fulfil
all aspects of its mandate effectively and efficiently.
Additionally, the innovative and efficient solutions that
the Mechanism has adopted to streamline its working
methods across its branches and foster high staff morale,
thereby optimizing efficiency, deserve recognition. In
that regard, since 2020 will be key to the success of the
Mechanism and its ability to meaningfully downsize,
as envisaged in resolution 1966 (2010), we must be able
to render the Council assistance in securing adequate
funding and the necessary political support to ensure
that it is moving closer to the post-2020 scenario.

My second point concerns the Mechanism's
engagement with Rwanda and the States of the former
Yugoslavia. We commend its continuing efforts to
foster a stronger relationship with the Governments
and peoples of Rwanda and the States of the former
Yugoslavia, including victims' groups. In line with
that, we encourage the Mechanism to continue its
important activities to provide effective assistance to
the national authorities of Rwanda and the States of
the former Yugoslavia and take on its responsibility
to monitor cases that have been referred to national
courts. As States have the primary responsibility to end
impunity and bring to justice those who are responsible
for the most serious crimes under international law, it
is important that the national judicial authorities are
advised, assisted and supported.

That leads to my last point, which is the cooperation
of States. We want to remind the Council that States are
required to cooperate with the Mechanism, including
by complying with orders and requests for assistance
related to cases before it. We note the requests by the
Prosecutor pertaining to the arrest and surrender of
the remaining fugitives. We would therefore like to
call on States, particularly those where fugitives are
suspected to be at large, to intensify their cooperation
with and assistance to the Mechanism, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions. At the
same time, we must constructively engage with the
States concerned in order to find the best possible way
forward. It is crucial to ensure that their international
obligations can be fulfilled, but that at the same time
their specific concerns can also be addressed.

Lastly, Indonesia would like to take this
opportunity to applaud the commitment of all countries
that continue to consistently support and cooperate
with the Mechanism, whether in enforcing sentences or
in other areas. And since this will be the last briefing
under Peru's leadership of the Council's Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, let me also
express our sincere appreciation to Peru and its entire
delegation for their dedication and excellent work in
steering the Informal Working Group.

