I would like to begin by highlighting this principled assumption that conflicts can be resolved comprehensively and permanently only when all their root causes and drivers are addressed justly, properly and in a comprehensive manner, particularly through an enhanced national ownership over related peace and political processes, with the broadest possible participation of all parties, as well as wider regional and international facilitation and support. This must be the guiding principle in dealing with conflicts, and, accordingly, all drivers of such situations, whether new or old, must be taken into account proportionate to the roles they play in the emergence or escalation of conflicts. In this context, due attention must be paid to addressing the contemporary drivers of conflicts, such as the impacts of climate change or pandemics where there is credible evidence that they are among the risk factors deteriorating the conflict. At the same time, the unique nature of contemporary drivers of conflicts require new approaches and innovative measures to address them in an appropriate and realistic manner. For instance, it does not seem that the effects of climate change in terms of the emergence or escalation of conflicts can be properly addressed through the application of traditional measures such as sanctions. Rather, such effects might be better addressed through extending economic and financial assistance to the societies concerned. These are exactly the areas where the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council can play an effective role in the amelioration of the situation. Among the new factors escalating and prolonging conflicts, one can refer to the imposition of unilateral coercive economic measures. Such acts, applied extensively in recent years, have played an important role in certain cases in deteriorating and protracting conflicts through obstructing the return of refugees and internally displaced persons, hampering reconstruction efforts, disrupting the peace and reconciliation processes, and accordingly delaying the settlement of conflicts, thus, leading to the further suffering of afflicted peoples. Unfortunately, the effects of unilateral coercive economic measures have become more devastating and horrible when combined with other new elements, such as the coronavirus disease pandemic. They worsen the economic situation of the conflict-torn societies concerned and prevent access to humanitarian goods, particularly food, medicine and medical equipment by the peoples in need. And the result is crystal clear - those who are most vulnerable unfortunately suffer the most. We also draw attention to impacts of sanctions imposed by the Security Council in certain situations where no action was even necessary. As a result, such measures have not only seriously violated the sovereign rights of the State concerned, but also lead to effects detrimental to its security and stability. While the new drivers of conflicts require proper attention by the Council, that must not be at the price of neglecting or underestimating traditional drivers of conflicts, such as acts of aggression, foreign occupation, external interference and the like, which continue to play an important role in the emergence, escalation and prolongation of conflicts in many parts of the world. Lastly, the Security Council's efforts in resolving conflicts can be effective only when, in addition to adopting realistic approaches in addressing them, they ensure the non-discriminatory application of laws to all parties to conflicts.
