Judge Robinson: I am indeed honoured to
address this distinguished body for the first time in my
capacity as President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
Mr. President, may I also congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and say that I am particularly honoured to address the
Council during your tenure, given the importance of
the Tribunal's work for your country.

The Tribunal has continued to work vigorously
and diligently since the last reporting period. As a
result, we are now close to completing our mandate.
We have nevertheless experienced delays owing to a
number of circumstances beyond our immediate
control. First, delays have resulted, and further delays
may be expected, from the late arrest of fugitives. In
that regard, I refer to the case of Stojan Zupljanin, a
recently arrested fugitive whose case was found
suitable for joinder with that of Mieo Stanisic'.
Although the joinder of those cases has had the
positive effect of cutting the costs of running the
Zupljanin case as a separate trial, it has also delayed
the start of the Stanisie trial, which was trial-ready at
the time of Zupljanin's apprehension.

Another example is the case of Vlastimir
Dordevie, who was still at-large when the multi-
accused trial of Milutinovic' et al began, in 2006. If
Dordevic had been surrendered earlier, he could have
been tried with his six co-accused. Now he must be
tried alone, and dozens of witnesses will have to be
brought back to the Tribunal to give evidence again in
his case. On the basis of steps taken by the Tribunal, it
is now expected that that trial may start as early as
15 or 16 December 2008.

If the fugitive Mladie is arrested now, his case
may be joined with that of Karadzie; but that joinder
would invariably delay the start of the Karadzie trial,
which is currently being prepared for trial. On the other
hand, any further delay in Mladie's arrest will likely
result in the need for separate trials.

The case of Goran Hadzie, the other remaining
fugitive, is not earmarked for joinder with any other
case. An important consideration that the Council
should be aware of is that, if he is arrested now, the
Tribunal could avoid the need of retaining the capacity
of trying a high-level accused in the Tribunal's residual
mechanism. I must emphasize to the Council that the
impact of late arrests on the orderly conduct of the
Tribunal's business should not be underestimated. I
therefore urge the international community to focus its
efforts on securing the immediate arrest of the
remaining fugitives as a matter of urgency, in
accordance with the obligations of States under article
29 of the Tribunal's Statute. The international
community must recognize the risks posed to
international justice if those fugitives are not
apprehended and brought to justice.

Other delays in trials have resulted from
unforeseen circumstances. An illustration of that is the
rendering of judgement in the Milutinovie et al case,
which was initially scheduled for September 2008 but
will now be delivered in February 2009. While it is
regrettable that the anticipated date of delivery of
judgement in that case will not be met, it has to be
borne in mind that estimation of the length of a trial,
including the delivery of a judgement, is more an art
than a science. My consultations with the presiding
judge on that particular multi-accused case indicated
that the delay arose from the difficulty of issues to be
resolved and the concern that the hectic pace of the
deliberations would impact on the fairness of the trial.
That hectic pace resulted from the exigencies of the
Tribunal's completion strategy. However, the
completion strategy, while requiring the Tribunal to
complete its cases as expeditiously as possible, does
not anticipate that principles of fair trial and the rights
of the accused should therefore be sacrificed. In that
regard, I wish to thank the members of the Security
Council for granting an extension of resolution 1800
(2008).

While the delays generated by those matters are
cause for concern, it is important to bear in mind the
Tribunal's remarkable achievements to date, which far
surpass those of any other international or hybrid court,
both in respect of the number of accused tried and in
its contribution to the development of international
criminal law. Of the 161 persons indicted, proceedings
have been fully concluded against 116 of them.
Considering the complexity of our cases, the breadth of

our indictments and the large number of victims and
witnesses, the completion of such a high number of
cases since the establishment of the Tribunal by the
Security Council is a clear demonstration of the
efficiency of the Tribunal's proceedings and of its
steadfast commitment to the completion of its mandate.
At this point, only five cases remain to be started, four
of which involve late arrests, namely, those of Tolimir,
Bordevie, Zupljanin and Karadzie. The fifth case, that
of Stanisie and Simatovie, has been delayed owing to
the ill-health of one of the accused.

In terms of judicial activities, we are currently
running seven trials simultaneously in our three
courtrooms, with our eighth trial, that of Dordevie,
scheduled to begin on 15 or 16 December. Those trials
involve a total of 27 accused, with judgement
anticipated to be rendered shortly in the case of
Milutinovie et al, which involves six accused.

As detailed in the report, the Tribunal has
continued to proactively seek new solutions to ensure
the speedy completion of trials in full compliance with
standards of due process. For instance, in order to take
advantage of a gap in the trial schedule after the
proceedings in the Stanisie and Simatovie case had to
be adjourned in May 2008, we commenced the Lukie
and Lukie trial in its place on very short notice and,
exceptionally as President, I am presiding over the
proceedings in that case.

The efficiency of the International Tribunal's
proceedings is also the result of the steadfast
commitment of its Judges and staff. Court hearings at
the Tribunal run from 8.30 in the morning to as late as
7.10 in the evening. In that respect I would like to
make special mention of the extraordinary sacrifice
made by some Judges who, owing to the exigencies of
the completion strategy, are obliged to sit on two cases
at the same time. They are usually ad litem Judges. But
there is one permanent Judge who is presiding over
two very complex cases at the same time. These Judges
sit on one case from 8:30 am. to 1:45 pm. and then on
a second case from 2:15 pm. to 7:00 pm. with less
than half an hour for lunch. Given their long hours
sitting in court, other judicial work must be completed
late into the evening and over the weekends. Moreover,
owing to the long court hours, these Judges have little
to no opportunity to attend to their personal matters
during the day. The overall impact on the Judges of
having to sit in court close to ten hours a day does take
its toll but these Judges and others before them have
taken on this responsibility with professionalism and
enthusiasm and their commitment should be fully
acknowledged as exemplifying remarkable dedication
to the work of the Tribunal.

A number of other Judges are actively engaged in
completing a trial in one case, while preparing another
case for trial. This is a demanding workload that
demonstrates their commitment to meeting completion
strategy targets. The international community owes a
huge debt to these Judges and their staff, who clearly
place the needs of the International Tribunal and the
dictates of the completion strategy far beyond their
own comfort and their entitlement to reasonable
working hours.

While we have achieved unparalleled efficiency
in the conduct of our proceedings, these results can
only be maintained by a proactive retention policy for
key staff, which has been lacking so far. The examples
I have just given you of the hard work and commitment
of our teams demonstrate how important it is that we
keep our most dedicated Judges and staff in order to
maintain the high standards we have set. But I must
stress that we have to remain vigilant that the closing
stages of the Tribunal do not witness a diminution of
the high standards we have set over the years. There is
a real danger that, if measures are not taken now to
provide staff with incentives to remain at the Tribunal
in its closing stages, we may lose our highly and
uniquely qualified legal staff. I therefore ask you to
help me ensure that we maintain our commitment to
the work of the Tribunal, which we must all finish
together.

Another important matter that I intend to pursue
and strengthen during my tenure is that of partnership
with local judiciaries. As you will know, a key
component of this cooperation was the referral of
13 accused to jurisdictions in the former Yugoslavia,
ten accused having been transferred to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, two to Croatia and one to Serbia.
Pursuant to rule 11 bis, the Referral Bench continues to
monitor referred cases and is thus far satisfied that they
are being conducted in full compliance with
international norms of due process.

I note that the Appeals Chamber ultimately
decided not to refer one case, that of Lukic' and Lukie.
The history of that case is, in my View, a splendid
example of the system for the administration of justice
at the Tribunal working efficiently and fairly. First, the
5
case was sent to the Referral Bench to determine
whether the accused were at the level to warrant their
case to be referred to local courts. This is required by
Security Council resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534
(2004). The Referral Bench determined that the case
should be referred but one of the accused appealed that
decision, arguing that he was of too senior a level for
his case to be referred to the local courts and that he
should be tried at the Tribunal. That appeal was
allowed and his trial is now taking place.

The Tribunal is also actively involved in
capacity-building efforts in the former Yugoslavia,
focusing on a number of key areas, including the
facilitation of trial coverage by the local media, direct
community outreach by its officers on the ground and
capacity-building efforts with national judicial
institutions addressing war crimes. For example, our
local offices have organized training programmes,
which, while directed primarily towards lawyers, have
also targeted other professionals involved in war
crimes proceedings, including witness support staff.
Very recently, several Judges met in Belgrade with
their counterparts from domestic jurisdictions and
shared their expertise in trying war crimes cases.

Additionally, we have undertaken a number of
projects that seek to identify best practices that may
serve other domestic or international criminal justice
institutions handling complex war crimes proceedings.
The first such project consists of a compilation of our
best practices, undertaken with the assistance of the
United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice
Research Institute; these will be published and
disseminated shortly. We are also working in
cooperation with the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe to assess our current outreach
activities and training programmes in the former
Yugoslavia to identify best practices. The objective of
this assessment is to facilitate the creation of capacity-
building programmes that meet the needs of domestic
courts addressing war crimes cases.

All of these initiatives are part of our efforts to
ensure that the long-lasting legacy of our work will
continue to grow in importance as we near completion
of the cases on our docket. Another increasingly urgent
matter is the devising of an appropriate mechanism to
address residual issues following the completion of our
cases. That, as the Council knows, is a key issue
currently on the agenda of the Security Council
Working Group on Ad Hoc International Tribunals. In
6

order to assist the Working Group in this complex task,
the Tribunals issued a joint report in September 2007,
followed by a number of additional clarifications, and
invited the Working Group to visit the premises of the
Tribunal and meet with the its Judges and staff. This
visit provided the members of the Working Group with
the opportunity to gain important insights into the daily
work of the Tribunal and to hear the recommendations
of Judges and staff on the nature and functions of the
future residual mechanism. The members of the
Working Group met not only with senior staff but also
with Associate Legal Officers in order to truly get a
feel for the daily work of the Tribunal.

I represent an institution that, as the first
international tribunal since the International Military
Tribunals of Nuremberg and Tokyo, has been the most
significant actor in the development of international
criminal law and the enforcement of international
humanitarian law. At the procedural level it has
judiciously used its rulemaking power to devise a
comprehensive framework of rules of procedure and
evidence that have already become the template for use
in other kindred tribunals. Those rules achieve the twin
objectives of expeditiousness and fairness. At the
substantive level the Tribunal has, more than any other
body, contributed to the development of a corpus of
law that has eliminated impunity and entrenched the
doctrine of individual criminal responsibility in the
field of international criminal law.

Few would have imagined, only twenty years
ago, that it would have been possible to bring before an
international tribunal high-level individuals, including
heads of State, accused of the most heinous crimes. I
represent a court that has tried more persons for
breaches of international humanitarian law than any
other judicial body. I also represent an institution that,
conscious of its responsibilities to the region, has
worked strenuously to ensure that local judiciaries have
the capacity to try war crimes cases in accordance with
the highest international standards. I therefore
represent an institution that can be justifiably proud of
its achievements.

Nonetheless, I address the Council today
humbled by the magnitude and complexity of the
pioneering role of the Tribunal and deeply concerned
that, as the Tribunal's work draws towards its final
stages, it should remain sufficiently resourced to
discharge its mandate. I therefore implore you today,
members of the Security Council and of the
08-64445

international community: Give the Tribunal the support
it needs to enable it to discharge its historic role.

