Mr. A] Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish
to begin by thanking you, Sir, for having convened this
meeting at this difficult juncture and by wishing you
success in your presidency of the Security Council this
month.

As many speakers have mentioned yesterday and
today, despite the enormous anger and worldwide
anguish shown by the international community, the
abhorrent carnage and the crimes against humanity
committed by the Zionist regime against the innocent
Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip are continuing
unabated, and every day we witness a new face of this
vicious aggression and crime. As a result of this
atrocity, hundreds of civilians have been cold-
bloodedly massacred in Gaza and thousands wounded,
most of them women and children.

The world community is witnessing with outrage
and anguish the perpetration of some of the most
blatant examples of crimes against humanity and
genocide committed by an irresponsible and brutal

regime that knows no boundaries in violating the most
basic principles of international law, international
humanitarian law and human rights law. It would seem
as if the life of that criminal regime depends on
creating and perpetuating bloodshed, and as if it feeds
on nothing but war crimes, aggression, occupation and
State terrorism.

The people of Gaza continue to be subjected to
untold sufferings that are unprecedented in the recent
history of humankind. It is appalling that, in the
twenty-first century, the civilized world should witness
an entire population under crippling blockade, starved,
deprived of the most basic supplies, including bread
and drinking water, and slaughtered in the most
horrendous ways, having been left with nowhere to go,
nothing to eat and no safe place to take shelter. Even
the places that the United Nations has provided for this
innocent people to escape Israeli brutalities are
savagely attacked, as the world saw in yesterday's
Israeli attack on schools run by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, killing more than 40 people, many of them
children.

The Israeli regime is targeting every human
being, every house and every infrastructure in Gaza. It
is actually targeting every value that the civilized
world stands for and every principle of international
law that is clear to the world community. Mosques,
hospitals, schools, United Nations buildings, medicine
and food stores, and even the farms and private houses
of the people are callously bombarded and women,
men and children slaughtered in their beds, in their
homes and everywhere on the streets. To cover up all
these crimes, the media is not allowed access to the
area by the Israeli regime to cover the tragic
developments in the Gaza Strip.

This savagery should be stopped and it should be
stopped immediately. The Israeli war machine must be
stopped from shattering more lives and livelihoods,
and the Israeli war criminals should be brought to
justice for the crimes they have perpetrated, and
continue to perpetrate, and for the outrageous and
brutal pain and torment they have inflicted and
continue to inflict on the innocent people in Gaza.

As mentioned by some speakers yesterday, a
whole population is being massacred only because it
resists occupation and State terrorism and simply
because it has exercised its right to vote, which is the
most basic principle of democracy.

The credibility of the international community
and of the United Nations is at stake and has been
challenged once again by the Israeli regime's war
crimes and crimes against humanity. It is long overdue
for the Security Council to live up to its responsibilities
to stop these atrocities. The Security Council must take
urgent and effective measures to stop this carnage and
to help ease the sufferings of the people in the Gaza
Strip. Every minute matters, since each entails more
crimes by the Israelis and more losses for the innocent
Palestinians. The Council must act and it must act now.

The Security Council should adopt a binding
resolution calling for an immediate end to the Israeli
attacks and aggression against the innocent Palestinian
people in Gaza; immediate Israeli withdrawal from
Gaza and the lifting of the blockade; the opening of the
crossings and the urgent provision of humanitarian
assistance to the people there. The international
community must hold that regime accountable for its
crimes and for the damages it has inflicted on the
defenceless Palestinians, and should mobilize its
efforts and resources to reconstruct the infrastructure in
Gaza.

The stalling tactics of some permanent members
to obstruct any action by the Security Council and to
render the Council incapacitated are neither acceptable
nor justifiable, and are tantamount to complicity in the
Israeli crimes against the Palestinian people. The
Security Council must be allowed to take action and to
stop this unbridled State terrorism. Indeed, if the
Security Council continues to fail to discharge its
responsibility to stop the carnage, the Member States
are fully ready to ask the General Assembly to take up
the issue on the basis of its resolution 377 (V) - the
"Uniting for Peace" resolution.

I do not wish to take the valuable time of the
Council to address the absurd statement made by the
Israeli representative in the Council yesterday, in
which certain baseless allegations were raised against
my country. Suffice it to stress that these are despicable
tactics that seek to distract attention from Israeli crimes
at a time when the whole world is united to counter
those crimes. These unworthy tactics have not worked
in the past and will not work in the future.
