Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for presenting the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (S/2015/942). We
commend the work accomplished by UNAMA in such
difficult circumstances. We welcome the statement by
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the
United Nations, Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal.

Angola co-sponsored resolution 2255 (2015),
unanimously adopted today, strengthening the
sanctions regime against the Taliban and its associates.
The resolution translates the resolve of Angola and
the international community to stop all forms of
support to extremist groups in Afghanistan, given the
fundamental threat that they represent to international
peace and security. Besides applying sanctions, we
underline the importance of a comprehensive political
process in Afghanistan aimed at supporting peace and
reconciliation among Afghans.

The debate that we are holding today offers another
opportunity to review the unfolding political, security,
humanitarian and human rights situation in Afghanistan,
while the country is completing its first year of the
transformation decade. We took good note, with great
sympathy, of the diligent work being carried out by the
Afghan National Unity Government to strengthen good
governance and the rule of law, promote the rights of
all Afghans and enhance the national capabilities of the
nation, as well as the progress made in the restoration
of the credibility of the electoral process.

However, we are deeply concerned over the reported
increase in the instability and worsening security
situation in Afghanistan, with attacks by the Taliban
throughout the country and the growing presence of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). The decrease
in international military support has exacted a heavy
toll on the Afghan security forces, which, according
to the report, have withstood the mounting pressures,
while being able to retake areas that had fallen into the
Taliban's control. The commitment of Afghanistan's
allies to continuing to assist the Afghan security forces
in order to ensure stability and security in the country
expresses the importance, for the country and for the
entire international community, of remaining steadfast
with Afghanistan in crucial and dangerous times.
Events such as the capture of Kunduz by the Taliban,
recovered a few days later by the Afghan armed forces
with the support of American troops, was yet another
demonstration of the danger that that group represents
for the institutions in place and of its ability to continue
destabilizing Afghanistan.

The Afghan people continue to pay an intolerable
price in terms of loss of life. They endure violations of
their human rights, are caught in the crossfire and are
victims of indiscriminate attacks, targeted killings and
intolerance by the forces of darkness. The millions of
Afghan refugees in Pakistan and Iran, the large number
in the current wave of refugees towards Europe, and the
very slow pace of returns clearly demonstrate the sad
plight of the Afghan people and their lack of confidence
in the future.

After some hopeful signs that the peace process
was on the verge of being launched, we note with
disappointment that the possible political solution to
the conflict has reached an impasse. We took note ofthe
statement made by the Prime Minister ofPakistan during
his recent visit to Washington, DC, on preparations
to facilitate negotiations between the Taliban and the
Afghan Government. We welcome the Heart of Asia-
Istanbul Process ministerial conference in Islamabad,
and we stress the need to enhance mutual trust and
cooperation between Pakistan and Afghanistan.
Friendly, mutually respectful relationships between
the two countries are crucial to create an enabling
environment for the peace process and to ensure
security, stability and prosperity for both States. That
is a positive sign that countries of the region can engage
in the pursuit of solutions for peace in Afghanistan and
that other members of the international community are
ready to support an Afghan-led peace process. Local
initiatives and peacebuilding efforts by national actors
with a View to promoting stability, such as the local
ceasefire agreement reached in September covering
regions of Baghlan province, reinforces the idea that it
is possible, through dialogue between the Taliban and
the Government, to come to a peaceful solution to the
conflict. We extend our encouragement to UNAMA in
support of such initiatives.
The Afghanistan Opium Survey 2015 points to a
shrinking of the illegal drug economy - a curse on
which Afghanistan is so heavily dependent. That is a key
development for the country's normalcy. We therefore
support and encourage the national drug action plan.
The success of that plan is even more important, as it
is a cornerstone in the fight against the financing of
terrorist groups such as the Taliban, ISIL, Al-Qaida and
their affiliates.

In conclusion, in spite of the notable progress
achieved by the Afghan people in the last few years,
the challenges facing the country are immense. The
Afghans still have to achieve new levels of cooperation
and understanding to allow the country to overcome
its present and bloody past. Moreover, we must
stress the international community's commitment to
Afghanistan and the need to be steadfast in assisting
the country - no matter how high the price might be
and taking into account what is at stake - and the need
to establish the basis for a better and more prosperous
future.

