Mr. Palous (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate country Croatia and the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro
and Serbia, as well as Armenia, the Republic of
Moldova and Ukraine, align themselves with this
statement.

I should like to thank the presidency of the
Security Council and the Secretary-General for this
thematic debate and to commend Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for
his informative briefing.

The European Union particularly welcomes this
debate, as it is taking place 60 years after the adoption
of the Geneva Conventions, which contain the core
norms and principles of international humanitarian law
concerning the protection of civilians in situations of
aimed conflict.

In this respect, the EU urges States that have not
yet done so to accede to both Additional Protocols of
1977 to the Geneva Conventions and to consider
accepting the competence of the International Fact-
Finding Commission, pursuant to Article 90 of the
Additional Protocol I.

On numerous occasions, the Security Council has
demanded that all parties to armed conflicts comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law to protect civilians in armed conflicts.
Unfortunately, as we speak, civilians continue to bear
the brunt of the conflicts.

The EU emphasizes the need to develop in
parallel additional concepts based on the aim to protect
civilian populations, human security and the
responsibility to protect. The EU welcomes the
endorsement by heads of State and Government of the
principle of the responsibility of protection; therefore,
we call for the full implementation of this principle by
the Security Council as well as by the General
Assembly. The EU is ready to contribute and
commends other organizations or groups for taking
initiatives to make this principle a norm in
international relations.

The EU is firmly committed to the full and
effective implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). The EU is
concerned by the continued high prevalence of sexual
and gender-based violence in situations of armed
conflict, including as a tactic of war. Resolution 1820
(2008) also calls for dealing with these crimes as a
security problem, requiring a systematic security
response that is proportional in scale and magnitude.

The EU has been strengthening its policy on
sexual and gender-based violence by pursuing three
objectives: preventing violence, protecting and
supporting victims, and combating the impunity of
perpetrators of violence. The EU member States
demonstrated their deep commitment to these
objectives by co-sponsoring resolution 1820 (2008)
and by adopting long-term EU guidelines on violence
against women and girls and combating all forms of
discrimination against them in 2008, as well as
adopting a European Security and Defence Policy
document on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) as reinforced by resolution 1820 (2008) in the
context of the European Security and Defense Policy.
Similarly, the EU continues to strongly support
the valuable work done by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. The EU member States
continue to implement long-term EU guidelines on the
protection of children affected by armed conflict and is
interested in cooperating with other States on this issue
on the basis of resolution 1612 (2005), which sets an
enhanced framework for the protection of children in
armed conflict.

The EU remains deeply concerned by the
continuing practice of recruitment and use of child
soldiers, in clear violation of international legal
obligations and other relevant principles. In this
context, I would like to invite all countries to ratify and
implement the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of
children in armed conflict, and to adhere to and follow
the Paris Commitments and Principles adopted in 2007.

We should also bear in mind the basic needs of
refugees and internally displaced persons. The EU is
continuously concerned by the growing number of
internally displaced persons and calls for ensuring their
protection.

Regrettably, in many conflicts, impunity prevails
due to the lack of political will and action. Therefore,
the Security Council should make clear once again that
any action against civilian populations, including
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity, are
unacceptable. The International Criminal Court (ICC),
the International Criminal Tribunals and the special
courts are working hard to promote peace and justice.
The EU encourages all States to provide their full
support to the ICC by acceding to the Rome Statute
and cooperating with the Court. All appropriate
measures should be used to prevent violence and to
bring to justice perpetrators of serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law. The
EU would also like to express its full support for the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide.

Let me reaffirm our gratitude to and solidarity
with humanitarian actors whose safe, unhindered and
timely access to the civilian population, in particular in
times of armed conflict, is a fundamental condition for
the fulfilment of their mandates and mission.

We encourage humanitarian personnel on the
ground to follow the principles of humanity,
impartiality, neutrality and independence, and we call
on the recipient countries to ensure their safety and
security. We urge all countries that have not yet done
so to sign and ratify the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel and its
Optional Protocol, and we invite the Secretary-General
to further include their provisions in host country and
other agreements.

A landmark development has recently taken place
on the containment of the risks posed by cluster
munitions. The EU wishes to commend the increasing
support of States for the Convention on Cluster
Munitions, which prohibits the use, production,
transfer and stockpiling of cluster munitions. The EU
remains determined to negotiate within the Convention
on Certain Conventional Weapons, a legally binding
instrument that addresses the humanitarian concerns of
cluster munitions in all their aspects. In the view of the
EU, such results would reinforce the importance of this
convention as part of the corpus of international
humanitarian law.

The EU welcomes the progress achieved in the
implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and
the review of the Geneva Declaration on Armed
Violence and Development during the year 2008.
Mainstreaming coherent policies on small arms and
light weapons within United Nations agencies and
among its Member States remains a challenge that
needs to be addressed in depth.

Finally, the EU maintains the view that the
protection of civilians is a key aspect of the United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, and
must be comprehensively, systematically and
consistently incorporated in all Security Council
mandates.

The EU wants to underline that the Security
Council has recently made important decisions that
enforce the protection of civilians component and the
respect of international humanitarian law in the
mandates of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad. The EU looks forward to the
Secretary-General's report on the implementation of
the protection mandates in the peacekeeping missions.

In this context, the EU also emphasizes the need
for close coordination and meaningful positive
synergies of policies regarding the protection of
civilians within the United Nations framework
activities in other key areas, such as human rights,
gender equality, children in armed conflict, the rule of
law, small arms and light weapons, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, and security sector
reform.

We believe that the updated aide-memoire to be
annexed to the statement by the President of the
Security Council will prove to be an inclusive
instrument in integrating various aspects of the
protection of civilians. I want to express the EU's firm
support for the establishment of an informal experts
group on the protection of civilians and encourage the
use of the aide-memoire as a reliable reference for
future reviews of peacekeeping and other mandates.

With this, let me reassure the Council of the EU's
continued commitment on this important issue.

