Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
thank Mr. Holkeri for his excellent briefing. I also wish
to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia
and Montenegro, Mr. Draskovic.

My country fully endorses the statement that will
be made by the Permanent Representative of Ireland on
behalf of the European Union.

The detailed report of the Secretary-General on
Kosovo (S/2004/348) has only confirmed what had
already come to light in the most recent Council
meeting on Kosovo. The unbridled inter-ethnic
violence of the events in March has caused a serious
setback to the process of normalization and compliance
with standards for the province. We reiterate our
vigorous condemnation of those events, and we appeal
that those responsible for them be brought to justice.

However, this is not the time to make statements
of disapproval, but rather to determine precisely what
happened, make a serious political assessment of the
events and calculate their impact, not only so that such
unfortunate events will not be repeated, but also so that
the international community can take the appropriate
measures so that the provisions of resolution 1244
(1999) can be fully complied with.

Let us begin with the facts. Three conclusions can
be drawn from Mr. Holkeri's briefing and from the
report of the Secretary-General. First, the inter-ethnic
violence of March was not an isolated event, but rather
an organized campaign, spread throughout the territory
with specific objectives against three of the province's
ethnic minorities, but with particular malice against the
Serb minority. Secondly, that violence was not directed
only against individuals and the heritage of those
minorities - including sites of particular cultural and
religious significance - but also against UNMIK and
the forces that the international community has charged
with maintaining order. Thirdly, the initial response of
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government was
ambivalent; they were reluctant to clearly condemn the
violence, particularly the violence unfortunately
directed against the Serb community. Worse yet, in
some cases they attempted to use the violence for their
own political objectives, calling for independence and
the transfer of UNMIK's competencies. Only after
UNMIK and the international community had put
pressure on the authorities did they show a change of
attitude.

A second aspect is the consequences. The
Secretary-General's report indicates that the inter-
ethnic violence has affected the entire normalization
process. Thus, not only has it compelled UNMIK to
modify the Implementation Plan, but it has set back the
situation of minorities and hampered the return of
refugees, seriously affecting freedom of movement,
freezing direct dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade
and seriously damaging the functioning of democratic
institutions. Those are all crucial aspects of resolution
1244 (1999) and of the "Standards for Kosovo"
document. Moreover, the attitude of the municipalities
and of the media - key institutions in the
normalization process - has revealed how far they are
from complying with the standards. Only the Kosovo
Protection Corps has demonstrated - with certain
exceptions - some degree of professionalism during
the crisis. On the whole, the objective of establishing
the rule of law has been seriously damaged by the
violence, which has even affected economic
development, weakening the confidence and interest of
investors.

Finally, we must consider measures to prevent
such unfortunate events from happening again and
derailing the situation. It is worthwhile to highlight the
work of UNMIK, headed by Mr. Holkeri, and that of
KFOR during the outbreak of the crisis and in the days
following. They have paid a high price, but they
probably prevented a true catastrophe. The change of
attitude among the provisional authorities -
particularly in terms of putting right the damage - is
also commendable, but there is still more than a
shadow of doubt as to their true commitment to
applying the standards for Kosovo.

Spain believes that the "standards before status"
policy is more valid now than ever before. The
incidents of March are proof that Kosovo is not
implementing the standards required of it by the
international community. What is more, there has been
considerable movement away from the standards. We
must send a loud and clear message to the Kosovo
authorities, insisting that there will be no discussions
on status until the standards are fully implemented, and
that episodes of violence will only postpone that date.
Any different course could have very serious
consequences for Kosovo's future and for the entire
region.

