Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Madam President, at the outset I wish to join others
who have preceded me in taking the floor to
congratulate you on having convened this debate,
which is very timely given the present context of the
Security Council's work. I should also like to welcome
your presence here with us.

In considering the item before the Council today,
we should bear in mind that the international
community has entrusted the United Nations with
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Within this Organization, this task
is shared by the General Assembly and the Security
Council. The Council has primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
General Assembly may, within certain limitations
relating to the Council's responsibilities, consider and
make recommendations on the general principles
governing cooperation in the maintenance of
international peace and security, and may also discuss
any issue related to the maintenance of international
peace and security that is brought before it for
consideration by any Member of the United Nations.

The drafters of the Charter of the United Nations
also foresaw the importance of regional organizations
in the settlement of conflicts, as such organizations are
often in the best position to find and promote
innovative and lasting solutions to conflicts. Article 52
of the Charter states that Members of the United
Nations
"shall make every effort to achieve pacific
settlement of local disputes through such regional
arrangements or by such regional agencies before
referring them to the Security Council."

In fact, with the passage of time, regional
institutions have, out of necessity, played a key role in
world politics. In the current context of globalization,
all political, economic and social phenomena can have
a regional component and impact.

The United Nations has developed a series of
approaches to this issue that include cooperation
agreements with regional organizations. The Security
Council in particular has worked jointly with regional
organizations in the maintenance of peace. It has
reaffirmed the importance of such joint efforts in a
number of resolutions, including resolution 1625
(2005). Cooperation between regional organizations
and the United Nations involves a recognition of their
complementarity and of the comparative advantages of
each. Regional organizations can often be more
effective than the United Nations in responding to
threats on the ground given that they have a better
understanding of the specificities of such threats to
regional peace and security. However, the operational
scope of regional organizations is restricted by a lack
of logistical and financial resources which limits its
activities over the long term.

Among regional organizations, the African Union
in particular has taken major steps towards playing a
greater role in the context of regional peace and
security. The United Nations and the Security Council
in particular must provide support and cooperation
with respect to such efforts. Cooperation with the
African Union must also be based on recognition of not
only its capabilities but also of its responsibilities, and
account must be taken of the need to develop its
capacity to discharge such responsibilities. Of course,
that principle applies to other regional organizations as
well.

The United Nations must continue to support
improvements in the capacity of the African Union to
prevent and resolve conflicts and to maintain regional
peace and security. That must involve training military
and civilian personnel, including the police component,
in order to facilitate the transformation of multilateral
missions into regional missions. In addition, the United
Nations must promote the logistical capacity of
institutions entrusted with the various aspects of

peacekeeping operations. We consider it particularly
important to explore new financing schemes for joint
operations that would make it possible for African
States to defray a larger part of the costs.

It is also important for the United Nations to
continue to support African Union initiatives to
promote national dialogue and reconciliation, at the
initiative of the parties in conflict. As we have said,
regional organizations have a comparative advantage in
this area.

Moreover, those comparative advantages mean
that the transfer of knowledge can and must go both
ways. The Council periodically invites regional
agencies to advise it or to submit reports. That is an
important contribution to resolving international disputes.
At the operational level, those organizations - as the
Organization of American States has done in some
cases, for example - provide logistical support and
even carry out joint operations and co-deploy forces in
areas of conflict.

It is essential to keep channels of communication
between the United Nations and regional agencies open
in order to maintain and enrich dialogue. Better
cooperation and coordination between those agencies,
the United Nations and the Security Council will in
future affect the ability of the international community
to comply with the call of Chapter VIII of the
Charter - that we first resort to regional agencies
before putting various crises on the agenda of the
Security Council.

