Mr. Estrada Meyer (Brazil): I thank the delegation
of China for convening this important debate. I also
thank the United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
for his informative briefing. We believe that the United
Nations as a whole - and the Security Council in
particular - has a leading responsibility in seeking
sustainable solutions for the complex and prolonged
conflicts affecting the Middle East.

As the Security Council prepares to discuss the
annual renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), allow me to stress
the vital role played by UNIFIL in maintaining peace
and stability in a vulnerable region. A particularly
relevant component of the mission is its Maritime
Task Force (MTF), which we have had the honour and
responsibility of leading for over six years now. The
MTF has successfully performed key security and
humanitarian activities, ranging from the seizing arms,
ammunition and illegal drugs to rescuing migrants and
refugees in the Mediterranean Sea. The Task Force
also contributes to regional economic development by
establishing a safer environment for maritime trade.
Its core assignments 4 to prevent violations of the
arms embargo and to train members of the Lebanese
Navy - contribute to the maintenance of calm and
stability in the region and remain as indispensable
as ever.

The continued significance of the MTF was
confirmed by the latest report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006):

"[t]he UNIFIL Maritime Task Force has
proved its operational effectiveness in its maritime
interdiction operations at the request of the
Government of Lebanon. [...] Those operations
are a significant deterrent against the illegal entry
of weapons or related materiel. Daily interaction
and exercises with the Lebanese Armed Forces
Navy have helped develop the Navy." (5/20! 7/59], para. 70)

It is imperative to ensure that UNIFIL and the MTF
continue to enjoy the strong political support of the
Security Council, as well as adequate resources to carry
out their mandate. That will be especially important
in the context of considering the proposals from the
strategic review conducted by the Secretariat earlier
this year.

Turning to the question of Palestine, a highly
symbolic milestone was reached last month: the
fiftieth anniversary of the ongoing occupation of
East Jerusalem, Gaza and the West Bank. During the
recently held United Nations Forum to Mark Fifty Years
of Occupation, Brazil expressed its deep regret that the
Palestinian right to a sovereign and independent State
has not yet been fulfilled 4 almost 70 years after the
adoption of General Assembly resolution 181 (II) and 50
years after the adoption of Security Council resolution
242 (1967).

The recent electricity crisis in Gaza is yet
another reminder of the severe social, economic and
humanitarian consequences of the occupation. Brazil
has consistently underscored that the two-State solution
is the only just and acceptable solution to the conflict,
with Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace
and security, within internationally recognized and
mutually agreed borders. As stressed by the Secretary-
General,

"[r]esolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
will remove a driver of violent extremism and
terrorism in the Middle East and open the doors to
cooperation, security, prosperity and human rights
for all." (SG/SM/18595- GA/PAL/1389)

We are deeply concerned about the recent incidents
of violence in East Jerusalem. We regret all loss of life
and call on all parties to reduce tensions and avoid
further escalation.

Recent developments concerning the crisis in
Syria continue to demand the attention of the Security
Council. It is key that the political dimension of the
negotiations on Syria 4 the Geneva process 4 and the
security initiatives encompassed by the Astana process
continue to advance hand in hand. Strengthening
the ceasefire regime is a fundamental component of
international efforts to find a political resolution to the
conflict, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), including
the commitments to the unity, independence, territorial
integrity, and non-sectarian character of Syria. In that
regard, we took note with interest of the memorandum
that creates four de-escalation areas in the Syrian
Arab Republic, signed last May, as well as the recent
announcement by Russia, the United States and Jordan
of measures to stabilize some of those regions. Such
security measures create positive momentum and
make it ever-more essential to advance on the political
track. We need to ensure that the de-escalation zones
serve as a step towards peace and the alleviation of the
humanitarian situation.

Brazil reiterates its deep concern with regard
to allegations of the use of chemical weapons in
Syria. We highlight the need for a full, impartial and
comprehensive investigation of all reported incidents,
such as those at Khan Shaykhun and Um-Housh,
including visits to all the relevant sites.

Lastly, with regard to Iraq, Brazil congratulated
the Government of Prime Minister Haider Al Abadi
and the Iraqi people on the liberation of Mosul,
announced on 10 July. That was a milestone in the fight
against international terrorism, as well as a decisive
step towards consolidating security, stability and the
territorial integrity of the country. Many challenges
remain in ensuring the safe and dignified return of
displaced persons and extending State authority and
the rule of law in the liberated areas. We hope that
important victory will be followed by a successful
process of reconstruction, economic recovery and meeting. Given the lateness ofthe hour, I intend, with
national reconciliation in Iraq. the consent of the members ofthe Security Council, to

