Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): I would like, at
the outset, to welcome the presence this morning of
His Excellency Mr. Faure Essozimna Gnassingbe,
President of the Togolese Republic, and to thank him
for his enlightening statement, which clearly indicated
the path ahead in terms of counter-terrorism efforts in
Africa.
We welcome the Togolese presidency of the
Security Council and congratulate it for all of the
actions taken with respect to issues of concern to the
African continent. We also wish to welcome all ofthose
who have come here to participate in the debate. We also
wish to thank Mr. Abdullahi Shehu for his statement. In
particular we welcome the statement of the Secretary-
General, which shed light on an important matter for
the African continent.

(spoke in English)

I would like, on behalf of Her Excellency
Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, to express the African
Union's gratitude for the invitation extended to us to
participate in this important debate on a very important
subject that calls for urgent attention, given the new
security threats emerging on the African continent,
worsened by the scourge of terrorism, particularly in
the Sahel Region.

I would like to take the opportunity to also highlight
the important actions that the African Union (AU) has
undertaken in the fight against terrorism in Africa
within the context of maintaining international peace
and security. Despite having registered commendable
progress vis-a-vis the threat of terrorism at
international and continental levels, we are witnessing,
unfortunately, a further deepening of the complex
terrorist threat currently facing the continent. That is
particularly evident in the Sahel region, where human,
drug and arms trafficking, kidnap-for-ransom, piracy,
the illicit proliferation of arms and money laundering
are increasingly becoming closely intertwined with
terrorism. The African Union has always recognized
that interconnection, with its attendant consequences
on peace, security, stability and development on
the continent. That is reflected in the various AU
instruments.

As a result ofthe interconnection, we are witnessing
a mutation of the ideologically based terrorism threat
to a new form of terrorism, which experts refer to as
narco-terrorism. It is a security threat that has given
birth to new forms of mercenarism in Africa - guns-
for-hire - where fighters are joining not necessarily for
ideological reasons, but rather for financial gain. The
prevailing security situation in Mali, as well as the case
of Somalia, clearly demonstrate the devastating effects
of such threats to peace, security and development.

Success in the war against terrorism, drug
trafficking and other forms of international organized
crime requires a firm, focused, coordinated and
collective effort by all Member States and the rest of the
international community, acting in a complementary
manner. Effective counter-terrorism action must
aim at addressing the root causes of terrorism and at
preventing terrorists from successfully recruiting and
carrying out their activities, as well as the ability to
limit the damage caused by terrorist attacks. That
requires considerable resources and the convergence
oflike-minded institutions specializing in the different
aspects of the counter-terrorism efforts.

In such a situation, cohesion, harmonization,
coordination and cooperation among all stakeholders
and networks become the rule rather than the choice.

The counter-terrorism evaluation missions
undertaken by the African Centre for the Study and
Research on Terrorism to a number of Sahel countries
affected by active terrorism have revealed acute
weaknesses in the fields of coordination, prevention,
law enforcement, damage limitation and protection.
Most of the problems were identified as structural and
profoundly interrelated, and need to be addressed in a
holistic manner striking a strategic balance between the
actions aimed at reinforcing security and those that are
directed at development.

It is in this context that, in an effort to better
systematize the continental effort against terrorism and
to ensure that local and regional realities and approaches,
perceptions, causes, features and manifestations of
terrorism are duly taken into account, the African
Union Commission has been urging member States
and regional economic communities to develop and
adopt, as a matter of urgency, comprehensive regional
counter-terrorism strategies, as well as coordination
and implementation mechanisms, by domesticating
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
the 1999 Organization of African Unity Convention
on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism,
and other relevant AU and United Nations counter-
terrorism instruments. It is our belief that in such
cases, coordination is best assured by a centrally placed
structure at the national and regional levels in the form
of a fusion centre that ensures that intelligence and real
time operational information is exchanged, and that the
activity of each player remains within the framework
and the strategic vision adopted at the outset, ensures
coherence between intelligence, policy and operation,
and provides strategic direction to all parties involved.

At the level of the African Union Commission, we
continue to work along those lines, giving priority to
capacity-building, the improvement of the counter-
terrorism legal framework, and the promotion of better
institutional interaction and coordination at the national
and regional levels, as well as the development of early
warning capacity that allows for timely and appropriate
intervention.

The improvement of the legal framework will be
pursued to mobilize technical assistance, particularly
in cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum criminal justice sector to help member States
harmonize their national criminal legislation with the
AU counter-terrorism model law by adopting legislation
that effectively eradicates terrorism and its financing
sources, including from ransom payments and other
types of organized crime, particularly drug trafficking.
We continue to work on the establishment of the
African arrest warrant, the African passport stop list,
and the finalization of draft conventions on extradition
and mutual legal assistance agreements.

With respect to capacity-building, the reality
of the member States calls for the development of
regional, comprehensive and complete training
packages and manuals for law enforcement agencies,
security services, judicial services, expert translators,
and scientific and technical investigation experts to
counter terrorism and transnational organized crime
within the regional framework. That would also
contribute towards enhanced cooperation between law
enforcement agencies, regional protocols to facilitate
the indictment of terrorists and other transnational
criminal networks, extradition and mutual assistance
protocols, and genuine international support to track
down those networks. An appropriate mechanism
against transnational organized crime is also necessary
to ensure sustainability, the provision of financial,
logistical and technical support to maintain the
efficient functioning of law enforcement, and judicial
cooperation.

The fight against terrorism, drug trafficking and
other types of organized crime is being hampered
by overlapping challenges of an economic, social,
political, security, human capacity, organizational and
infrastructural nature. Committed, sustainable and
reliable support on the part of our cooperating partners,
in coordination with the member States, in a manner
that can also contribute to local development is urgently
required if the region is to successfully overcome those
difficulties and contribute to the global fight against
terrorism and organized crime in general.

The need for sustained support to the ongoing
establishment of national coordinating structures for
terrorism and organized crime in the form of national
and regional fusion centres cannot be overemphasized.
That should aim at enabling a timely exchange of
information, the creation of synergies, and the sharing
of resources among different institutions involved in
the conduct of joint operations. It would also contribute
to enhancing national and regional cooperation.

In conclusion, I need to emphasize that ensuring
a safe, secure and stable continent that is free from
the scourges of terrorism, violent conflicts and other
threats to peace, security and development is at the core
of the key objective of the African Union. Our presence
here today is a clear testament to our commitment
and determination to achieve better coordination with
the rest of the international community so that we
can together effectively prevent and lastingly combat
terrorism and all threats to international peace, security
and stability.

(spoke in French)

Like speakers who have preceded me, I would like
to offer my condolences to the Government and people
of Turkey following the terrorist acts that victimized
that country, which is a friend of Africa.

