Ms. Adamson: The candidate country Albania, the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and the European Free Trade Association country
Liechtenstein align themselves with this statement.

The Middle East peace process remains a key
priority for the European Union (EU), whose positions
have not changed. We see no viable alternative
to a negotiated two-State solution that fulfils the
legitimate aspirations of both parties 4 including
Israeli and Palestinian security needs and Palestinian
aspirations for statehood and sovereignty - and that
ends the occupation that began in 1967 and resolves
all permanent status issues. Resolution 2334 (2016),
while reaffirming all of the Council's relevant previous
resolutions since 1967, reiterated the key threats to
the viability of the two-State solution, notably the
continued Israeli settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. It also
clearly condemned acts of violence against civilians,
including acts ofterror, as well as all acts ofprovocation,
incitement or destruction.

The latest developments in and around the Old
City of Jerusalem and in the West Bank pose a real risk
of further escalation. Three Palestinians were killed
during violent clashes with Israeli security forces on
Friday. These incidents must be fully investigated. In a
terror attack in the West Bank during the night of Friday
and Saturday, three Israelis were murdered at their
Shabbat dinner table by a young Palestinian. Nothing
can justify such a despicable crime. Since then, there
have been further attacks in Israel and Jordan, and
two Jordanians have lost their lives. The EU strongly
condemns acts of terror, expresses its regret for all the
losses ofinnocent life caused by the violence and hopes
for a speedy recovery for the wounded.

We appreciated President Abbas's condemnation of
the attack on Israeli police officers in the Old City of
Jerusalem, sacred to three religions, and the assurances
by Prime Minister Netanyahu that the status quo at
Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount will be preserved.
It is now vital to ensure that all political, religious and
community leaders act responsibly, restore calm and
avoid any acts or rhetoric that could further increase
tensions. Continued cooperation between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority is crucially important if we are to
prevent further violence and loss of life. We encourage
Israel and Jordan to work together to find solutions and
ensure security for all, respect the sanctity of the holy
site and uphold the status quo, noting the special role
of the Hashemite Kingdom, as recognized in its peace
treaty with Israel.

The EU also strongly opposes the recent Israeli
decisions to proceed with plans for thousands of
settlement units in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and stresses the Security
Council's repeated demand that Israel cease all
settlement activities immediately and completely.
Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory
constitute a flagrant violation of international law and
a major obstacle to peace, and threaten to make a two-
State solution impossible.

The EU has been following the worsening
situation in Gaza. We commend the efforts by the
United Nations and Egypt to mediate and provide and
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance and
fuel to the Gaza Strip. The EU will continue to provide
humanitarian and development assistance to Gaza. A
single, legitimate and democratic Palestinian Authority,
with full control over Gaza, is critical for achieving a
viable Palestinian State.

The EU stands ready to support all serious
peacemaking efforts. We welcome ongoing United
States efforts and those of the Quartet, including the
holding of a meeting of envoys on 13 July. We recall
the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative, which
provides key elements for a comprehensive settlement
of the Arab-Israeli conflict.

Let me turn to Lebanon and the endorsement of a
new electoral law by the Parliament on 16 June, on the
basis of which parliamentary elections will take place
by May 2018. Conducting peaceful, fair and transparent
parliamentary elections will be key to ensuring the
functioning of Lebanese democratic institutions. In
last week's Association Council between the EU and
Lebanon, the EU recognized Lebanon's extraordinary
and exceptional effort in hosting more than 1 million
Syrian refugees. We are committed to maintaining
the level of our support in 2018 and 2019. The EU and
Lebanon agreed that the only sustainable long-term
solution for refugees and displaced persons from Syria
into Lebanon is their safe return to their country of
origin in accordance with all norms of international
humanitarian law, while taking into account the
interests of the host countries, as conditions for such a
return are met.

In Syria, we hope that the implementation of
de-escalation arrangements towards a nation-wide
cessation of hostilities and unhindered humanitarian
access will help facilitate the intra-Syrian talks
under United Nations auspices in Geneva. Thus far,
Damascus has refused to engage substantially in
those negotiations. The EU continues to call for full,
unhindered humanitarian access and for accountability
for all violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. The EU has just allocated
€1.5 million to the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. Only when
a credible transition is firmly under way will the EU be
ready to assist in the reconstruction of Syria.

In Iraq, the liberation of Mosul was a highly
symbolic step in the defeat of Da'esh, although it does
not mark the end of military operations. Several very
sensitive areas remain to be recovered from Da'esh. But
even then, the territorial defeat of Da'esh is only one of
the challenges. Winning the peace with the population
is an equally challenging and urgent task for the Iraqi
Government. The EU calls on the federal Government
of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government to
build on their successful security cooperation in the
campaign to liberate Mosul and engage in a constructive
dialogue on all issues across the political and economic
spectrum, including the disputed internal boundaries.
Unilateral steps must be avoided.

Lastly, Iraq is in need of international support to
face all these huge challenges. The EU is committed to
providing such support and is stepping up its efforts.
More than €200 million is programmed for 2017. A
Common Security and Defence Policy mission will
be deployed to advise and assist in the reform of the
security sector, as well as in delivering on humanitarian
needs and stabilization.

