Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): The British
Government warmly welcomes the draft resolution before
the Council, extending the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) for a further
three months, and we shall vote in favour of it. We pay
tribute to those States - Canada, India, Nigeria, Mali,
Ghana and Malawi - that are contributing troops to
UNAMIR. We also welcome the Government of
Rwanda's support for and agreement to the continuation
of UNAMIR's work in its country.

As the Secretary-General has reported, a climate of
relative security and stability has continued to prevail in
Rwanda. The Government of Rwanda deserves every
credit for its efforts in this regard. We take particular note
of the Government of Rwanda's recommitment to
ensuring the safety of international personnel in Rwanda.
At the same time, we know that the international
humanitarian personnel in Rwanda attach importance to
UNAMIR's continued presence, and this draft resolution
will, we believe, be important in that regard. We trust that
the Government of Rwanda will seek the assistance of
UNAMIR in that task should the need arise.

The presence of 1.6 million refugees in States
neighbouring Rwanda continues to give cause for concern.
We welcome the fact that, at the summit of Heads of
State of the Great Lakes region, held in Cairo on 28 and
29 November, leaders in the region pledged to encourage
the return of refugees to their home countries. A primary
objective of the international community is to assist the

 

Government of Rwanda by creating the conditions for the
voluntary and safe return of those refugees. The Cairo
Declaration has given grounds for renewed hope in this
context, and the new mandate of UNAMIR rightly focuses
on this. We welcome the Government of Rwanda's
agreement to the extension of UNAMIR's mandate, with
the return of refugees as its primary focus. If, as we hope
will be the case, there is to be a substantial return of
refugees to Rwanda in the next few months pursuant to the
Cairo Declaration, we believe that UNAMIR's continued
presence with its new mandate focusing on this issue, on
assisting the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees in that process, will be the key to ensuring that
the refugees return home in conditions of dignity.

It is also a matter of the greatest importance to the
British Government that the perpetrators of the genocide be
brought to justice. This is an important element in the
return to normality in Rwanda. We note that the
International Tribunal for Rwanda has now begun the
significant task of identifying the perpetrators of genocide
and of bringing them to justice, and only today has issued
an indictment. We call on all States in the region to
cooperate with the Tribunal as it goes about its work. We
welcome the fact that UNAMIR will continue to assist in
the coming period in providing security for the Tribunal
until the arrangements worked out between the Government
of Rwanda and the Tribunal are put in place. We call on all
States in the region to cooperate with the Tribunal as it
goes about its work.

We note that this is the final extension of UNAMIR's
mandate. But we believe that the United Nations and the
international community at large will continue to have an
important role to play when UNAMIR leaves on 8 March
1996. The British Government will continue to assist the
international community at large in building peace and in
helping in the rehabilitation and reconstruction of Rwanda.
In this context, we hope that discussions can soon begin on
a possible future role for the United Nations in restoring
confidence and building stability in Rwanda once UNAMIR
leaves.

