Mr. Plumbly (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland): It is my Government's firm hope and
belief that the Basic Agreement on Eastern Slavonia signed
on 12 November 1995 represents a watershed, opening the
way for the reintegration of Eastern Slavonia into Croatia
and thereby restoring that country's territorial integrity.
Since 1992, when United Nations peace-keepers were first
sent to the region, the United Nations has been actively
involved in trying to bring peace to Croatia.

It is most welcome that the parties have at long last
agreed to settle their differences by negotiation. We salute
the perseverance and dedication of the United Nations
mediator, Mr. Stoltenberg, and of the United States
Ambassador to Croatia, who played a crucial role in the
negotiations.

The parties having come this far, it is essential that
nothing be done that might jeopardize the Agreement.
That is why any resort, at this stage, to military pressure,
or still less to the use of force, by either side, would be
totally unacceptable, and would carry with it the most
serious consequences.

The task before us now is to establish the basis on
which implementation of this Agreement can go forward.
There will need to be careful study before the Security
Council can be in a position to proceed. But proceed we
must, without delay, drawing on the advice and contacts
of the Secretary-General and those who were most closely
involved in the negotiation of the Agreement.

We look to the parties to begin in earnest the
process of reconciliation between the two communities.
We understand that this will not be an easy or a painless
process; events such as occurred in Vukovar or the
treatment of those Serbs who chose to remain in the
Krajinas cast a long shadow. But it is nevertheless
essential that both sides actively encourage reconciliation
and that they cooperate fully with the International
Tribunal, because unless there is reconciliation, unless the
Serb minority is encouraged to remain and Croatian
refugees from Eastern Slavonia are able to return to their
homes, the opportunity represented by this Agreement
will have been wasted.

