Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I think
I can agree with one point made by the representative of
Venezuela, which is that this is indeed a human drama,
and a tragic one at that. Over 130,000 people have set
off from the North African coast to attempt to reach
Italy this year alone; more than 3,000 of them did not
survive that journey. Just last week, more than 250
people - including children as young as 4 - drowned
after their boat sank just 12 miles from the Egyptian
shore. It has been reported that last week alone more
than 11,000 migrants had to be rescued off the Libyan
coast.

Our work today is one part - just one part - of
what is needed to save lives. All told, more than 10,000
souls have been lost at sea since 2014 after travelling
untold miles to escape conflict and extreme poverty,
and migrant smugglers and human traffickers have
exploited a desperate situation. To stop these smugglers
and stem such senseless deaths at sea, the member
States of the European Union (EU), coordinating with
Libya's Government of National Accord, took action
last year through the EU Naval Forces Mediterranean
Operation Sophia. Since last October, the Operation has
assisted in saving over 37,000 people. For that reason,
the United States fully supports renewing resolution
2240 (2016) to extend the Council's support for the EU
Pperation.

We are pleased that the EU has decided to expand
its Operation's mandate to assist in the training of
Libyan coast guard and navy. The United States is
likewise providing capacity-building assistance to the
new Libyan Government, and urges the international
community to fully support Libya's Prime Minister
Serraj, its Presidency Council and civil society efforts,
which are helping Libyans establish a democratic,
representative political system, strengthen the capacity
of critical Libyan institutions to deliver services,
secure Libya's territory and build effective, civilian-led
national security institutions.

We must also address the abuses facing refugees
and other migrants, lest efforts to shut down
people-smuggling have the unintended consequence
of trapping those seeking asylum, with no options to
flee violence and conflict. We urge the EU and the
Government of National Accord to ensure that the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of those
migrants who are rescued are respected, in accordance
with applicable international law. We must also continue
to work to end the root causes of this crisis - the
conflicts and extreme poverty that drive people from
their homes to attempt the very dangerous journey
across the Mediterranean.

