Mr. Wang Xuexian (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation is in favour of holding
an open debate on the Somali question. We also welcome
this opportunity. We believe that such a debate can focus
the attention of the international community on Somalia
and facilitate new and effective efforts of interested States
in seeking a solution to the Somali question.

At the end of 1994, as a member of the Security
Council delegation, I visited Somalia. During the few
days of my stay, I was so shocked at what I saw that I
could hardly eat or sleep. The once-beautiful
Mogadishu - the pride of East Africa - was now
reduced to complete ruin. No buildings emerged
unscathed by war damage. The airport and the harbour
were closed. The infrastructure was totally destroyed.

 

Shots were heard all the time. Society was in turbulence,
and the people were unable to carry out a normal life.

At the time, with a heavy heart, I appealed to the
leaders of Somalia that peace was of the utmost importance
and only peace could save Somalia. To our regret, the
situation in Somalia today is hardly in any way different
from that of a year ago. There is no prospect of a solution
bringing peace.

The Chinese Government and people have always
been deeply concerned by developments in Somalia, and
have great sympathy for the plight of the Somali people.
We have always believed that the key to the solution of the
Somali question is national reconciliation. Through broad-
based political consultations, all factions in Somalia should,
in the general interest of the country and the nation, set
aside their differences, sit down and talk to each other.
National reconciliation is the only way out.

In the final analysis, the Somali question can only be
resolved by the Somali people themselves. But the
international community has an unshirkable responsibility,
too. The United Nations, the Security Council in particular,
has at least a partial responsibility for the situation in
Somalia today.

We are always of the view that the United Nations
cannot just leave Somalia alone. That is why we support
the work of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia
(UNPOS) in Nairobi. But we also believe that this limited
presence is not enough. The United Nations should make a
greater effort, and we hope that the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), the African States and the Arab States can
play a greater role in this regard.

Many proposals have been made in previous
statements. The Chinese delegation believes they are worthy
of our serious consideration. China, too, stands ready to do
its share in this regard.

Finally, we hope and firmly believe that with the
support of the international community the Somali people
will overcome the present difficulties and set out upon the
road of peace, rehabilitation and reconstruction at an early
date.

