Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank the
Spanish presidency for convening this briefing. I also
wish to thank our briefers today.

Promoting cooperation has long been an objective
of the Security Council's counter-terrorism efforts.
Today's resolution 2322 (2016), on international
judicial cooperation on counter-terrorism, advances
those efforts, and we commend Spain for its leadership.

I, too, wish to place on record my delegation's
condolences to Egypt and Turkey for yesterday's
terrorist attacks.
While terrorism is not a new phenomenon, the rise
of extensive global networks and their sophisticated
use of modern communications technologies have
considerably extended its reach. No country can
consider itself safe from the threat. Groups such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/Da'esh
and Al-Qaida propagate and carry out indiscriminate
attacks across borders and use the Internet to recruit
for, finance and incite acts of terror. They find refuge in
fragile States and vulnerable communities and among
the disenfranchised.

As the Council has recognized, the emergence
of foreign terrorist fighters and the susceptibility to
recruitment of young people from all parts of the world
are particularly concerning developments. Foreign
terrorist fighters prolong the conflicts in which they
participate and carry extremism from one conflict
zone to another. Without effective strategies for
deradicalization and reintegration, the knowledge and
skills they have gained also have the potential to pose
a threat to their countries of origin, should they return.

We all know there are no quick or simple solutions
Effective solutions will require time, resources and
commitment across a broad spectrum of activities to
combat terrorism, prevent and limit its spread, bring
terrorists to justice and rebuild the communities that
have suffered the effects of terrorist violence and
oppression. Effective prosecution and enforcement are
key parts of that effort. International cooperation is
also essential to make those parts work, just as it is to
all of our efforts to keep our communities as safe as
they can be.

The transnational nature of many terrorist
operations makes it much harder both to prevent terrorist
attacks and apprehend terrorists. As our briefers have
emphasized today, the transnational dimension also
poses major challenges to the successful prosecution
of terrorists, once apprehended. In many cases, the
information, evidence and witnesses necessary to
conduct a prosecution successfully are located in
a number of different countries, which raises both
practical and legal challenges.

As today's resolution stresses, international
cooperation among law enforcement agencies and
judicial authorities is essential. Mechanisms such
as mutual legal assistance and extradition have long
existed, but their role in responding to terrorism
remains underutilized. Given the extensive use of the
Internet by terrorist groups, mutual legal assistance
in relation to digital data will become increasingly
significant. Just as our approaches to counter-terrorism
must respond and evolve to meet the threat, so must
the ways in which States cooperate on prosecution and
enforcement issues. We must be as efficient and effective
as possible to combat impunity, while ensuring respect
for human rights, and in particular ensuring respect for
due process in criminal and associated proceedings.

In that regard, we must recognize and deal with the
fact that many States do not have the systems or the
resources to make or respond adequately to requests
for evidence or extradition in a terrorism case. We
are therefore going to have to do more to strengthen
their capacities in those areas. Otherwise, some States
may become unwitting havens for terrorists seeing to
evade justice or hide assets. To that end, New Zealand
recently hosted a joint United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and Pacific Islands Forum workshop in
Auckland, focused on ensuring legislative compliance
with international counter-terrorism instruments.

New Zealand strongly supports the Secretary-
General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.
We will never achieve our common goal of dealing
effectively with terrorism if we do not put a sharp focus
on addressing the conditions that drive individuals
to commit acts of terrorism in the first place. While
security responses are essential, they will only ever be
a partial fix to the much broader problem. New Zealand
also values the work of the Global Counter Terrorism
Forum in developing guidelines of best practices,
including on judicial cooperation in counter-terrorism.

The special meeting on terrorist financing to be
convened by the Chairs of ISIL/Al-Qaida and Counter-
Terrorism Committees today and tomorrow will
provide a useful opportunity to discuss one of the key
challenges that we face, that is, how to deprive terrorist
groups from accessing, raising and moving the funds
they need to finance their activities. I encourage my
successor as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) to
continue that useful practice of joint meetings between
that Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
on the many issues of common interest.

In conclusion, I must stress the key role that the
Council plays in encouraging States to work together
at the bilateral, regional and international levels to
identify and address the drivers of violent extremism.
Today's meeting helpfully builds on high-level Council
meetings on counter-terrorism involving Ministers
of the Interior and Finance last year, and reinforces
the message that all the relevant agencies within
Governments need to be involved in implementing
Council counter-terrorism resolutions.

