The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Georgia and Germany, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Chkheidze
(Georgia) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Eitel
(Germany) took the seat reserved for him at the side
of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, documents S/ 1997/558 and
S/l997/558/Add.l.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1997/594, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/ 1997/590, which contains the
text of a letter dated 28 July 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of Georgia to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting the text
of a letter of the same date from the President of Georgia
addressed to the Secretary-General.

It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/1997/594) before it. If I hear no objection, I shall now
put the draft resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Chile, China, Costa Rica, Egypt, France, Guinea-
Bissau, Japan, Kenya, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as

resolution 1124 (1997).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.30 pm.

