Mr. Andanje (Kenya): I would like to begin by
conveying my Government's message of sympathy and
condolence to the Governments of France and Lebanon
following the recent terrorist atrocities.

My delegation commends the presidency of the
Security Council for convening this important debate.
We are delighted to make our contribution.

Kenya aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and
by the representative of Sierra Leone on behalf of the
African Group.

Kenya attaches high priority to conflict prevention
and to addressing the root causes of conflict, in equal
importance, with regard to their impact on development.
They are inseparably connected. It is indisputable that
development has no worse enemy than war. Conflicts
result in death, suffering and the displacement of entire
populations. We recognize that the absence ofpeace and
security in countries in conflict impedes sustainable
development. Kenya therefore welcomes Sustainable
Development Goal (SDG) 16, on peace, justice and
strong institutions. Nevertheless, we are convinced
that Goal 16 is more of a development challenge and
that it should not be seen as a security challenge. It
should serve as a framework that supports the effective
implementation of the rest of the SDGs.

My delegation fully supports efforts aimed at
assisting countries emerging from conflict. We
concur with the view that this requires an approach
that incorporates and strengthens coherence across
the political, security, development and human rights
sectors - an approach that also includes the rule of
law and addresses the underlying causes of conflict.
Security and development ultimately depend on respect
for human rights and the rule of law. However, there
are other equally important, interrelated considerations
that need to be taken into account. Nothing happens
in a vacuum. Many factors impact development, both
within countries and among them. Such factors compel
us to address pressing issues in the context of existing
reality rather than in terms of the outcome we might
wish for. That can sometimes be inconvenient.

I would like to briefly underline my delegation's
views on the connection between peace and security
and development in the context of supporting the
Council's prevention agenda and working to better
understand the root causes of conflict. I will highlight
four issues touching on the root causes of conflict and
global governance. The point is not to revisit history
as some distant, past event. We must understand the
seeds of conflict in today's world so that we can seek
solutions from an accurate understanding of the root
causes of conflict.

The rule of law and human rights are vital to global
security and prosperity. The rule of law must be seen to
be fair, while addressing global injustices and inequality
and promoting fairness. However, if we do not remain
true to those ideals, they will not gain legitimacy and
credibility in the eyes of others. None of the SDGs can
be achieved without genuine transformation whereby
our different communities can live together in peace
and security.

All countries should enjoy due rights, equal
opportunities and fair participation in global, economic,
financial and trade affairs. We have to give our people,
not only in each nation but also throughout the world,
the benefits of globalization, which unfortunately
accrue to a few. They must at least have a chance to
share in the prosperity.
Finally, my delegation believes that the security of
everyone is linked to that of everyone else. It is only by
working together that we can make each other secure.
As we consider how to address the issues of security,
development and the root causes of conflict, we should
not lose sight of the fact that our hope for success will
hinge on upholding collective responsibility, global
solidarity, the rule of law and mutual accountability.

