Major General Mood: It is a privilege to serve
as a United Nations peacekeeper and it is an honour to
address the Security Council today. It is also an honour
to lead the first United Nations peacekeeping
operation, created by the Council in August 1949 -
the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
(UNTSO). Our mission area straddles complex
cultural, religious, historic and perceptional fault lines
in Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria. The work
of UNTSO is twofold. On the one hand we continue to
observe, on the Council's behalf, withdrawals and
military disengagements between Israel, Lebanon and
Syria. On the other hand, through regional dialogue we
continue to assist the efforts of all five countries
towards a regional peace.

One might ask: Does UNTSO still deliver on the
commitment made by the Council in 1949? Let me
answer with four thoughts. First, UNTSO continues to
provide the international community with a regional
presence and perspectives on the Middle East that are
not limited to local withdrawal and disengagement
areas. Secondly, we continue to enjoy consent and
appreciation wherever we operate, from our
headquarters in Jerusalem, to Amman to Beirut,
Damascus and Cairo. Thirdly, once the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)
have accomplished their mandates, UNTSO provides
an available mechanism for transition, while also
supporting the parties in their subsequent
implementation of a comprehensive regional peace in
the Middle East.

Finally, impartial observation, de-escalation of
incidents and an objective regional perspective are
delivered at a fraction of the cost of larger operations.
As borders are discussed among Israel, its neighbours
and a future Palestinian State, UNTSO continues to be
as current today as when the Green Line was drawn.

Allow me to highlight some achievements. First,
the Force Commanders of UNIFIL and UNDOF
recognize the complementary value of unarmed UNTSO
observers under their operational control. The 153
unarmed female and male observers from 23 nations are
well-trained and experienced officers, contributing
significantly to UNIFIL and UNDOF operations.

Secondly, UNTSO, UNIFIL and UNDOF Force
Commanders have achieved unity of effort on mandate
implementation, enabled by their combined role as
heads of mission, thus aligning military and civilian
components in the same direction.

Thirdly, our unarmed male and female observers
enjoy unique access and trust among the local
authorities and population in South Lebanon and on the
Golan.
Fourthly, we are welcomed and actively engaged
in bilateral and multilateral dialogues that serve to
de-escalate incidents and eliminate violence.

Fifthly, we enjoy an open and constructive host
nation dialogue with all five countries on a range of
issues related to support and cooperation.

Lastly, UNIFIL, UNTSO and UNDOF are
harmonizing and cooperating effectively on logistical
aspects of the missions, achieving cost-effectiveness
and enhancing operational output.

Allow me also to point out a few concerns and
challenges. First, improved coordination among the
civilian and military components of the United Nations
family in order to achieve integrated effects that imply
sustainable results carry considerable potential.

Secondly, much of the complexity we face is born
in and fuelled from countries beyond the five in the
Mission area. There is a need to relate to those who can
influence the military landscape, including States that
are not within the Mission area and non-States that are.

Thirdly, the credibility of the United Nations rests
on impartiality - actual and as perceived by the host
nations.

Lastly, seeds of conflict born of the fundamental
long-term risks to our planet, such as the lack of fresh
water, are becoming more apparent, including in the
Middle East.

The United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization is the most enduring evidence of the
Security Council's commitment to supporting the
achievement of a comprehensive regional peace in the
Middle East. As the United Nations calls upon the
parties to show maximum restraint, refrain from
violations of Security Council resolutions and engage
in active dialogue, the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization remains ready and available
to support their positive engagement.

