Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): First, allow me to
express my profound sorrow at the deaths of those who
perished, deep condolences to the bereaved families
and heartfelt sympathy to those injured in the suicide
bombing in Haifa on 4 October. Terrorism cannot be
justified for any reason. Japan reiterates its
condemnation of the brutal terrorist attacks that
continue to victimize large numbers of innocent people.

The Israeli attack against Syrian territory on
5 October, however, could cause a further deterioration
of the situation in that region, where the level of
tension is already elevated. Japan considers that attack
to be absolutely deplorable.

As those incidents illustrate, the situation in the
Middle East has worsened, to the great disappointment
of the international community. Japan recognizes that
the extension of the so-called separation fences, as
approved by the Israeli Cabinet, will cut into the Green
Line. This is particularly true in the case of the area
surrounding the Ariel settlement.

These separation fences, although it is claimed
that they are intended to prevent the intrusion of
terrorists, not only negatively affect the lives of
Palestinians but also prejudge the final status of the
negotiations, as the fence is to be extended inside the
Green Line. Japan has therefore called upon the Israeli
Government to reconsider its fence programme.

With respect to the latest Israeli decision to
extend the fence, which is truly regrettable, Japan
strongly requested the Israeli Government, on
1 October - the day of Cabinet approval - to refrain
from implementing that decision. Today, I would like
to take this opportunity to request the Israeli
Government once again not to implement that decision.
Japan will closely watch the Israeli Government's
actions with regard to this matter.

At the same time, Japan fully expects that the
Palestinian Authority will resolutely fight against
violence by the extremists and take steadfast measures
for that purpose. It is indispensable that the Palestinian
Authority fully recognize that, unless steady efforts are
made, it will be difficult to improve the situation. I
would also like to emphasize that any lack of resolute
measures on the part of the Palestinian Authority
against the violence will only provide an additional
excuse inside Israel for the continued construction of
the separation fence.

The Government of Japan is concerned that the
efforts for peace based on the road map, which is now
at a critical juncture, have become increasingly fraught
with difficulties. Nevertheless, the road map remains
the only viable way to achieve peace. I reiterate our
earnest hope that, in order to resume the
implementation of the road map, both the Israeli and
the Palestinian sides will exercise the maximum self-
restraint, refrain from taking measures which will
worsen the situation, and make the utmost efforts for
putting an end to the violence.

