The Secretary-General: It is apleasure to welcome
President Santos Calderon to the Chamber today and to
share the good news he brings. After more than four
years of arduous negotiations with the Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia-People's Army, a Final
Peace Agreement is finally at hand. I salute President
Santos Calderon's vision, courage and leadership in
ending through negotiations a conflict that has caused
so much suffering for the Colombian people for so
many decades. This great achievement is the work of
Colombians - the parties and the many organizations
and individuals who contributed to the negotiations.

The international community has been privileged
to support their efforts. I would like to recognize in
particular the contributions of Cuba and Norway,
the guarantors, along with Chile and Venezuela, the
accompanying nations. The United Nations has been
entrusted with important responsibilities, in particular
in the monitoring and verification of the ceasefire
and the laying down of arms. I commend the Security
Council for its unanimous, timely and effective action
in responding to Colombia's request for assistance.
When the parties asked for this support in January,
there was still no ceasefire, much less a final agreement.
Yet the Council did not hesitate. They believed in the
Colombian peace process and you acted.

We are now well advanced in the deployment of
the United Nations Mission in Colombia. Some 200
unarmed observers and civilian staff are on the ground,
deploying to the zones where they will carry out their
verification, working with the parties and engaging
with communities and local authorities. Their numbers
will grow quickly as the next stages of the peace
process are completed. Their presence aims to help
ensure that crucial commitments will be kept and to
build confidence in the peace process.

I thank the Council for its latest resolution 2307
(2016), authorizing the recommendations contained
in my report (S/20l6/729) regarding the mandate, size
and logistical requirements for the Mission. I assure
members that the Mission will work in a coordinated
fashion alongside the existing United Nations system
in Colombia. United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes have been supporting peacebuilding
in Colombia for many years. They are gearing up to
provide all possible support for the implementation
of the agreements, including by continuing their
importantwork on promoting human rights,
implementing development programmes and providing
humanitarian assistance.

I commend President Santos Calderon once again
for his vision and determination. It will be an honour to
attend the signing ceremony in Cartagena on Monday.
These comprehensive agreements offer Colombians not
only the end of a conflict, but the prospect of lasting
peace rooted in more equitable development, a fully
inclusive democracy and redress for millions of victims.
At a time of armed conflict in many other places, peace
in Colombia sends a powerful message of hope to the
world.

