The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a brief statement in my capacity as the
representative of Burkina Faso.

Throughout the discussions on the draft
resolution, Burkina Faso has continually recalled that
the imposition of sanctions is an extreme measure that
the Council should consider only as a last resort.
However, Burkina Faso decided to vote in favour of
resolution 1907 (2009) for the following reasons.

First of all, Burkina Faso continues to be very
concerned by the current situation in Somalia, and we
are particularly concerned today in the light of the
serious deterioration of the security situation that took
place on Sunday, 20 December, with clashes between
illegal armed groups and Governmental soldiers, which
led to 14 deaths. Attributed essentially to militia of the
Al-Shabaab movement, supported by foreign fighters,
these attacks make it difficult for humanitarians to
work. Moreover, their scale and their intensity lend
credibility to the argument about support for the
insurgents coming from the outside, particularly from
countries in the subregion.

Burkina Faso also wanted to ensure follow-up to
the express request made by the competent bodies of
the African Union in the light of the aforementioned
situation. Indeed, the African Union Peace and Security
Council, in the communique it issued after 194th
meeting, held 15 June 2009, expressed its deep concern
at the increased presence of foreign elements in
Mogadishu and other parts of Somalia and called on
the Security Council to impose sanctions on
individuals and States who oppose the peace and
reconciliation process in Somalia. That appeal from the
Peace and Security Council was ratified by the
thirteenth session of the Assembly of heads of State
and Government of the African Union, which was held
from 1 to 3 July 2009.

However, given that the sanctions regime
provided for in the resolution that we have just adopted
is accompanied by a review mechanism, Eritrea still
has time to show its good faith and goodwill. We
therefore urge Eritrea to cooperate with the
international community, to scrupulously respect the
arms embargo, to support the implementation of the
Djibouti Agreement, the only framework for a political
settlement of the Somali crisis, and to recognize the
Transitional Federal Government as the only legitimate
political authority in Somalia.

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Djibouti.
