Mr. Nesho (Albania): The debate about Iraq is
taking on broad dimensions. All nations have a historic
responsibility to reflect on the position of the
international community and to act in the interests of
peace and stability in the world. The possession and
production of weapons of mass destruction and the
danger posed by their potential use in terrorist acts
constitute a real threat to the entire international
community.

The Albanian Government has attentively
followed the latest developments on Iraq and
commends the work done by the United Nations
inspectors. But to our understanding, their reports
clearly show that Iraq is still in breach of the
obligations deriving from the Security Council
resolution 1441 (2002). That resolution, unanimously
adopted, clearly states that Iraq should bring to full and
verified completion the disarmament process by
ceasing to produce and possess weapons of mass
destruction and ending the development of related
programmes

We see that Iraq has to date failed to comply with
resolution 1441 (2002), as it has not immediately,
actively and unconditionally cooperated with United
Nations inspectors. As has often been reiterated in this
body, the issue is not whether Iraq has weapons of
mass destruction but whether it is cooperating to get rid
of them.

The task of inspections in Iraq cannot go on
endlessly, because it would weaken the importance of
resolution 1441 (2002) and the credibility of the
Organization. The international community must be
determined to act without wasting time and to send the
necessary message of responsibility and determination
for the preservation of the international order. Vain
promises and empty rhetoric about peace do not
prevent crime or secure peace. Recently, we in the
Balkans suffered the fatal consequences resulting from
the international community's delay in taking the
necessary decisions. The mass graves in Srebrenica and
Kosovo attest to that sad truth.
In its statement of 5 February 2003, the Vilnius
Group of countries, in which Albania participates,
stated its concern about the threat of terrorism and of
dictatorial regimes that possess weapons of mass
destruction, as well as its views regarding democratic
values in the world. We appeal to the Security Council
to undertake the necessary action in response to the
continuous threat that Iraq poses to international peace
and security. The Albanian Government understands
and supports the commitment of the United States of
America and of other nations to avoid the threats of
weapons of mass destruction and international
terrorism.

The determination to prevent terror is a great
achievement of the present world civilization. By
acting in time and with a long-term vision we will
avoid the consequences that might stem from a lack of
determination.

