Mr. Djedje (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
Poland's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May, and to assure you of
C6te d'Ivoire's support, as we had already begun
to do yesterday during our important discussion on
children and armed conflict. In any case, we wish you
every success for the month of May. On behalf of my
delegation, I would like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
the quality of his briefing on the situation in that country.

In speaking for the first time on the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, I would like to inform the
High Representative that he has the full support of
C6te d'Ivoire for his mandate in implementing the
Dayton Peace Agreement of 14 December 1995. That
Agreement has been the cornerstone of the work of the
international community in providing the country with
a multiethnic, multi-faith and multicultural framework.

Like the High Representative, my country is pleased
to note that Bosnia and Herzegovina has submitted to the
European Commission the answers to the questionnaire
necessary for the review of its candidacy for membership
in the European Union. That act demonstrates, if it
were needed, the Bosnian authorities' ability to make
the necessary efforts and essential reforms, particularly
in the areas of the rule of law, fundamental rights and
judicial independence, in order to complete the cycle
of political and socioeconomic change in their country.
In that regard, my delegation welcomes the fact that
the Bosnian authorities have adopted the necessary
legislative measures to resume cooperation with the
International Monetary Fund.

Despite the hopes raised by the points that I have
just highlighted, C6te d'Ivoire remains concerned
about the ongoing political tensions in the country,
which, if we are not careful, could undermine the
gains of the Dayton Agreement. My delegation is
particularly concerned about the statements of the
leaders of Republika Srpska calling for secession
from Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that regard, Cote
d'Ivoire calls on all political actors in the country to
focus on development priorities, particularly economic
and social, and to refrain from being drawn into the
rhetoric of division, which could threaten the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also urge all
stakeholders to redouble their efforts and to undertake
the fundamental reforms to ensure that the elections to
be held in October are fully democratic.

My delegation remains deeply concerned that the
Parliament of Bosnia and Herzegovina has not dealt
with the shortcomings of several provisions of the
criminal procedure code to combat organized crime and
corruption. In that regard, we encourage the Parliament
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to undertake the appropriate
reforms with a view to tackling the economic, social
and security challenges facing the country today. My
country also urges the political authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to guarantee for their citizens the
establishment of the rule of law in order to prevent
situations of impunity in a country in search of national
reconciliation and in which all communities are called
on to live together in peace and harmony.

We encourage the international community to
remain alert with respect to the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which remains fragile. The Security
Council must be aware at all times of any difficulties
that the High Representative may face in the full
implementation of the Dayton Peace Accord, which
is key not just to Bosnia and Herzegovina's stability
but to that of the Balkan region as a whole. We call
on all Bosnian political groups to reject dangerous
rhetoric and to use dialogue in order to find peaceful
solutions to the differences between the country's
different communities. We also encourage Bosnia and
Herzegovina's neighbours to combine their efforts to
promote lasting peace there.

Finally, like other countries, Cote d'Ivoire would
like to express its commitment to the unity, territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
a fully functional and independent State.

