The President: I should like to recall that at its
3590th meeting, on 7 November 1995, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1018 (1995), in which it decided that the
election to fill the vacancy in the International Court of
Justice should take place on 28 February 1996 at a meeting
of the Security Council and at a meeting of the General
Assembly at its fiftieth session.

This morning the Security Council and the General
Assembly will proceed independently with the election, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Statute of the
Court, for the purpose of filling this vacancy. The list of
candidates nominated by national groups and received by
the Secretary-General within the required time for
submission, that is, by 2 February 1996, is contained in
document S/1996/52 and Add.1. Document S/1996/133
contains the name of a candidate nominated by a national
group and received by the Secretary-General after
2 February 1996. Document S/1996/53 contains the
curricula vitae of the candidates nominated by the national
groups.

The Security Council also has before it, in document
S/1996/51, a memorandum by the Secretary-General
describing the present composition of the Court and setting
out the procedure to be followed in the conduct of the
election.

I should like to remind the Council that under
Article 10, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the International
Court of Justice,

"Those candidates who obtain an absolute
majority of votes in the General Assembly and in the
Security Council shall be considered as elected."

The required majority in the Security Council is eight votes.
Article 15 of the Statute of the Court provides that

"A member of the Court elected to replace a

member whose term of office has not expired shall

hold office for the remainder of his predecessor's
term."
Accordingly, the member elected to fill the remainder of
the term left vacant by the death of Judge Andres Aguilar
Mawdsley will serve until 5 February 2000.

The voting will be by secret ballot. When we
proceed to the vote, members of the Council will receive
a ballot paper containing the names of the candidates. N o
withdrawal will be accepted once the ballot papers have
been distributed. However, it would be possible to
withdraw between ballots. Members of the Council will
be requested to place an "X" next to the name of the
candidate for whom they wish to vote. Votes may be cast
only for a candidate whose name appears on the ballot
paper, and each elector may vote for only one candidate;
otherwise, the ballot will be considered invalid. When a
candidate has obtained the required majority, I shall notify
the President of the General Assembly of the name of that
candidate, and I shall request the Council to remain in
session pending the receipt from the President of the
General Assembly of the result of the voting in the
Assembly.

I shall now draw lots to select two delegations to
serve as tellers.

>l<>l<>l<

The President: The names of the delegations of
Guinea-Bissau and Germany have been drawn. I therefore
request each of them to appoint one member of their
respective delegations to serve as teller.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Welberts
(Germany) and Mr. Sane (Guinea-Bissau) acted as
tellers.


The President: May I take it that the Council is
now ready to proceed with the election to fill the vacancy
caused by the death of Judge Aguilar Mawdsley?

It is so decided.


The President: I would ask the Conference Officer
to distribute the ballot papers.

Members of the Council should place an "X" in the
box next to the name of the candidate for whom they
wish to vote.

 

>l<>l<>l=


The President: I take it that all members of the
Council have now voted, and I request the Conference
Officer to collect the ballot papers.

All the ballot papers have been collected. I should like
to remind the Council that, as we agreed during our
consultations, the ballots will not be counted until it has
been verified that the ballot papers in the General Assembly
have been collected. The Council will remain in session
pending the receipt of that information.

***


The President: I have now been informed that the
ballot papers have been collected in the General Assembly.
The counting of the ballots in the Security Council will
begin. The tellers will now count the ballots. As agreed in
our consultations, there will be two independent countings
of the ballots, one by each teller.

>l<>l<>l<


The President: The result of the voting is as follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:

Mr. Gonzalo Parra-Aranguren 9

Mr. Julio A. Barberis

Mr. Francisco Villagran Kramer l


The President: A single candidate, Mr. Gonzalo
Parra-Aranguren has accordingly received the required
majority of votes in the Security Council.

I shall communicate the results of the vote to the
President of the General Assembly in writing. I request
the Council to remain in session while we wait for the
President of the General Assembly to inform the Council
of the result of the voting in the Assembly.

>l<>l<>l<


The President: I should like to inform the members
of the Council that I have just received from the President
of the General Assembly the following letter:

"I have the honour to inform you that, at the
IOlst plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
held today for the purpose of electing one member
of the International Court of Justice, the following
candidate obtained an absolute majority of votes in
the General Assembly: Mr. Gonzalo
Parra-Aranguren."

As the Security Council and the General Assembly
have agreed on the same candidate, the distinguished
jurist Mr. Gonzalo Parra-Aranguren of Venezuela has
been elected a member of the International Court of
Justice for a term of office expiring on 5 February 2000.

I should like to congratulate Mr. Parra-Aranguren
and wish him every success in the high office to which he
has been elected. I should also like to thank the tellers for
their assistance.

The Security Council has thus concluded its business
for this meeting.

The meeting rose at 1.20 pm.

