Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
would like at the outset to welcome the convening of
today's meeting and to thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.

I should like to comment briefly on the questions we
are discussing today.

First, on the improvement of the relationship and
coordination between the Security Council and the
regional and subregional organizations, we believe that
the Security Council should take more concrete action to
support the Organization of African Unity (OAU), the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Southern African Development Community (SADC) and
the Inter-Governmental Authority on Development. We
support the work of all of those regional and subregional
organizations.

Secondly, we believe that in considering issues
involving hot spots, we could, in the relevant resolutions
and presidential statements, welcome the regional
organization concerned and approve or authorize it to
carry out the relevant work.

Thirdly, efforts should be made to strengthen the
relationship between the Security Council and the OAU.
Consideration could be given to the possibility of inviting
the Secretary-General of the OAU, or his representative,
to give regular briefings to the Security Council.

Fourthly, following OAU summit or ministerial
meetings, we could invite the Chairman for that month to
brief the Council as appropriate.

The second issue I would like to comment on is how
to carry out peacekeeping operations in Africa in a more
timely and effective manner. First, we believe that the
general principles are obvious - that is to say, we should
abide by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the

 

United Nations, and also by the three principles of
neutrality, self-defence and prior consent of the parties
concerned. These are the three principles that must guide
us.

Secondly, we believe that, with regard to peacekeeping
operations in Africa, the views of the countries concerned,
the relevant regional organizations and the Secretariat
should be sought beforehand. When a decision is taken, the
lack of guarantees for security on the ground cannot be
used as a pretext for taking a negative approach.

Thirdly, we believe that a lack of resources has
gravely impeded the normal functioning of peacekeeping
operations. We therefore call upon the countries that are in
arrears for assessed peacekeeping contributions to pay their
arrears in full in a prompt and unconditional manner.

Fourthly, with regard to the peacekeeping operations
carried out in Sierra Leone, the reaction of the Security
Council was not prompt. The Council was also hesitant in
the case of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. All this
has given rise to a great deal of suspicion about double
standards. We believe that the key here is whether the
necessary political will can be mustered.

The third question I would like to comment on relates
to the additional instruments that the Security Council could
use in order to better prevent and resolve conflicts in
Africa. We believe that, generally speaking, the Security
Council must find new means in order to improve its work.

First, let us recall that the Security Council dispatched
a mission to East Timor last September to investigate the
situation on the ground. This was well received by all of
the parties concerned. We believe that the Security Council
could also dispatch similar missions to the relevant regions
in Africa in order to carry our a study of the situation on
the ground.

Secondly, we believe that the Security Council should
make increased efforts to tap the potential of existing
mechanisms and resources. For instance, the sanctions
Committees could play an enhanced role in this regard. The
manner in which Ambassador Fowler, Chairman of the
sanctions Committee on Angola, has conducted the affairs
of that Committee merits our attention and consideration.

Thirdly, we believe that African conflicts have very
complex causes and that efforts should therefore be made
to deal with both the symptoms and root causes in a
balanced manner. Following the fulfilment by peacekeeping
operations of their mandates, other relevant bodies within
the United Nations system should take over promptly and
play their proper role in the building of peace. The
Security Council should therefore further strengthen its
exchanges and cooperation with other relevant United
Nations bodies, such as the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council.

We believe that today's discussion is a very good
beginning. There is an old Chinese saying that a journey
of a thousand miles must start with the first step.

