Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would first like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman, Charge
d'affaires Adamson and Ambassador Cardi - the
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) - for their valuable briefings. My delegation
would like to take this opportunity to commend
the dedicated and practical work of the Facilitator.
Throughout the year, much work has been done
on organizational and technical assistance for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

Kazakhstan welcomes the fourth report
(S/2017/1030) of the Secretary-General, in which there
is strong support for the implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). We attach
great importance to that historic agreement, which
not only ensures the exclusively peaceful nature of
Iran's nuclear programme but also represents a major
achievement in nuclear non-proliferation. Kazakhstan
made a significant contribution to the negotiation
process that led to the agreement. We stand for the
further and full implementation of the JCPOA by
all parties.

The majority of the international community
demands the preservation and continuation of the
hard-earned achievement of multilateral diplomacy.
It is necessary to acknowledge that the agreement has
put Iran on a nuclear-free path, with the International
Atomic Energy Agency confirming that Islamic
Republic of Iran is fulfilling all its obligations with
regard to the nuclear aspects of the deal.

As for the conclusions and recommendations of
the fourth report of the Secretary-General, Kazakhstan
takes a constructive approach in assessing the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and the
JCPOA. With regard to the worrying violations of the
provision of ballistic missiles and the alleged transfer
of missile technology to Yemen, a transparent and
impartial investigation of all reported cases requires
greater and closer interaction and cooperation among
the Secretariat, Iran and other countries concerned. We
will expect more detailed information, as promised in
the report of the Secretary-General.

We should be careful not to discredit the other
achievements that have been made within the
framework of resolution 2231 (2016) and the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. Implementing the
JCPOA has had a significant impact on normalizing the
situation in the region and beyond. Its positive effects
on the revitalization of economic activities in the region
will definitely strengthen the atmosphere of trust and
confidence, which are very crucial to ensure regional
stability and peace.

In conclusion, I would like to underline that
Kazakhstan will continue to fully support and strictly
implement resolution 2231 (2015). We also express
our readiness to cooperate with Iran and others in
the framework of implementing the JCPOA. We
are firmly convinced that the Security Council, as
a guarantor of international peace security, should
always oversee its full compliance. The Council can
rest assured that Kazakhstan will play its full part in a
responsible manner.

