Mr. Biabaorroh-Iboro (Congo) (spoke in French): My delegation wishes to thank Mr. Pronk for
his comprehensive and enlightening briefing. We are
grateful to the Secretary-General for submitting to the
Council the report before us (S/2006/728), which
makes it possible to follow the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the fulfilment of
the mandate of the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan (UNMIS) as envisaged in resolution 1590
(2005).

Although the report indicates that some progress
has been made, it raises many worrisome issues. My
delegation is concerned, to say the least, that the
inordinately long wait for the dividends of peace will
permanently dash the hopes of sorely afflicted
populations, reignite the crisis and thus increase the
people's suffering. We are seeing too much slowness.
My delegation urges the parties to the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement to resolutely implement all of its
provisions, including with regard to the issue of power-
and wealth-sharing.

My delegation is pleased at the work carried out
by the United Nations Mission in the Sudan and its
support for the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, with a view to promoting
reconciliation between the parties, as well as its
assistance to the African Union Mission in the Sudan.
We regret that constraints have been placed upon its
activities. Although security in southern Sudan has
improved, the situation continues to be fragile because
of the presence of armed groups and the circulation of
weapons. We fear that this situation could jeopardize
progress that has been achieved. The peace process
under way in Darfur and in southern Sudan offers real
opportunities that leaders in the Sudan should make the
best of in order to ease the suffering of their people.
My delegation also stresses that the Darfur-Darfur
dialogue is an important element that aims at including
all the parties in the implementation of the Agreement
and at bolstering reconciliation. That process is
essential for peace in Darfur.

In conclusion, I cannot fail to observe that
rejecting a United Nations peacekeeping force and the
withdrawal of UNMIS from the Darfur region pose an
enormous risk; the international community cannot
take such a risk, especially in the light of developments
on the ground. We welcome the 26 August cessation of
hostilities agreement between the Government of
Uganda and the Lord's Resistance Army. We hope that
the agreement will help ease the suffering of the people
in northern Uganda.

We support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the mandate of UNMIS be
renewed for 12 months, until 24 September 2007. We
take note of the invitation just issued by the delegation
of the United States of America.

