I sincerely thank His Excellency Mr. Ralph Gonsalves, Prime Minister of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, for chairing today's important open debate. As the United Nations celebrates its seventy-fifth anniversary, today's meeting takes place at the right time for us to reflect on the contemporary drivers of conflicts and insecurity and strengthen our efforts towards peacebuilding and sustaining peace. I thank the Deputy Secretary-General and other briefers for their insightful briefings. As we are all aware today, the international community continues to face serious threats and challenges as a result of the lack of respect for and even breach of the fundamental principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and set out in General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV), "The Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States", especially those pertaining to the sovereign equality of States, the non-use or threat of use of force and the peaceful settlement of disputes. These are the drivers of tensions, conflicts and confrontation. They are manifested in the imposition of one's will on others, interference in the internal affairs of sovereign States, as well as complex developments regarding an arms race, especially in the nuclear field, and the violation of international law, including the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, as the significance of seas and oceans to international peace, security and development continues to increase. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is a calamitous incidence of non-traditional security challenges. With that, Mr. President, please allow me to make the following points. We need to develop friendly relations among nations and build up a culture of upholding the Charter of the United Nations and international law. We call on all parties to conflicts to exercise maximum restraint, endorse a global ceasefire, as called for by the Secretary-General, and observe international obligations in order to ease tensions and resume dialogue towards lasting solutions. We also call for the lifting of unilateral sanctions that adversely affect socioeconomic development and the livelihoods of people in conflict-ridden areas. Multilateralism should be further enhanced, with the United Nations at the core of international cooperation to harmonize the interests and behaviours of Member States and strengthen partnerships with other regional and subregional organizations. The Security Council should stay united during the decision-making process, make the best use of available tools, particularly preventive diplomacy and mediation, and embark on the reform of United Nations peace operations. Due attention must be paid to addressing the root causes of conflicts and insecurity rather than solely addressing their consequences. Efforts should be intensified at all stages, from early warning and prevention to the peaceful resolution of conflicts and from post-conflict recovery to sustainable development. Priority should be accorded to the protection of civilians, including the most vulnerable, as well as to dealing with bomb and mine consequences and victim assistance. Similarly, the coordinated efforts of the international community must focus on a resilient economic recovery, a human-centric approach, a global partnership for development and an efficient functioning of global governance, where developing countries, most of those hardest hit by the COVID-19 pandemic and external shocks, are properly assisted with financing, technology and market access. Rising from the situation of a poor, less developed country and from the ashes of a war-torn land to become a middle-income country, Viet Nam values and will remain committed to being a reliable partner for sustainable peace and development. Together with other members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), we have strived to build an ASEAN community of mutual care, support and sharing - a South-East Asia of peace, security and stability - as well as a regional environment conducive to good neighbourliness, cooperation and prosperity. Viet Nam stands ready to work with all partners and stakeholders to cope with the challenges of the time.
