Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, I should like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your presidency of the Council
for the month of July, which marks the start of the
summer holidays and serves to remind us of where we
stand with regard to work that we must complete at the
forthcoming session, including on the question of
Palestine.

I would also like to express my appreciation to
Ambassador Nelson Messone, Permanent
Representative of Gabon, for his exemplary leadership
of the Council during the past month. I would also like
to thank Mr. Robert Serry for his comprehensive
briefing.

Two and a half years after the end of Israeli
military operations in the Gaza Strip, we are, once

again, witnessing a surge in violence in and around
Gaza. The worrisome situation requires the Council to
take urgent and appropriate action, in accordance with
its resolution 1860 (2009), in order to protect the
civilians in that overpopulated Palestinian territory. As
well, the illegal economic blockade of Gaza must be
lifted and a durable ceasefire ensured. Efforts aimed at
achieving Palestinian reconciliation carried out around
the leadership of President Abbas, as called for in
resolution 1860 (2009), should also be supported.
Undoubtedly these basic measures are vital to
stabilizing the situation and establishing peace.

The stalemate in the peace process is
unacceptable at a time when so many have pinned their
hopes on September and the sixty-sixth session of the
General Assembly. Now, more than ever, the Council
must act resolutely to bring about a peaceful settlement
to the question of Palestine. In that regard, it should be
recalled that the Quartet Road Map, which the Council
endorsed in its resolution 1515 (2003), has already set
out the necessary requirements, including refraining
from any action that might undermine confidence
between the parties.

The Council will thus agree with me that a call
for the resumption of negotiations must necessarily be
accompanied by measures to compel Israel to abide
strictly by its obligations under international law.
Indeed, inaction on the part of the Council further
invites Israel to intensify its illegal policies, as
evidenced by the explosive growth of Israeli
settlements.

The Council is aware, however, that that the
ultimate objective of the settlement project is to
consolidate Israeli control over the occupied
Palestinian territory and make it impossible to achieve
a two-State solution based on the June 1967 borders, as
called for by President Obama in his speech of 19 May.

Furthermore it is deplorable and even frustrating
that the Quartet's much-anticipated meeting did not
lead to a decision on clear parameters, similar to those
endorsed by the European Union, to guide Israeli-
Palestinian negotiations.

Since the last open debate of the Council on the
Palestinian question (S/PV.6520), our Committee has
made every effort to promote a solution that would rest
on the existence of two States and establish peace
between the Israelis and the Palestinians. In that
connection, the Committee held the United Nations
Seminar on Assistance to the Palestinian People in
Helsinki, in April, to mobilize international support for
the Palestinian State-building programme. In that
connection, it is widely agreed that the Palestinian
Authority has succeeded in establishing sound public
institutions.

Similarly, in Brussels in June, the Committee
convened the United Nations International Meeting in
Support of the Israeli-Palestinian Peace Process, to
take stock of European and other international and
multilateral initiatives aimed at achieving a two-State
solution. Our Committee is also heartened by the
growing number of States recognizing Palestine.

We are also mindful that the Road Map includes
other multilateral options, including, in the context of
the United Nations, promoting the achievement of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security. Today, perhaps more than ever, the
Security Council has a particular role to play in
achieving this shared but often delayed goal.

In this manner, and by acting with strong political
will and courage, we can achieve justice for both the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples. This has been the stated
aim of the United Nations Since 1975, which our
Committee strives to achieve.

The President (spoke in French) I now give the
floor to the representative of the European Union,
Mr. Pedro Serrano

