Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of Friends of
Haiti, which includes Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, France, Guatemala, Peru, the United States
of America and my country, Uruguay.

I would like to commend you, Madam President,
for having organized this debate to discuss the latest
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (S/2014/162).

The Group of Friends welcomes the presence
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Sandra Honore, and thanks her for her
comprehensive briefing and for her tireless work.
We also welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Haiti.

Strengthening the rule of law and democratic
institutions, establishing a political environment
conducive to democratic stability and improving
socioeconomic conditions are key elements for
achieving broader and more sustainable stability and
prosperity in Haiti. In that regard, the Group of Friends
strongly encourages all political actors in Haiti to
continue deepening their dialogue and cooperation with
a view to strengthening democracy in their country,
and reiterates the importance of the holding free and
fair legislative, municipal and local elections this year
as an essential and urgent step towards lasting stability,
recovery and development in Haiti.

The Group welcomes the efforts devoted by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Haiti
to facilitate dialogue among all national actors with a
view to strengthening Haitian democratic institutions.
The signing of the El Rancho agreement marks
an important milestone in a Haitian-led process and
represents the will of Haitian political stakeholders
to move forward with the planning of elections. That
momentum must not be lost. We encourage Haiti's
political leaders to keep up that spirit of cooperation
and act promptly to uphold the provisions of the
agreement regarding the reform of the electoral law, the
establishment of a transitional Electoral Council and
the fixing of an electoral timetable.

The Group of Friends notes that, since the latest
report by the Secretary-General, the overall security
situation in Haiti has remained relatively stable,
although it has been marked by an increase in civil
unrest during the first part ofthe reporting period. That
has allowed the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to implement the drawdown
established in resolutions 2070 (2012) and 2119 (2013)
without undermining the security and stability of Haiti.
The Group of Friends takes note of the progress in the
execution of MINUSTAH's 2013-2016 consolidation
plan, aimed at allowing the Haitian authorities to
assume full responsibility for their country's security
as soon as conditions permit. The Group of Friends
commends this calibrated approach and reiterates the
importance of making decisions on future actions
based on conditions on the ground.

The Group of Friends takes note of the five
options presented in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2014/162) as a basis for future discussions on
how best to carry out the political and peacekeeping
functions that remain crucial to Haiti's progress. The
Group also welcomes the Secretary-General's intention
to conduct a comprehensive strategic assessment with
a view to making a recommendation to the Council,
and underlines the importance of maintaining close
cooperation with the Government of Haiti in that regard.

The Group of Friends reiterates the importance of
the Government of Haiti's commitment to strengthening
the rule of law and making further progress in the
judiciary and security sectors. In that regard, the
Group would like to emphasize the Haitian National
Police's critical role in Haiti's security and stability
and to stress the importance of completing its ongoing
strengthening, professionalization and reform so that
it can assume full responsibility for security in Haiti.
In that context, the Group of Friends emphasizes the
importance of building up the Haitian National Police's
capacity outside Port-au-Prince, and ensuring its
adherence to the highest standards of respect for human
rights.
The Group of Friends of Haiti reiterates its
commitment to the United Nations policy of zero
tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse, and in that
regard expects all United Nations personnel to abide by
the highest standards of conduct. The Group urges all
actors involved to assume their responsibilities in order
to prevent such cases, investigate allegations and hold
those responsible accountable.

The Group welcomes the significant progress made
during 2013 regarding the resettlement of persons
displaced by the 2010 earthquake. However, we are
also concerned about living conditions in the remaining
camps, particularly for women and children, an
example of the persistent humanitarian challenges that
Haiti continues to face. The Group of Friends notes the
ongoing work being done by the Government of Haiti,
MINUSTAH and others to protect vulnerable groups
and encourages all actors to pay as much attention
as possible to preventing and reducing violent crime,
particularly against women and children, including
rape and other crimes of sexual violence.

The ongoing efforts to eliminate the cholera
epidemic are a reminder ofthe importance of sustaining
cooperation between the international community and
the Government of Haiti in order to meet the needs of
the Haitian people. In that regard, the Group welcomes
the two-year plan developed by the United Nations and
focused on short-term actions in support of the lO-year
national plan for the elimination of cholera in Haiti,
and takes note of the Secretary-General's appointment
of a Senior Coordinator for Cholera Response in Haiti.
Similarly, we acknowledge the efforts of the donor
community and calls on them to fulfil the pledges they
have made without delay.

The Group of Friends of Haiti believes that security,
respect for human rights, rule of law and development
are closely interlinked and mutually strengthen stability.
We therefore underscore the need to systematically
address unemployment, education and the delivery of
basic social services, and to ensure the economic and
political empowerment of women.

At the same time, the Group stresses that there can
be no genuine stability or sustainable development in
Haiti without strengthening democratic institutions

and a credible democratic process. In that context, the
Group emphasizes the importance of promoting the rule
of law through the strengthening of Haitian institutions
and further reaffirms the responsibility of MINUSTAH
for supporting the Haitian State by promoting improved
governance structures, the extension of State authority
and the promotion and protection of human rights, in
accordance with its mandate.

Finally, the Group of Friends of Haiti reaffirms
its solidarity with and commitment to the people
and Government of Haiti in their pursuit of stability,
reconstruction, recovery, social and economic
development and democratic consolidation. The Group
ofFriends recognizes the important role ofMINUSTAH
in ensuring stability and security in Haiti, and expresses
its support for and recognition to the women and men of
MINUSTAH for their dedication and tireless efforts to
support recovery and stability in Haiti.

