Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We wish to thank the
Director for Operations and Advocacy of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), Ms. Reena Ghelani, for her
comprehensive and yet sobering briefing, complemented
by the Permanent Representative of Belgium on behalf
of the co-penholders. We would also like to welcome
our colleague the Permanent Representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

South Africa reiterates its deep concern about the
dire humanitarian situation in Syria. Almost eight
years after the start of the conflict, the situation in
the Syrian Arab Republic remains one of the worst
humanitarian crises in the world. Some 13.1 million
people require humanitarian assistance, including
6.2 million people who are internally displaced. The
humanitarian crisis in Syria has a particularly severe
impact on women, children and people who live with
disabilities. Children have been disproportionally
affected, with over 5 million children at a heightened
risk of undernourishment, dehydration, diarrhoea,
infectious diseases and injury. Millions more will need
to be supported after being exposed to the traumatic
events and violence of the past eight years.

South Africa calls for the full implementation of
resolution 2449 (2018), which renewed the authorization
for cross-border and cross-line humanitarian access
to Syria. My delegation welcomes the successful
humanitarian operation undertaken in Rukban. Initial
reports by OCHA reveal that the operation, involving
133 trucks, was the largest humanitarian operation ever
undertaken by the United Nations in Syria. The Rukban
operation distributed humanitarian assistance to more
than 40,000 people in the form of health, nutritional
and education supplies and more 66,000 blankets and
sleeping bags. Additionally, more than 7,000 children
were vaccinated. Given the difficult environment
in which the operation took place, OCHA and its
implementing partners should be commended for their
success. We also commend the Government of Syria for
authorizing and facilitating access to Rukban.

We should be mindful of the fact that there is an
urgent need for humanitarian assistance in north-
eastern Syria in places such as the Al-Hol camp, three
quarters of whose population are women and children
under the age of five. We also remain concerned about
the situation of civilians, particularly those trapped in
Hajin, the last area controlled by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant. We call on all the parties to abide by
their obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law, for all movements to be voluntary,
for displacement to last no longer than necessary and
for the displaced to be able to return as soon as possible
in safety and dignity.

We welcome the ongoing de-escalation agreement
between Turkey and Russia, which has averted
potentially catastrophic humanitarian consequences,
especially in Idlib province. We urge the parties to
sustain it.

It is important to ensure that the Syrian authorities
allow speedy and sustained access to humanitarian
assistance, bearing in mind the importance of respect
for international humanitarian law and for protecting
the civilian population.

We reiterate our view that the only sustainable
solution to the Syrian question, after so much bombing
and destruction, continues to be a political settlement
achieved through an inclusive Syrian-led dialogue
aimed at a political transition that reflects the will of
the Syrian people, with guaranteed protection for all
groups of Syrian society. We therefore urge the Council
to unite to fully implement resolution 2254 (2013)
and to support Mr. Pedersen, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, who will be briefing us on Thursday.

Finally, we are looking forward to the release of
the strategic humanitarian needs plan for 2019, as well
as to the pledging conference to be held in Brussels
in March. We call on the international community to
make its support as generous as possible. We, as the
international community, and the Council in particular,
must continue supporting the humanitarian efforts
in Syria.

