Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I would like to thank
the French presidency for bringing once again to the
attention of the Security Council the issue of peace
and security in the Sahel region. Today's briefing
is a good opportunity to discuss the steps that the
international community can take to respond to the
challenges facing the region, so I would thank you
once again, Mr. President. Our appreciation goes
also to the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres,
for his report on the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (S/2017/869) and for his comprehensive
presentation today.

Ukraine is extremely concerned by the rapidly
deteriorating security situation in the Sahel region. The
crisis in Mali in 2012 created a State authority vacuum
in the central and northern parts of the country that
was subsequently filled by violent extremist groups
associated with Al-Qaida, Da'esh and other terrorist
entities. Weak governance, poverty and the influx of
weapons and armed combatants created an environment
conducive to the spread of radical extremism and
terrorism to neighbouring countries, in particular those
sharing common borders with Mali.

The terrorist attack in Ouagadougou in August,
a spate of attacks against the the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) in September and other recent
militant strikes in the region show that the threat of
terrorism continues to loom over most of the Sahel.
This is a vivid example of how a regional spillover
of Violence is becoming a threat to global peace
and security.

In this regard, Ukraine welcomed the decision of
the States members of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5) to create a joint force tasked with combating
violent extremism and terrorism within their borders.
We could not agree more with the Secretary-General
that the establishment of the Joint Force represents an
opportunity that cannot be missed.

During a field mission to Mali, Burkina Faso and
Mauritania earlier this month, organized in a timely
manner by France and co-led by Italy and Ethiopia, the
Security Council had a chance to garner insight into
the realities of the situation on the ground and the state
of operationalization of the Joint Force.

Given the limited resources of the participating
countries, the progress made so far has been impressive.
I refer in particular to the development of the concept
of operations and steps to attain initial operational
capability of Force headquarters in Sevare and the
command post in Niamey.

However, much more remains to be accomplished.
It is important now that the G-5 Sahel member States
maintain a strong commitment to their initiative
and continue working towards the goal set with the
support of bilateral partners, the Council and the wider
international community.

As has already been noted in this Chamber, reaching
full operational capability will require significant
technical and financial resources. While recognizing
the primary responsibility of the G-5 Sahel countries,
we believe that it is crucial that international partners
provide a helping hand to address the equipment and
financial needs of the Joint Force. In this context, the
donor conference scheduled for December in Brussels
is an important initiative. We commend the Secretary-
General for his readiness to get involved personally to
mobilize the resources needed.

Ukraine also believes that, in its turn, the United
Nations can play a role in supporting the Joint Force.
The four options for support set out in the Secretary-
General's report are worthy of in-depth consideration.
It is our view that MINUSMA can provide valuable
targeted assistance to the Force. It is clear that
the Mission's mandate will have to be adjusted
accordingly. However, any expansion of MINUSMA
operations should not come at the expense of the
Mission's ability to implement its primary mandate.
Nor should we forget that there are still significant gaps
in the Mission's capabilities that prevent it from fully
reaching its potential.

This leads me to my last, and perhaps most
important, point: the need to address the root causes of
the crisis and instability in the Sahel. We are convinced
that the Joint Force, once fully operationalized, will
still constitute only one part of the required broader
strategy. The full and unconditional implementation
of the 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali is another crucial piece of the regional puzzle
on how to restore peace and stability in Mali and the
Sahel, as well as contain and eliminate any spillover
effects of the internal struggle in the country.

The signatory parties should redouble their efforts
to complete the operationalization of the interim
administrations in the north and to engage in inclusive
national consultations in the light of the upcoming
constitutional review and referendum. The ultimate
goal of these efforts should be the comprehensive reform
of national institutions, which will help to bring real
peace dividends to the people of Mali and to contribute
to curbing instability in neighbouring countries.

In this regard, we believe that resolution 2374 (2017)
remains an important tool for achieving change in the
behaviour of the signatory parties and for encouraging
them to be more proactive in advancing peace in Mali.

Let us be clear. If we want to achieve a sustainable
peace and stability in the region, there must be greater
investment in socioeconomic development. Without
functioning Government structures, without the
provision of essential social services, without working
law enforcement or a judiciary, without active State
support for local businesses and trade initiatives,
vulnerable communities in conflict-affected and
Government-neglected areas will remain an easy
target for terrorists and extremists. Thus, initiatives
on fighting terrorism; bringing about economic
development; and ensuring respect for human rights,
including the active promotion and protection of the
rights of women and children, must go hand in hand
and complement one another.

Lastly, I wish to echo the Secretary-General's call
for the deployment of the Joint Force to be kept on the
radar of the Security Council and for the Council to
stand ready to take additional measures if necessary.
