Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant
Secretary-General for Africa, and Ambassador Mauro
Vieira for their briefings.

At the outset, we would like to congratulate the
Government of Guinea-Bissau for having held peaceful
legislative elections on 10 March. The results have
been characterized by international observers and
by civil society as fair and credible. We welcome
the appointment of the new Prime Minister and the
establishment of the new Government.

We commend the efforts of international partners,
such as the African Union, the United Nations, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the
European Union and the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS),
for their support in the preparation of the most recent
elections. The fact that the security environment has
remained relatively stable during this period bodes well
for the next step - presidential elections in November.

We also note that socioeconomic instability is
closely related to political tensions. We would urge all
the parties involved not to interfere so as to allow for
the achievement of the priority goal. We also urge the
Government to spare no effort to reach an agreement
on a political framework that covers all key electoral
issues.

Drug trafficking and organized transnational
crime continue to pose a threat to the stability and
national security of Guinea-Bissau. We wholeheartedly
support the efforts of UNIOGBIS to serve as a
partner to the Government, which has demonstrated
its renewed commitment to improve the national
response mechanism to combat drug trafficking and
related crimes.

We also welcome the progress made in the
prosecution of those responsible for gender-based
violence and for intercommunal clashes fuelled by land
disputes. However, impunity continues to give rise to
a lack of trust in the justice system and dissatisfaction
among the population vis-a-vis the authorities. Putting
an end to impunity and strengthening the justice system
is essential to building a peaceful and secure society in
Guinea-Bissau.

The Dominican Republic commends the training
efforts carried out by UNIOGBIS as well as the
integration of women into human rights defenders
teams, which are a key part of promoting a fairer and
more inclusive society. In February, UNIOGBIS, in
cooperation with the National Network of Human
Rights Defenders, trained human rights defenders,
including women from various regions of the country.
This kind of training helps to raise awareness about
the human rights dimension of the Stability Pact and
the Code of Conduct and Electoral Ethics for the
legislative elections.

The maintenance of peace and stability in Guinea-
Bissau must be shored up through the promotion and
upholding of human Rights.

