Ms. Muthukumarana (Sri Lanka): We thank the
presidency of Australia for organizing this important

open debate and for circulating a useful concept note
(S/2014/787).

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

The 9/11 terror attack focused the international
community's attention as a whole on the threat of
international terrorism - a reality which was already
a part of daily experience in some parts of the world
including, Sri Lanka. Led by the United Nations, the
international community achieved significant success
in addressing this menace, particularly through
resolution 1373 (2001).

The recent atrocities committed by the so-called
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
associated terror groups have once again brought a
sense of urgency to the international community's
efforts to combat terrorism. Militarily confronting a
non-State actor that resorts to asymmetric warfare is
extremely challenging, as the international community
has experienced during the decade-long and ongoing
effort to counter Al-Qaida. A terrorist organization
has no compunctions about safeguarding civilian lives
during military confrontations. In fact, many terrorist
groups intentionally and tactically resort to placing
civilians in harm's way. We have seen this in the recent
brutal tactics that ISIL and associated terror groups
have unleashed on the civilian populations under their
control. Our thoughts and sympathies go out to the
countries whose citizens are subjected to ISIL terror
and torture.

In Sri Lanka, we experienced these tactics first-
hand when the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
(LTTE) relentlessly placed civilians in danger by using
them as human shields and hostages, despite repeated
calls, including by the United Nations, not to hold
civilians hostage. The LTTE strategy included holding
civilians hostage as a means of attracting international
attention and seeking external intervertion to subvert
the humanitarian operation that was under way to
rescue civilians from the clutches of the terrorists.

The complications involved in military engagement
with non-State actors should not deter our resolve to
counter international terrorism. No terrorist group
could survive for long without the critical support
of international linkages and networks. Therefore,
international cooperation to curtail sources of their

sustenance - including ideological, financial and
logistical support and recruitment - should be
prioritized.

Sri Lanka's efforts to end a three-decade-long
terrorist conflict were assisted substantively by complex,
multifaceted and comprehensive coordination with the
international community. We remain grateful to all our
friends in the international community who assisted
and cooperated with us in numerous ways. Although
the conflict ended in 2009, the LTTE's extensive
international network, funded by some sections of the
expatriate community, remains intact. There have been
several recent attempts to revive the armed elements of
the group in Sri Lanka in March 2012, December 2012
and April 2014. In the face of such attempts, Sri Lanka
remains vigilant to prevent any resurgence of terrorism
in the country.

The recently adopted resolution 2178 (2014)
recognizes that there is no military solution to the
problem of misguided individuals seeking to join
terrorist organizations. We wish to underline that the
root causes of terrorism and extremism are complex
and that these phenomena cannot be associated with
any ethnicity or religion. In today's interconnected
world, it is very easy for agents of extremism to spread
their ideologies across national borders. They do not
need arms and ammunition to cause damage. However,
the damage they inflict can be more extensive and long-
1asting than the most devastating weapons. The end
result of extremist ideology is communities, regions
and even countries being riven apart by suspicion
and hatred. As resolution 2178 (2014) emphasizes,
it is important for States to engage relevant local
communities and other actors in developing strategies
to counter violent extremist narratives.

Sri Lanka takes serious note of its responsibilities
under the relevant Security Council resolutions. We
continue to extend our fullest cooperation to multilateral
and bilateral mechanisms that target international
terrorism. In 2010, we collaborated with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
in hosting a regional workshop in South Asia. On our
invitation, a CTED team visited Sri Lanka in October.
We work with our neighbours to promote regional
peace and stability through dialogue and cooperation
in the spheres of defence and security. We are party to
several regional counter-terrorism conventions of the
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation.

In November, Sri Lanka will host the inaugural
South and Southeast Asian Nations Defence Chiefs'
Dialogue 2014, with the participation of defence chiefs
of the region. The annual Galle Dialogue, hosted by
Sri Lanka, focuses on the threat of piracy. As an island
nation, Sri Lanka strives to fulfil its responsibilities
in terms of maritime security. Preventing various
transnational crimes - including drug smuggling,
arms smuggling and human trafficking, which are
connected to international terrorism - is essential to
the long-term security of our country and the wider
region. Together with India and Maldives, Sri Lanka
participates in a trilateral mechanism for cooperation
in maritime security. Moreover, Sri Lanka remains
vigilant about extremist elements transiting through
our territory.

We wholeheartedly support the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We should
also make every effort for the early finalization
and adoption of the United Nations comprehensive
convention on international terrorism. We hope that our
efforts in the Council will have a constructive impact
on strengthening the United Nations counter-terrorism
initiatives and further invigorate the Security Council's
commitment to strengthening international cooperation
in combating terrorism.

