Ms. Bensouda: This is the sixth time that my Office
reports to the Security Council since the adoption of
resolution 1970 (2011), by which the Council, acting
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
referred the situation in Libya to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). My Office appreciates the
opportunity to once again engage with and update the
Council on developments in the Libya situation and the
related proceedings before the Court.

Libya has come a long way since the 2011 uprising
that paved the way for the Libyan people to rebuild their
country towards a more promising future. The new
Libya has had notable successes, including the holding
of the first democratic elections in half a century,
but the country still faces formidable challenges.
The security situation in Libya remains volatile and
precarious, marked by car bombings, abductions and
assassinations of public and security officials. That
unfortunate fact has understandably hampered my
Office's ability to operate in Libya in furtherance of its
investigative activities. We hope the security situation
in Libya will improve, in order to enable my Office to
effectively follow up and intensify its investigations.
My Office welcomes initiatives aimed at helping to
rebuild Libya's military and law-enforcement agencies
to reinforce security for Libya and all Libyans. We call
on all States to assist Libya in its efforts to become a
fully fledged, secure, democratic society that adheres
to the highest standards of justice. The Libyan people
deserve no less.

In this new country, Libya desires to become and
be recognized as a stable, democratic society that fully
observes the rule of law and punishes perpetrators of
crimes that shock the conscience of humankind. Those
aspirations, while genuine and praiseworthy, have yet to
be fully realized. There have certainly been promising
gains. For instance, the draft law that would make rape
during armed conflict a war crime in Libya is a most
welcome step in the right direction. Conversely, it is
a matter of great concern that thousands of detainees
remain in uncertain conditions in the country, with
multiple and apparently well-founded allegations of
torture and even killings in detention reported. My
Office fully shares the concerns of the United Nations
that unless this problem is effectively addressed now,
it will only escalate with time. It is incumbent upon
the Ministers of Justice, the Interior and Defence of
the State of Libya to speedily ensure that detainees
are transferred to proper Government-controlled
detention facilities, where they can be either charged,
with their due-process rights fully respected, or, where
appropriate, released. Torture and inhumane treatment
of prisoners should have no place in the new Libya.

Equally disturbing are the simmering tensions
around the Tawergha minority issue. Those tensions and
the possibility of reprisals have the potential to reignite
violence in the country. It bears stressing that those who
seek to defend the revolution and see to it that it succeeds
are at real risk of burying it if they do not take concrete
and immediate steps on this issue. The fact-finding and
reconciliation commission to be established following
the adoption of the new transitional justice law must
bring all parties together with a view to resolving
the issue sooner rather than later. I should recall that
ordering the displacement of the civilian population for
reasons related to the conflict other than for security or
military imperatives is a crime over which my Office
can still exercise jurisdiction.

As I remarked during my previous briefing to
the Council (see S/PV.6962), Libya has embraced the
Rome Statute process and chosen to engage with the
Court. The admissibility challenges that are before the
Court are testing the application of the Rome Statute
provisions in an unprecedented manner. Through its
active involvement in related proceedings before the
Court, Libya is setting an example of how States can
invoke complementarity to protect their sovereign right
to investigate and prosecute their nationals. My Office
and the Libyan Government have robustly advanced
our respective positions in court on the question of who
should prosecute two accused Libyan nationals who we
both believe are most responsible for serious crimes
under the Court's jurisdiction committed within the
territory of Libya. On 11 October, the Court's Pre-Trial
Chamber issued its decision on the admissibility of
the Abdullah Al-Senussi case, finding it inadmissible
before the ICC.

In essence, the Chamber was satisfied that, in
this specific case, Libya met the statutory criteria for
stopping my Office from continuing its investigations
and prosecution of Abdullah Al-Senussi. After fully
studying the decision, my Office has concluded that
there is no legal basis for appeal. Should new facts arise
in the future that negate the basis on which the case
was found inadmissible, my Office will not hesitate to
request a review of the decision. The challenge now is
for Libya to demonstrate to the world that Al-Senussi
will receive a genuinely fair, impartial and speedy trial
that respects all his rights and fundamental guarantees,
including the right to counsel of his choice. It also falls
on the Council and the international community to
assist Libya in that process and to ensure that justice is
not only done, but is seen to be effectively done.

By contrast, in the case of Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi, the Pre-Trial Chamber has ruled the case
admissible before the ICC, on the grounds that Libya
has failed to meet the legal criteria for making the
case inadmissible. In its subsequent admissions to the
Chamber, the Government of Libya has sought further
time to provide additional information, and the matter
is currently under consideration by the Chamber. In the
meantime, the Court has reiterated the obligation of
the Government of Libya to surrender Mr. Al-Qadhafi
to its custody. It is fundamentally important that the
Council both remind and urge the Libyan Government
to comply with the decisions of the Chamber, even when
they do not suit the Government's position. I stress
how critically important it is that all States respect
and implement the decisions of the Court's judges.
The obligation to surrender persons against whom
arrest warrants have been issued to the Court must
be respected. Political considerations have no place
in law that is impartially and independently applied.
I strongly urge the Government of Libya to surrender
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the Court without further
delay.

There are many others who are alleged to have
committed crimes or who have continued to commit
crimes in Libya since February 2011. Some are still
in the country, while others are abroad, where they
continue to use their influence to destabilize the
country and pose a security threat to civilians. It is
impossible for the ICC to investigate and prosecute
all perpetrators alone. Neither can Libya undertake
that demanding task by itself. The investigation and
prosecution of a few by both the International Criminal
Court and the Government of Libya should not result in
impunity for the many. Joint, complementary efforts by
both the Government of Libya and the Court, strongly
and actively supported by the international community,
are thus crucial to ending impunity in the country.

To that end, my Office and the Government of
Libya have recently concluded a burden-sharing
memorandum of understanding, whose purpose is
to facilitate our collaborative efforts to ensure that
individuals allegedly responsible for committing crimes
in Libya as of 15 February 2011 are brought to justice
either at the ICC or in Libya itself. While my Office will
prioritize its investigations and prosecutions of those
who are outside the territory of Libya and thus largely
inaccessible to the Libyan authorities, the Government
of Libya will prioritize investigations of those suspects
who are within Libyan territory.

I am also pleased to report that my Office and the
Government of Libya have committed to supporting
each other's investigations and prosecutions through
the exchange of information, subject to confidentiality
and protection obligations. To be absolutely clear,
this agreement neither relieves the International
Criminal Court or the Libyan courts of their respective
jurisdictions, nor does it apply and/or affect the
ongoing judicial proceedings in either the SaifAl-Islam
Al-Qadhafi or the Al-Senussi cases.

The support of the Council and of the international
community will be crucial for the colossal task of
collecting evidence to untangle the modus operandi of
the networks responsible for committing crimes. Among
other things, we will require telephone intercepts and
sustained follow-up on transfers of funds to establish
the whereabouts and movements of persons under
investigation. This is all information that we can access
only with the assistance of States. Above all, we hope
we can count on the cooperation of States in facilitating
the smooth arrest and surrender of those against whom
warrants will be issued. This is key to sending a clear
message to would-be Libyan and all other would-
be perpetrators that the international community is
watching and will no longer allow impunity to reign
unchecked.

I view the memorandum of understanding as an
important confidence-building measure in the working
relationship between my Office and the Government of
Libya, and my hope is that it will pave the way to closing
the impunity gap in Libya. I welcome the memorandum
as a positive commitment of the Government of Libya
to accountability and providing justice to Libya's
victims, and indeed to cooperating with the ICC in
the investigation and prosecution of additional cases
against those most responsible for the most serious
crimes under the Court's jurisdiction committed in
Libya.

I will conclude by reiterating that Libya's challenges
are our own, and we will all share in the successes or
failures of these efforts to bring justice to the victims
in Libya and peace and security to its people. Towards
that end, I again encourage the Government of Libya
to make public a comprehensive strategy to address
serious crimes committed in the country, regardless
of who is the perpetrator and who is the victim, and I
encourage Libya's partners to step up to the challenge
ahead of us and to make effective not only the ICC
mandate in Libya, but that of the Council.

