Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zarif for his briefing. I welcome the
presence of His Excellency Foreign Minister Vuk
Jeremic' of Serbia at today's meeting. I also listened
carefully to the statement of Mr. Hoxhaj of Kosovo.

Although the current situation in Kosovo is
generally stable, it nevertheless continues to be
vulnerable and fragile. We express our concern about
the tense relations among the ethnic communities in
Kosovo, and in northern Kosovo in particular. We hope
that the parties concerned will take a cautious approach
and settle their differences through dialogue, refraining
from any action that may further complicate the
situation or escalate tensions. China has always
maintained that the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Serbia should be fully respected.

On the question of Kosovo, a settlement plan that
is acceptable to all should be reached within the
framework of resolution 1244 (1999) and through
dialogue and negotiation between the parties
concerned. Recently, several rounds of dialogue were
conducted between Belgrade and Pristina, and definite
progress has been achieved on certain issues. We hope
that the parties concerned will increase their efforts and
continue to push forward with the dialogue. That is not
only in the interest of the parties concerned; it also
serves the well-being of the people. It is also in the
interest of peace and stability in the Balkan region and
all of Europe.

The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has made unremitting
efforts to promote regional peace and stability and
enhance dialogue. China expresses its appreciation in
that regard. We support UNMIK continuing to carry
out its mission in accordance with the mandate of the
Security Council. We hope that UNMIK, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo
Force will strengthen their coordination and play a
positive and constructive role in promoting the
settlement of the relevant questions.

China expresses its deep concern about the illicit
trafficking in human organs. Any acts that violate the
norms of international law and international
humanitarian law should not be condoned. The
concerns expressed by Serbia in that regard are
justified. We support the United Nations carrying out
investigations into the relevant cases.

