Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing.

The Council has gathered scores of times to
discuss the humanitarian crisis in Syria. After so many
meetings, one might begin to believe that this crisis has
always been with us and that it always will be - like a
problem we that can analyse but cannot address. But we
cannot be content with merely observing this problem.
In fact, the Council has an obligation to the Syrian
people - an obligation to respond to the deliberate
choices of the Al-Assad regime, which have left a
million Syrians dead and another 12 million displaced.
That is an obligation that the United States is prepared
to meet.

We stand firmly behind the call of the Under-
Secretary- General for the continuation for an additional
12 months of the life-saving cross-border humanitarian
aid mechanism established pursuant to resolution 2165
(2014). That is because the mechanism is working.
The United Nations has reached more people in 2019
through the cross-border mechanism than any time
since the Council adopted resolution 2165 (2014). We
also support the mechanism because it is transparent,
reliable and, most importantly, indispensable to
millions of Syrians. We call on all Council members
to support a technical rollover of that resolution for
another 12 months. The importance of the resolution's
renewal cannot be overstated. It will ensure under its
terms that vital supplies continue to flow through all
four crossing points.

In the first instance, we are grateful to the
United Nations and the humanitarian organizations
that have provided basic necessities and life-saving
medicines through the A1-Yarubiyah border crossing.
That integral crossing point must remain open. In
north-western Syria, brazen and heinous military
operations conducted by the regime have made civilian
communities in Idlib and northern Hama fully reliant
on United Nations cross-border aid deliveries through
the Bab Al-Hawa and Bab Al-Salam crossings. We
strongly condemn the Al-Assad regime's escalation of
these air strikes that have, with Russian support, killed
and injured civilians and humanitarian workers. These
repulsive attacks have deliberately targeted civilians
and civilian infrastructure, including two medical
facilities operated by the Union of Medical Care
and Relief Organizations humanitarian coalition, in
violation of resolution 2286 (2016). The United States
seeks full accountability for those responsible for the
attacks on hospitals, schools and civilian homes. We
therefore fully support the work of the United Nations
board of inquiry to investigate attacks on United
Nations-supported medical facilities in north-western
Syria. A public accounting of the board's findings will
be essential to ensuring accountability and deterring
future attacks.

We call for an immediate end to these attacks
by Syrian and Russian forces in order to end the
humanitarian crisis and move the United Nations-led
political process forward, in line with resolution 2254
(2015). But it is not only these attacks that must end.
The regime must also cease using humanitarian aid
to punish its political rivals. Aid must go wherever it
is needed - without exception. Yet as we speak, the
regime is blocking United Nations humanitarian aid and
access to eastern Ghouta, Rukban and southern Syria.

The fragility of the security situation, especially in
southern Syria, even prevents the United Nations from
utilizing the Al-Ramtha crossing, the use of which has
been authorized by the Council. We urge the United
Nations to remain prepared to utilize the Al-Ramtha
crossing as soon as the security conditions in southern
Syria allow. When they do, it is our firm belief that
purely humanitarian aid, including $9 billion that the
United States has provided since the conflict began,
should go to all Syrians in need.

While the choices of the Syrian regime embody the
very quality of dishonour, there are those whose choices
merit this Council's praise. I therefore conclude today
by saluting the humanitarian workers who risk their
lives for the Syrian people every day. We remember
with admiration and gratitude Mr. James Le Mesurier,
founder and director of the Mayday Rescue group, and
we offer our deepest condolences to his family and his
loved ones. In his humanitarian efforts, James worked
to save the lives of civilians threatened by Syrian and
Russian air strikes. It was James's commitment to the
Syrian people that led him to support the creation of the
White Helmets, whose life-saving work we are so very
proud to support.

The Syrian people have suffered at the hands of
the Al-Assad regime since 2011, but we have the power
to relieve that suffering. Indeed, we are obligated to
relieve it. May we delay no further in doing so, and as
Mr. Lowcock stated, there is no plan B.

