Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): In my capacity as
Chairman of the Organization of the Islamic
3
Conference (OIC) Group at the United Nations, I have
been authorized to read out a statement issued by the
OIC Group on 8 February 2007.

"The OIC Group at the United Nations in
New York met on 8 February 2007, at the
ambassadorial level, to consider the grave
situation in occupied East Jerusalem as a result of
Israeli aggression against the holy city and the
blessed Al-Aqsa mosque, and issued the
following statement.

"The OIC Group at the United Nations in New
York expresses its strong condemnation of
Israel's heinous aggression against the blessed
Al-Aqsa mosque and the holy city of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif, committed by demolishing a historic
road connecting Bab Al-Maghariba with the holy
Al-Aqsa mosque compound, in addition to two
rooms adjacent to Al-Buraq wall. The OIC Group
also condemns Israel's continued excavation
works beneath the holy Al-Aqsa mosque
compound, undermining its foundations and
threatening it with collapse. The OIC Group
considers these acts and measures taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, a provocation to the
feelings and sentiments of more than one billion
Muslims in the world. The OIC Group denounces
Israel's continued policy in denying Palestinian
worshippers access to their religious sites.

"The OIC Group stresses that these provocative
Israeli actions are not the first of their kind. Since
1968, the Security Council has adopted 16
resolutions, particularly resolution 465 (1980),
and has repeatedly declared that measures and
arrangements taken by Israel, the occupying
Power, which aim at changing the legal status,
demographic composition and character of the
city of Al-Quds al-Sharif are null and void and
without any legal validity whatsoever.
Furthermore, the Security Council has repeatedly
reaffirmed the applicability of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 to all the territories occupied
by Israel in 1967, including East Jerusalem.

"The OIC Group stresses that Israel, the
occupying Power, by escalating its aggression
against Al-Quds Al-Sharif and creating new facts
on the ground, raises doubts about its seriousness
to resume the peace process which aims at
achieving a just settlement of the Palestinian
question - seriously threatens all efforts exerted
to revive the political process and aborts any
possibility for negotiations on the final status
issues, particularly the issue of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif.

"The OIC Group, reaffirming the centrality of the
cause of Al-Quds Al-Sharif for the whole Islamic
umma, affirms the firm position of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, for
which the cause of Palestine and Al-Quds
Al-Sharif was the raison d'etre, on the
preservation of the Arab and holy characters of
the city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif.

"The OIC Group, emphasizing the need to
prevent a further escalation in the situation in the
region, calls upon the Security Council, as the
body responsible for maintaining international
peace and security, to take immediate and urgent
action in order to bring an end to Israeli
intransigence and violations against the blessed
Al-Aqsa mosque and Al-Quds Al-Sharif, and to
guarantee Israel's respect for the Council's
resolutions and for international law, particularly
international humanitarian law."

