Mr. Oshima: I would like, first of all, to express
my appreciation for the great deal of interest in the
progress that is being made in the work following the
exchanges between the President of the Council and the
Secretary-General as to how we proceed from now
until November 2002, when we expect to submit a
report to the Council on this important issue.

First, with regard to the question raised by the
Ambassador of Ukraine concerning the preparation of a
manual, an inter-agency process was initiated to
address this matter. Agencies have agreed to produce a
manual for United Nations humanitarian field staff that
should incorporate best practices collected from the
field and contain guidance on practical steps as to
when, how and on what basis one should engage or
disengage with armed groups. The group is also
preparing a policy paper on this issue. The
endorsement of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee
will be sought for the manual and the policy paper
before they are submitted to the Council for its
consideration.

Contacts with armed groups should of course be
based on core humanitarian principles of neutrality,
impartiality and humanity to stop the suffering of
innocent civilians and to allow a sustained
humanitarian dialogue. Contacts with armed groups
should not affect their legitimacy or the legitimacy of
their claims. The concern over legitimizing armed
groups must be balanced with the often urgent need to
negotiate with those groups on access and the safety of
personnel in order to take life-saving assistance to
people in need.

Those are some of the core issues that the manual
will try to address, drawing on the best practices that
agencies and their partners in non-governmental
organizations have collected over the years. Of course,
we would like to share the manual with the members of
the Council in an appropriate forum.

The Ambassador of Singapore raised the issue of
quick implementation of the recommendations made in
the report of the Secretary-General, and wondered
whether we are able to provide some trend lines. This
is of course not an easy task, but we will try as much as
possible to reflect that in our report to be submitted
next November, not only in terms of the information
but also with regard to any general trend that we may
be able to establish. We shall try to determine where
there has been progress or regress in addressing the
relevant issues raised in connection with the protection
of civilians.

Concerning possible overlap, there are issues
connected with the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, including small arms, conflict prevention,
children in armed conflict, et cetera. There are a
number of reports by the Secretary-General that
separately raise the issue of civilian protection in
connection to those sub-issues, ifI may call them that.
There are certain overlapping elements, but I think
these processes are more complementary to each other.
Indeed, these processes demonstrate a convergence of
opinions on the critical issues.

On the practical level, in order to enhance the
development of the road map, my Office has
undertaken a review of relevant reports of the
Secretary-General and Council resolutions relating to
prevention, peacekeeping, sanctions, the issue of
children, small arms issues and other matters.
Identifying other implementation efforts will help fill
any gaps and will enhance cooperation with other
departments and agencies in order to facilitate
implementation. But I do indeed recognize the need to
try to establish some common threads that will need to
be pulled together. We will try to make an effort to
ensure that those common threads are developed and
that they are adequately reflected in the report that we
will submit in November 2002.

Turning to the problem mentioned by the
representative of Colombia, I do not believe that
invitations were extended to all members of the
Council to the three workshops that have taken place so
far. We envisage further workshops in the months
ahead, and I would like to assure the members of the
Council that invitations will be extended to future
workshops. In addition, as I indicated, I hope that some
time early next year an interface will take place with
all members of the Council to address the issues under
discussion, such as the road map, the development of a
manual and other relevant issues. I would also like to
make sure that work plans for between now and
November 2002 are developed and that all members of
the Council are duly informed of them.

Concerning a progress report on the matrix, as I
mentioned in my remarks, that matter has been looked
at by the Secretariat as a tool 7 as an implementation
chart - to help members of the Council and other
stakeholders to better address issues related to the
protection of civilians in all its aspects. We will, of
course, need some more time to complete that work,
but in due course we would like to report to members
of the Council on progress in an appropriate way. We
very much look to the President of the Council for
guidance in that regard.

Let me turn briefly to the issue of the separation
of combatants from the civilian population in camps
for internally displaced persons and in refugee camps.
This, of course, is a problem which we often witness in
many situations. In Afghanistan we certainly see this
happening at the moment, and we also see it in various
situations in other complex emergency situations in
Africa and elsewhere. For example, in Afghanistan at
the moment we see some indications of the
militarization of camps for internally displaced
persons; this is reported in Mazar-e-Sharif and in
Herat. Apparently, there is intimidation of Pashtun
internally displaced persons by Northern Alliance
factions, which leads to the introduction of military
elements into such camps. Similar developments are
reported also in some of the camps established in the
border areas near Pakistan. The situation created there
is so dangerous that access by humanitarian agencies to
the camps to assist people in those facilities has been
made risky and dangerous. At the moment, access is
not assured.

Those kinds of problems do indeed exist; in each
and every case, what the humanitarian agencies try to
do is to address each case on its own merits, case by
case, and see what they can do: what kind of practical
arrangements can be made to allow access. But again,
this often involves very difficult and delicate
negotiations. Sometimes agencies are successful, other
times they are not. The only thing I would like to say
about these problems is that they involve very difficult
negotiations in each and every case. For further
practical information, I think this issue should really be
addressed to the agencies that are actually engaged on
the ground.

I hope I have answered most of the questions put
to me.

