Mr. Calovski (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia): The Republic of Macedonia has been closely
following the situation in Albania with concern and with
hope that the crisis will be overcame speedily, without
Violence, by the Albanians themselves, with the assistance
of their neighbours and of the international community,
including the Security Council, which quickly discharged
its duty, in line with its obligation to act preventively.

 

It is of paramount importance for Albania and for our
region that Albania held democratic parliamentary elections,
that the negative developments have been halted and that
the process of settling the difficulties has started. In our
View, Albania has managed to turn a difficult page of its
history and to enter the period of non-violent transition,
stabilization, and economic and democratic development.
For the Republic of Macedonia, as a neighbouring country,
it is of huge importance that this process continues
successfully. The support of the international community
will be as important in the future as it has been up to now.
Within the framework of its capabilities, my country will
do its best to assist the new positive orientation of Albania.

When the crisis erupted and endangered the stability
of Albania and of the whole region, the Republic of
Macedonia promptly started to send humanitarian aid.
Within days the Government decided to offer its corridors
for the delivery of international humanitarian assistance.
And what was more important, at that particular moment
when the Albanian population faced the most difficult crisis
of food shortages, we started effectively delivering and
distributing food to the regions bordering my country,
which was very much welcome and appreciated by the
Albanian citizens. We should recall that at that time there
was no military, police or any other law-and-order force on
the Albanian side and the contacts between the two
countries were held on the level of local border
communities and through bodies of the Red Cross.

The Republic of Macedonia did not take part in the
multinational protection force, in accordance with its
principle of not participating in peacekeeping forces in
neighbouring States. However, as co-sponsors of Security
Council resolutions 1101 (1997) and 1104 (1997), we have
supported the force's establishment from the beginning.
And we would like to commend all States and
organizations, and in particular the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), for their
participation. We are pleased to note that the new President
of Albania, Mr. Rexhep Mejdani and the newly elected
Government, headed by the Prime Minster Fatos Nano,
have started the democratization process and the
stabilization and development of Albania, and that the
multinational protection force under Italian leadership has
fulfilled its mandate successfully.

We would also like to note the importance of the
results of the first international conference held on 31 July
in Rome and the adoption of the draft international agenda
for Albania. We hope that the next conference, to be held
in Brussels in September of this year, will also be fruitful.

At this point, I would like on behalf of my
Government to express high appreciation to the
Government of Italy for its leadership and readiness to
help and act. All these positive developments have been
greeted in my country with anticipation that the crisis in
Albania will be over soon and that the new situation will
make an important positive contribution to the
development of the region as well. In this respect, of
particular importance is the stated readiness of the
Albanian Government to develop friendly and good
neighbourly relations with all its neighbours and the
realization of the provisions contained in the international
agenda for Albania.

The future of Albania, like that of the other Balkan
States, lies in its full integration in Europe. How soon this
goal will be achieved depends on Albania itself and also
on the position of the international community.

The Republic of Macedonia would like to be a part
of the international efforts that will enable neighbouring
Albania to end the crisis and to enter a period of stability
and development.

