Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): The Kingdom
of the Netherlands aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union. I will read out
a shortened version of my statement, in view of time
constraints. My full statement will be available via
PaperSmart and on Twitter.

Let me begin by paying tribute to the energy,
leadership and vision of Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi
for the way he has structured the work on this issue.
We also pay tribute to the energy and the work of his
Deputy Permanent Representative, his staff and the
Group of Experts for their outstanding work.

The open debate we are having today is a fitting
manner to close the comprehensive review of 1540
(2004). Today's debate illustrates the inclusive way
in which Spain has conducted the review. We have
engaged all Member States, both the members of
the Council and the non-members of the Council in
the General Assembly. This was a best practice and
should be followed by all of us. The great number of
co-sponsors, including the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
is a testament to the effective way you, Mr. President,
have handled this.

I would also like to underline the statement made
by the representative of Italy. Realizing the goals of the
resolution is of crucial importance in the coming period
and, together with Italy, during the split term 2017/2018
year in the Security Council, we are committed to
working hard on the realization of these goals. Let
me make three points in this context with regard to
implementation, nuclear security and the threat of
biological weapons.

First, with regard to the need for the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), we
really need it on a global scale and we need it to be
comprehensive. We need it to be comprehensive by
Member States, but also by international and regional
organizations and industry. With so many actors, we
need coordination to ensure efficient and effective
implementation and to prevent overlap or competition
by different organizations. In that regard, the work
done by the 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts
is indispensable.

Furthermore, at the national level, we have a great
instrument at our disposal: the national action plans.
They help improve the effectiveness and efficiency
of technical assistance and international cooperation.
It is a truly forward-looking instrument that will help
us put more emphasis on action rather than reporting.
We therefore strongly encourage Member States to use
national action plans.

My second point concerns nuclear security. We are
all aware of the horrendous effect that a terrorist attack
using nuclear or radiological weapons would have. In
order to address such a threat, nuclear security is key.
It is a prime example whereby the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) can count on a solid international
organization. Of course, the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) has a crucial role to play in that
regard. We need close cooperation between the IAEA,
Member States and the 1540 Committee to strengthen
nuclear security worldwide. The outcome of the Nuclear
Security Summit in March sets an ambitious goal of
how the ensure nuclear security. Let us work together
to make that a reality.

My third point concerns biological weapons.
The possibility of a biological attack by non-State
actors is real, and we need to address that threat
more comprehensively and urgently than ever. The
international framework needs to be strengthened. It
should be updated given the rapid pace of technological
development in the biological sciences. Resolution
2325 (2016), which was adopted today, provides a good
platform for making progress in that regard. We therefore
strongly encourage all partners to integrate that fully in
their efforts to implement today's resolution.

In conclusion, let me reiterate our deep thanks to
Spain for its outstanding effort and inclusive approach
with regard to the review. It led to outstanding results
and sets an example with regard to substance and
process. And, together with Italy, we stand ready to
offer our full support to the incoming Chair, Bolivia,
for the swift and effective implementation of this very
important resolution.

