Mr. Abebe (Ethiopia): Let me join other
delegations in congratulating you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month, and assuring you of our full support. We
also express our profound appreciation to the delegation
of Bolivia for its able leadership of the work of the
Council in October. We thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, for her
report and briefing to the Security Council pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011).

We remain extremely concerned about the grave
violations ofhuman rights committed by all parties to the
conflict in Libya. The continued violence perpetrated
by armed groups and terrorists is seriously threatening
the country's stability and security. Abductions, torture,
displacement, the killing and injuring of civilians,
arbitrary detention and human trafficking continue
unabated. Criminality is increasing and the level of
lawlessness engulfing the country is deeply troubling.
As pointed out in the statement issued yesterday by
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, the use
of force and intimidation against private and public
institutions is also alarming.

Unfortunately, it is the Libyan people, particularly
their most vulnerable groups, such as women, children,
migrants and refugees, who are suffering enormously
in the ongoing crisis. The current dangerous and
uncertain situation must be addressed as a matter of
urgency. That is why we fully concur with the view of
Mr. Ghassan Salame, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya, who has underscored on
a number of occasions, including in his most recent
briefing of the Council (see S/PV.8341), that the status
quo in Libya is untenable.

We condemn all attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure, including the recent attacks in southern
and central Libya. All who continue to commit such
violations must be held accountable. It is vital to fight
the widespread sense of impunity in Libya through
the appropriate legal mechanisms, while respecting
the country's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We strongly believe that ensuring the protection of
civilians and civilian infrastructure should be the
primary responsibility of all the parties in Libya. In that
regard, the international community should continue
to support building and enhancing the capacity of
Libyan State institutions, particularly its judiciary and
law-enforcement bodies, in order to ensure the rule of
law. The international community should also provide
support anchored in a long-term and coordinated
strategy for building State institutions, in order to
foster an environment of security and stability.

The continued and widespread violations of human
rights cannot be sustainably halted until all Libyan
political actors find a lasting political solution to the
protracted crisis. Unifying State institutions also
remains extremely critical. In that regard, all Libyan
actors must be urged to work constructively towards
concrete progress in addressing the impediments to the
full implementation of the United Nations action plan.

In conclusion, I want to reiterate our position that
only a Libyan-led and -owned comprehensive political
dialogue, facilitated by the United Nations, can bring
about a credible and successful transition in Libya.
We continue to support the diplomatic endeavours of
Special Representative Salame to implement the United
Nations action plan. In that regard, all Libyan actors
should engage constructively with him. The Council
should also continue to support his efforts.

