Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I offer special thanks to the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr.
Guehenno, for the information he has provided us. It is
an important basis for the statement that we are about
to make.

We also take this opportunity to congratulate all
the members of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) for their achievements over the
past 18 months. The appointment of Mr. Hans
Haekkerup as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General will help to maintain the proper course
initiated by Mr. Bernard Kouchner. We trust that we
will continue to see the same level of commitment and
dedication in the work of UNMIK.

I should like to focus on five main points.

First, we would like to emphasize the important
role that is being played by the new Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in finding a peaceful
solution to the problems that we are dealing with today.
We must continue to provide support to President
Kostunica so that we can effectively contribute to the
consolidation of strong institutions in that country.

It is only natural, therefore, that we should
temporarily put on hold the strengthening of the
Belgrade Government and avoid discussing, or taking
decisions on, matters that are extremely sensitive for
the parties concerned. For example, it would be
premature to decide, on the one hand, the date of
general elections in Kosovo, and on the other, the
definitive status of this province. It would be
meaningless to move forward in these areas without the
consent of Belgrade.

Secondly, we would like to say how important it
is for UNMIK to continue working to protect all of the
ethnic minorities. It is unacceptable that acts of
violence are continuing to take place, such as the ones
that occurred recently in the Presevo Valley and in
Leposavic. The Albanian extremists must feel pressure
from the international community to put an end to these
attacks. We believe that political violence as a response
to democratic changes in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia must stop. UNMIK and the Kosovo Force
should spare no effort in putting an end to these
destabilizing factors, which could have repercussions
in the rest of the region.

Thirdly, we feel that it would be appropriate for
UNMIK and the Belgrade Government to come up with
a joint solution to the problem of displaced persons and
refugees. This could be an important step in generating
confidence among the parties, in addition to directly
benefiting the most vulnerable segments of the
population.

Fourthly, let me note my Government's approval
of the commitment of the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to respect the provisions of the
Military-Technical Agreement and of resolution 1244
(1999). Enhancing cooperation between Belgrade,
UNMIK and KFOR is imperative in order to make
progress towards finding a lasting solution to this
question.

Fifthly, it is important that we review the
situation in Kosovo in a much broader context. It
would not be advisable to continue viewing each
conflict in the Balkans as an isolated case, as this could
further delay the achievement of a lasting solution
fostered by mutual trust between all of the parties
concerned.

I should like to conclude by briefly speaking
about the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia. To a large degree, the legitimacy
and prestige of the Security Council and of the United
Nations are at stake when it comes to the effectiveness
of this Tribunal and its officers. Furthermore, the
validity of international criminal law is also at stake.
That is why we believe that the Security Council
should do everything in its power to ensure that we
achieve the objective for which the Tribunal was
established.

