Mr. Delattre (France) (Spoke in French): Let
me begin by thanking Australia for its commitment
to a subject that is one of the most pressing threats
to international peace and security today. This was
an issue raised by the State visit just carried out by
President Hollande to Australia.

The horrific murders of the young American
humanitarian worker Peter Kassig and 18 Syrians
remind us once more of the cowardice of Daesh
terrorists and of the need to combat them.
More and more regions are being affected by
terrorism, with groups and practices that flout every
precept of law and humanity now being inflicted on
new populations. Daesh constitutes an unprecedented
threat to countries in the region but also to the rest of
the world. Moreover, the threat has grown thanks to the
proliferation of groups like Ansar Al-Sharia in Libya
and Boko Haram in Nigeria. In addition, the situation
remains fragile in the Sahel. The intervention of France
in Mali alongside African forces and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali has significantly reduced the threat of terrorism,
but it has not disappeared. Faced with this challenge, it
is necessary to redouble our efforts. The responses are
many.

The fight against Daesh calls for a military response,
which today takes the form of a coalition made up of
a growing number of States. Just as it is doing in the
Sahel, France is also fully playing its part in Iraq - as
was just demonstrated by the destruction by a French
air patrol of offensive Daesh positions in the environs
of Kirkuk. France is in the process ofboosting its aerial
component. The action of the coalition in support of
Iraqi forces has just served to break the siege of Baiji,
including with the participation of Peshmerga forces.
We are encouraged by the assessments that the military
response has helped offset Daesh's momentum on
territorial expansion.

However, this fight must also be a political one.
Military action alone cannot sustainably address
terrorism. Daesh in Iraq has thrived on the fragility ofa
State subject to divisions, mistrust among communities
and instability. Prime Minister Al Abadi is now working
to create the conditions for a reconciled Iraq that respects
the rights of all. We support his efforts. The formation
of an inclusive Government, the growing awareness
of the concerns of Sunnis, the gradual resolution of
disputes with the Kurdistan Regional Government and
the normalization of relations with regional partners
should be commended and encouraged. Similarly, in
Syria, only a political transition at the national level
will definitely overcome the scourge of Daesh, whose
rise has been promoted and exploited by the regime in
Damascus.

Sanctions also help fight against the scourge of
terrorism. In Libya, the Sanctions Committee on
Al-Qaida has taken up a project to sanction Ansar
Al-Sharia-Derna and Ansar Al-Sharia-Benghazi.
Those sanctions should make it possible to signal the
determination of the international community vis-a-vis
terrorists, who cannot be regarded as interlocutors.
This is also about encouraging all moderate forces
in Libya to come together to present a common front
against terrorism In general, we call for a more regular
use of the sanctions regime against Al-Qaida so that
the sanctions list better reflect the reality of the threat.

This strong response to terrorism can be carried
out only in the context of strict respect for human rights
and international humanitarian law, which are essential
to the effectiveness of our strategy in the short and long
terms.

Terrorism is evolving and directly threatens
our societies thanks to the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters. Terrorists, including Daesh, rally
people - often young people - to their cause. More
than 15,000 fanatical individualshave thus joined as
parties in the fight Syria and Iraq. Among them are
the 376 French nationals, or people living in France. In
total, more than 1,000 are involved in jihadist ranks in
various ways. The fight against this phenomenon is a
priority for France's internal security.

Last September, at a summit-level meeting, the
Security Council adopted a resolution to combat this
phenomenon (see S/PV.7272). Since then, France
has expanded its national approach. On 4 November,
my country adopted new measures in line with the
recommendations set out in resolution 2178 (2014),
with a view to preventing the exit of French individuals
from our territory where there are serious reasons to
believe that their movement was for a terrorist purpose.
The law also helps fight against radicalization on the
Internet, with full respect for the freedom of expression.
We are also working to identify pathways that facilitate
recruitment.

But we must go further together. Presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/23, which we adopted today,
notes the need to scrupulously follow up in the fight
against foreign terrorist fighters. This illustrates
the importance of the international community
strengthening its cooperation in respect of civil
liberties.

The text also emphasizes the importance of
combating trafficking in oil and recalls the obligations
of States in the fight against the financing of terrorism.
That must be a priority area for all of us. Bahraini
authorities organized a meeting on that subject on
9 November, which we welcome.

Beyond those repressive measures, it is necessary
that the international community examine the causes
of radicalization and combat violent extremism. We
must especially rein in terrorist propaganda - and
we should call it by its proper name. When it comes to
Daesh, for example, it can never be repeated enough:
that organization is neither a State nor Islamic. That is
why we decided to use the more neutral term "Daesh".

We welcome the fact that today's presidential
statement urges the United Nations to consider how to
better fight against the phenomenon of radicalization.
That will be an aspect of a long-term strategy against
terrorism, one in which France will remain resolutely
committed.

