Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, on this day when we are holding
the last meeting - well, maybe the last meeting - of
August, I wish to express my gratitude to the
delegation of Syria for its work and to thank you
personally, Mr. President, for your contribution to the
work of the Security Council throughout Syria's
membership in this body.

We shall miss you, Mr. President. We will
remember how you cooperated with all delegations, the
contribution of your delegation and your personal
contribution to attaining consensus in the Security
Council in the consideration of the very complex
questions we took up, and how you always sought
unity in the Council on these very serious problems.
That was helped by your diplomatic art, your
experience and your personal qualities as a person
aware of his responsibility for the fate of the world - I
am using these lofty words - someone who is
interested in strengthening this Organization.
We shall miss you, but we know that in Geneva
someone will be involved in the work of the United
Nations, furthering our common cause and facilitating
the close coordination of the process between New
York and Geneva in the best interest of our common
objective: to strengthen the United Nations.

Turning to the theme of today's meeting, let me
say that one of the key instruments available to the
Security Council in the settlement of disputes and
conflicts is peacekeeping operations, carried out either
under the United Nations flag or by multinational
forces acting under a Council mandate. In Council
decisions of recent years, a consensus has emerged
about the need for a comprehensive approach to
conflict resolution. It is crucial that the practicalities of
such an approach be worked out with the active
involvement of all States Members of the United Nations
and that the outcome reflect their views.

The peacekeeping strategy emerging in the
Organization is based on decisions of the Security
Council, which bears primary responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and security, and on
recommendations of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, as endorsed by the General
Assembly. Among the very important principles of that
strategy are the following: the parties to conflict must
cooperate with United Nations missions; there must be
interaction between the Organization and regional
arrangements, in keeping with Chapter VIII of the
Charter; and the Security Council must authorize any
operation involving coercion.

The mechanisms of peacekeeping operations are
gradually being improved. Cooperation is gradually
developing between members of the Security Council
and troop-contributing countries, and the use of United
Nations missions in conflict areas is on the increase, as
are activities by Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General. Coordination among the various
elements of the United Nations system is progressing
as modern peacekeeping operations become
increasingly multifunctional.

More specific account is being taken of the
underlying reasons for today's conflicts, such as socio-
economic problems and religious, ethnic or other
clashes. A differentiated approach is gaining ground -
an approach reflecting the specificities of each
individual crisis situation. Practical methods for
peacekeeping and peace-building are being developed
in areas such as reforming the security sector;
strengthening borders; the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants;
promoting economic reform; assisting law enforcement
and judicial organs; helping to organize and conduct
elections; and, sometimes, helping to reshape the
political structure of a country in crisis, including
through constitutional reform.

Among the key guidelines in all those areas of
peacekeeping are ensuring that the people of a State in
need enjoy normal living conditions and helping them
fully to exercise their sovereignty in conditions of
peace and stability. Thus, the entire international
community is outraged at attempts to impede the noble
work of United Nations peacekeepers - who,
unfortunately, are increasingly becoming targets for
attack by terrorists and bandits, as occurred in Baghdad
on 19 August. Resolution 1502 (2003), unanimously
adopted two days ago, sends a clear signal that the
Security Council, acting on a solid foundation of
international law, has no intention of tolerating
attempts to torpedo United Nations peacekeeping and
humanitarian activities and will do everything to
ensure that crimes committed against United Nations
personnel do not go unpunished.

I mentioned the situation in Iraq, and this relates
directly to the theme of today's discussion. It poses a
serious challenge to the United Nations. Our wealth of
peacekeeping experience certainly can and should be
drawn on in that country. Given the unprecedented
complexity of the challenges faced in the Iraqi
situation, imaginative new approaches will
unquestionably be required - in addition to
peacekeeping methods already approved - in order to
effectively promote a post-war settlement that will be
in the interests of the Iraqi people.

Attaining that goal will require a truly
comprehensive approach, along with a further
significant enhancement of the role of the United
Nations, including giving the United Nations mission
established by resolution 1500 (2003) the authority to
participate directly in the political process: the
introduction of constitutional reforms; the organization
of elections; and the formation of an internationally
recognized Government on the basis of a clear plan for
restoring the sovereignty of Iraq within a specific time
frame and as soon as possible.

As part of such a comprehensive approach, it
would be realistic to consider the status and parameters
of an international military presence, whose mandate
should serve the goal of providing safe conditions
conducive to the Iraqi people's exercise of their right to
determine their own future. Such a decision would be
an important contribution by United Nations
peacekeeping to the maintenance of international peace
and security in the region.

As an active participant in United Nations
peacekeeping, Russia is ready to do all it can to
promote the attainment of that goal.

