Mr. McNee (Canada): Canada thanks the
Secretary-General for his latest report (S/2010/318)
and welcomes his assessment of the situation in
Afghanistan. At the outset, I would like to join others
in expressing our deep condolences for the death of the
United Nations staff member killed yesterday.

The security situation indeed remains very
challenging. However, it is encouraging to see progress
in such areas as electoral reform and reintegration.
Canada also welcomes the recent Security Council
mission to Afghanistan under Turkey's leadership. It is,
in our view, very important to maintain the Council's
focus on Afghanistan and for Council members to be
able to meet with key interlocutors in Kabul and
elsewhere in the country.

The upcoming Afghan-led international
conference, the first of its kind in Kabul, will be an
important opportunity for the Afghan Government to
engage Afghans in the future of their country. At the
Group of Eight (G8) Summit held on 25 and 26 June in
Canada, leaders outlined their interest in seeing the
Government of Afghanistan deliver detailed plans and
show tangible progress in implementing the
commitments made at the London Conference.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Staffan de Mistura, is giving strong and
skilful leadership to the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). The four priorities
on which he has chosen to focus - namely, support for
the elections, reconciliation and reintegration, regional
cooperation and aid coherence - are of critical
importance and include areas of interest that were also
highlighted by the G8. The United Nations efforts to
focus on these priorities are very important.
Nonetheless, it will also be necessary not to lose sight
of other crucial areas such as humanitarian assistance
and sustained support to security transition efforts.
Canada recognizes UNAMA's need to restructure
in order to ensure that its important work in
Afghanistan continues with minimal disruption,
considering the ongoing challenges such as security
threats against its staff, high vacancy rates and
operational difficulties in some areas. Given these
challenges, Canada supports the United Nations
decision to consolidate its offices. However, given the
Afghan Government's lack of capacity at the
sub-national level, which impacts on its ability to
deliver services to Afghans where they live, the United
Nations Mission will need to seek ways to enable its
continued engagement outside Kabul.

In our View, the United Nations should continue
to coordinate the international community's political
engagement in the context of the upcoming elections.
Canada welcomes the Afghan Government's steps to
address some of the international community's core
concerns, including a new Independent Electoral
Commission Chair, the inclusion of two international
commissioners in the Electoral Complaints
Commission and the clarification that a minimum level
of women's representation in elected office remains
guaranteed under the law.

Despite these areas of progress, the upcoming
elections face continued challenges. The United
Nations support for the elections must be sufficiently
robust to allow for the resolution of key issues related
to the electoral law, while at the same time supporting
the technical delivery of the elections.

Key to stability in Afghanistan is Afghan-led
reconciliation and reintegration that reaches out to
those who renounce violence, respect the Afghan
Constitution and have no links with Al-Qaida or other
terrorist organizations. In that context, the recent Peace
Jirga was an important milestone. Canada commends
Afghan Government efforts to develop a peace and
reintegration programme. We urge the Government to
ensure that this programme and the work of the peace
council are consistent with Afghanistan's international
legal obligations, such as the protection of human
rights, including the rights of women, victims and ex-
combatants.

The implementation of a well-coordinated,
gradual transition of security responsibilities to Afghan
authorities is a key objective to be achieved as soon as
conditions on the ground permit. An increase in the
capability of the Afghan National Security Forces -
well coordinated with the Afghan Ministries of
Defence and Interior - is essential in that regard. The
anticipated joint Afghan-International Security
Assistance Force transition plan to be presented at the
Kabul Conference should garner functional
capabilities, resources and regional conditions to
enable the Afghan National Security Forces to ensure
and maintain peace and stability.

Canada supports efforts to reform and build the
capacity of the Interior Ministry and, more specifically,
the separation of the Minister's political functions from
operational police command. Canada also welcomes
the development of the National Police Strategy and
Plan and continues to encourage the finalization of
those documents. The progress made on police
recruitment is also welcome. We recognize that
improving the quality of the police force is perhaps as
important as its size.

(spoke in French)

Canada recognizes the continued role played by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
in coordinating humanitarian assistance. Canada
applauds the efforts made to date by the United
Nations and non-governmental organizations to update
contingency plans to respond rapidly and effectively to
conflict-affected and displaced persons. We urge that
lessons learned be applied in Kandahar, especially in
view of the impending military operations.

The regional dimension of the situation in
Afghanistan requires momentum and attention from
Afghanistan's neighbours, the countries of the region,
the broader international community and the United
Nations, in particular in terms of the implementation of
durable solutions for Afghan refugees and internally
displaced persons. Recent efforts to increase regional
cooperation in Kabul are encouraging. Canada
continues to support regional cooperation through
confidence-building initiatives such as the Dubai
process, which is delivering tangible progress on
Afghan and Pakistani shared border management
issues, and the G8 Afghanistan-Pakistan Border Region
Prosperity Initiative, which aims to improve regional
connectivity and dialogue.

The coming months, during which the Kabul
Conference and the parliamentary elections will take
place, will be crucial for achieving measurable success
by the Afghan Government and the international
community. It is essential at this critical juncture for
Afghans, the Afghan Government and the international
community to continue to work together intensively to
rebuild a peaceful, stable and prosperous Afghanistan.

