Mr. Davide (Philippines): I hope that the
Philippines, as the second-to-last speaker on the list,
will be given more than five minutes.

Let me start, Sir, by extending to you my
delegation's warmest congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of February 2010 and for organizing this debate
on transition and exit strategies, which underscores the
special importance that the French presidency places
on peacekeeping. I also wish to thank you for inviting
the Philippines to participate in the discussion.

The Philippines associates itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Morocco
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. However, as
a troop- and police- contributing country, the
Philippines wishes to make the following points on the
issue under consideration.

First, peacekeeping is in a constant state of
evolution. In the past 60 years, we have seen how our
efforts to keep the peace have metamorphosed from the
more traditional form of separating warring States and
maintaining ceasefire lines to more complex and
multidimensional operations involving various
stakeholders, which have come to include even
non-State actors. The unprecedented surge in the
demand for peacekeeping in areas of conflict
worldwide during the past several years cannot be
expected to end. While the cost of keeping the peace
may be staggering - it was estimated at $7.8 billion in
the past year alone - we cannot afford to fail. It is
thus incumbent upon all States Members of the United
Nations to ensure that we succeed in our efforts to
deliver and maintain the kind of peace that is needed to
allow people caught in conflict to move on and build.

Secondly, the role of the international community
is to promote and facilitate the handover of
responsibilities for lasting peace and the sustainable
development of a post-conflict area to its people. That
makes exit strategies for missions both sound and
necessary. Logic and reason therefore dictate that,
before we step in to help keep the peace, we should
also know when to step out and prepare the transition
towards that end. It is therefore imperative that a
clearly defined exit strategy be put in place in
formulating the mandate of any peacekeeping
operation. That means that the Security Council should
provide mandates that are not only clear and achievable
but are also provided with the proper resources to
accomplish the missions.

Thirdly, the Security Council must be able to set
a realistic time limit for the transition of any
peacekeeping mission. Critical tasks or identifiable
benchmarks before mission drawdown should
accompany the given deadline. A timeline will provide
us the ability to measure progress throughout the
mission and to protect the gains of years of
peacekeeping operations. However, such a timeline
should be based on existing realities on the ground and
on consultations with various stakeholders. Efforts
must be exerted to avoid a repetition of the premature
exit in Timor-Leste in 2005.

Fourthly, in setting and reviewing mandates, the
existing consultative mechanisms involving the
Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and police-
contributing countries must be strengthened and
reinforced. The Security Council could benefit from
the actual experience on the ground of troop- and
police-contributing countries in formulating new
mandates and in reviewing existing ones. Cooperation
among various stakeholders, especially among the
actors involved in the conflict, is necessary to create an
environment conducive to the success of our
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts. Close
cooperation and coordination between regional
organizations and the United Nations system are
necessary to ensure the effective execution of exit
strategies.
Fifthly, efforts to keep the peace must go hand in
hand with efforts to build peace. It is imperative that
peacebuilding activities be incorporated in the initial
stages of a peacekeeping mission, to empower and
prepare national and local authorities for the eventual
transition and exit.

Finally, to put everything in place, in the light of
the inputs put forward today by delegations, the
Security Council may now consider the creation of a
special ad hoc working group exclusively tasked with
preparing - after open-ended, transparent and
inclusive consultations and a thorough review of the
history of United Nations peacekeeping and previous
mandates - a working paper on general plans,
programmes, activities and strategies, which may be in
the form of rules and regulations, on the entry,
transition and exit of peacekeeping operations. That
would make the process transparent and accountable
and avoid ad hoc solutions, which could be affected by
temporary interests. Of course, the rules and
regulations can include flexible clauses to respond to
extreme emergency situations.

