The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of C6te d'Ivoire
to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2016/381, which contains the text ofa draft resolution
submitted by France, as well as document S/2016/386,
which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted
by Angola, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Senegal, Spain, Ukraine, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States
of America and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2016/254, which contains the
text of a letter dated 15 March 2016 from the Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1572 (2004), concerning C6te d'Ivoire,
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I also wish to draw members' attention to document
S/2016/297, which contains the special report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation in
Cete d'Ivoire .

The Council is ready to proceed to a vote on the
draft resolutions before it. I shall first put to the vote
the draft resolution contained in document S/2016/381.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

The President (spoke in Chinese): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2283 (2016).

I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2016/386.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)


The President (spoke in Chinese): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2284 (2016).

I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.


