Mr. Kama] (Pakistan): As this is the first time I have
addressed the Security Council under your presidency, Sir,
let me congratulate you on your assumption of your high
office. I have no doubt that under your talented and able
guidance, the Council will be able to fulfil its
responsibilities successfully during the current month. I
would also like to take this opportunity to express my
admiration to your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Botswana, for the excellent manner in
which he conducted the affairs of the Council last month.

Today's open debate on Afghanistan in the Security
Council takes place after a long lapse of seven years. Its
purpose is obviously to identify the root cause of the
continuing conflict and the outlines of possible solutions.

In order to understand the continuing conflict in
Afghanistan, we unfortunately have to look back at the
tragic events faced by this war-torn country over the last 17
years. During the decade-long Soviet occupation of
Afghanistan, the country was completely devastated. Large
portions of the country were bombed and torched; nearly
1.5 million Afghans died resisting the occupation; 7 million
or more were displaced from their homes, most of them
being forced to take shelter in the two neighbouring
countries of Iran and Pakistan, and an estimated 30 million
unmapped mines were inhumanely scattered.

Once the occupying forces had withdrawn, the various
Afghan factions fell out with each other in their struggle to
fill the vacuum. The billions of dollars worth of arms and
equipment left behind in Afghanistan by the occupying
forces provided a much too ready and constant source of
ammunition for this continuing conflict.

The Government and the people of Pakistan
obviously viewed these developments with great concern.
As a neighbour with deep historical and cultural links
with Afghanistan, and as one that had stood shoulder to
shoulder with the people of Afghanistan in their travails,
Pakistan was shocked by this new conflict between
brothers. In our opinion, the people of Afghanistan were
entitled to the fruits of their long struggle, and to be able
to concentrate all their energies on the tasks of
reconstruction after their prolonged suffering. The
consistent position of the Government of Pakistan on this
fratricidal conflict has always been that only a broad-
based interim mechanism, in which all factions would
participate, could pave the way to a democratic
government that alone could provide the necessary
durable fabric for this multi-ethnic country. Durable peace
requires abandoning the politics of domination and
exclusion and achieving a genuine national reconciliation
among all the political, ethnic and various other segments
of Afghan society.

It is also evident that the people of Afghanistan are
fed up with factional strife and earnestly dream of
resuming normal life in conditions of peace and security.
It is therefore incumbent upon the United Nations and the
international community to assist them in this regard.

A comprehensive framework for restoring peace in
Afghanistan, with the real commitment and support of the
international community, must be delineated. It should
have political, economic and humanitarian components
and should be implemented with vigour and
determination.

The international community has identified the
essential political elements for peace in Afghanistan.
These are reflected in the resolution adopted unanimously
by the General Assembly at its fiftieth session.

Much of the strife in Afghanistan can be attributed
to the absence of legitimate governance. Legitimacy flows
not from military diktat or the use of weaponry against
innocent civilians, but from the confidence and support of
those civilians. Attempts by one group or another to claim
legitimacy on the basis of lapsed agreements have been a
core factor in, fuelling the factional strife. The General
Assembly therefore clearly stipulated as essential the
transfer of power through the urgent establishment of a
fully representative and broad-based authoritative council.

The United Nations Special Mission has made
commendable efforts to deal with this issue. Regrettably,

 

these efforts continue to be frustrated by lack of political
will and remain hostage to the changing political and
military configurations in Afghanistan.

The massive infusion of weapons and funds from
abroad for various political and military factions compounds
the problem and weakens the resolve on the part of the
protagonists to seek national reconciliation. Unfortunately,
many political factions have been reduced to mere pawns
in a chess game that has broader regional and international
dimensions.

Pakistan, which stood steadfast with the Afghan
people in their heroic struggle for the liberation of their
country, provided succour and support to millions of
Afghan refugees and suffered most from the war in
Afghanistan, is today being portrayed by some as playing
politics in Afghanistan. Those who accuse us of interfering
in Afghanistan know full well that we have scrupulously
refrained from supporting one faction or another. These
allegations against us are concocted in a transparent attempt
to cover up the massive weapon supplies from certain
quarters or are an expression of disappointment on finding
no such support from Pakistan.

More fundamentally, the trumpeting of these
allegations is a naive attempt to explain away the untenable
situation that these factions find themselves in, due to a
complete lack of popular support from the Afghan people.

The culture of money, weapons and drugs has been
deliberately cultivated in order to foist on the people of
Afghanistan military diktat by self-seeking mercenaries who
have shown by their actions that they care little about the
Afghan nation or about Islam.

It is indeed ironic that the nominal central authority
physically controls only 5 of the 32 provinces, yet, despite
its long, self-extended term, it has not been able to obtain
the allegiance of those over whom it arrogates to itself the
right to govern. On the other hand, the Taliban control
more than half the country and are locked in a struggle
with the nominal central authority. A quarter is controlled
by General Dostum, and other parts by smaller factions.
The intellectuals, the technocrats, the refugees and the vast
majority of common Afghans view with disgust this
outrageous power play, which has done great discredit to
the pride of the Afghan nation.

Those opposed to the nominal central authority
question its legitimacy. Central to this is the fact that, under
the Afghan accords of March 1993, the term of the
government in Kabul expired in June 1994.

These accords were arrived at by a process of intra-
Afghan dialogue. The dialogue has since been interrupted.
The Security Council must lend its fullest support to the
efforts of the United Nations Special Mission to revive
the intra-Afghan political process. A representative
gathering of the Afghan leaders should be convened under
United Nations auspices, or under the joint auspices of the
United Nations and neighbouring countries, with a view
to launching a credible process involving the transfer of
power to a fully representative, broad-based government.
Pakistan stands ready to support such a process, which is
the only way to address the issues.

Such a gathering could also address the question of
the induction of a neutral security force and the
demilitarization of Kabul and Afghanistan as important
steps which should proceed simultaneously with the
formation of a broad-based government.

We also favour a complete ban on weapons and
arms supplies to the warring factions in Afghanistan. The
imposition of a general arms embargo by the Security
Council would convey the right signal to the Afghan
warlords of the international community's determination
to bring this intolerable situation to an early end.

The Council should also consider imposing an
embargo to interdict, effectively, the plane-loads of
ammunition being flown into Afghanistan each day from
various destinations. Monitoring the arms and air
embargoes would require an effective mechanism, which
we hope it would be possible for the United Nations to
set up, in cooperation, possibly, with the Organization of
the Islamic Conference.

The idea of an international conference on
Afghanistan has been talked about. In our View, it would
be premature to convene an international conference on
Afghanistan at this stage. As experience and history
indicate, no solution from outside can be imposed on the
Afghans. A durable solution can be evolved only by the
Afghans themselves. A representative gathering of the
Afghans under the auspices of the United Nations,
assisted if necessary by the Friends of Afghanistan, would
appear to us to be a more feasible means of launching the
intra-Afghan peace process.

The other elements of a comprehensive approach
require equal attention: we need a generous and sustained

 

international commitment to the economic reconstruction of
Afghanistan, and the provision of urgent humanitarian
assistance to the people of Afghanistan. We also need such
assistance for the refugees in Pakistan and Iran, and we
need to make effective plans for their rapid repatriation to
a peaceful Afghanistan.

We fully appreciate the sufferings of the Afghan
people, of whom more than 1.5 million still reside in
Pakistan as refugees. We are continuing to extend all
possible assistance to these Afghan refugees. So far, we
have spent around 10.5 billion rupees from our own modest
resources on their care and maintenance. We have also
allowed unimpeded passage of food items across our
borders into Afghanistan. We have facilitated ongoing
World Food Programme, United Nations Development
Programme and International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) operations for relief assistance in Afghanistan. The
ICRC has so far airlifted a total of 900 tonnes of food
supplies from Peshawar to Kabul.

We have seen the report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security, dated 3 April 1996.
Pakistan fully supports the efforts of the Special Mission of
the Secretary-General to Afghanistan to facilitate national
rapprochement and reconstruction in Afghanistan.

Pakistan has welcomed this open debate in the
Security Council. However, we are convinced that we have
not heard the true voice of the Afghan people, who alone
can decide on their future. Until and unless we do so, our
discussions will continue to be ill-informed and incomplete.
We have to find ways and means to hear the views of all
the factions in Afghanistan, without being inhibited simply
by rules and regulations.

We hope that this debate in the Security Council will
not only help sensitize the international community about
the sufferings of the people of Afghanistan, but will also
give a major impetus to the efforts of the United Nations
Special Mission for peace and stability in Afghanistan.

