Mr. McCully (New Zealand): I would like to start
by thanking Minister Selim for convening this open
debate on countering the narratives and ideologies of
terrorism. Today we are dealing with a threat whose
scale and spread requires a global and collective
response and surely commands the attention of the
Security Council.
My country, New Zealand, once regarded itself
as largely removed from the threat of international
terrorism, protected by its geography. Sadly, we now
live in a world where terrorism is a global enterprise,
exported through modern technology and sophisticated
social media. Every society has its element of
disenchanted and disenfranchised people who provide
a ready market for extremist ideology. Every society
has its element of disturbed or criminal minds who find
international terrorist branding a convenient cloak.

New Zealand strongly supports the four pillars
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy - addressing the conditions that spread
terrorism, preventing and combating terrorism,
counter-terrorism capacity-building, and respecting
human rights and the rule of law. The Security Council
has a central role to play in guiding a comprehensive
international response to terrorism. I want to make
three brief points.

First, the most important contribution the Security
Council can make to combat terrorism is to improve
its capacity to prevent and resolve conflict. Unresolved
conflicts in Syria and Iraq are fertile breeding grounds
for terrorism and extremist ideology, a phenomenon we
have already witnessed in Afghanistan and elsewhere.
The unresolved conflict in Palestine has now fuelled
generations of hopelessness and extremism. Therefore,
my first message is that the Council must face up to its
core business of preventing and resolving conflicts ifit
wants to eliminate the conditions under which extremist
narratives and ideologies will breed and spread.

Secondly, stronger, fairer and more inclusive
societies are the best long-term sustainable defence
against the spread of terrorism. Establishing unifying,
inclusive governance that respects human rights and
the rule of law and that does not succumb to the short-
term temptation to marginalize significant groups
is critical to the long-term fight against extremist
ideologies. That is true in Iraq and Afghanistan. It is
true in all countries.

Thirdly, Governments will need to be increasingly
active and innovative in their counter-terrorism
strategies and continue to improve cooperation across
national borders. That has to be done globally, in
particular through the full implementation of the
Council's sanctions regimes targeting the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida and the
Taliban, and regionally. For my country, enhanced
cooperation across the Asia-Pacific region is of great
importance, especially through the growing number
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations-based
counter-terrorism initiatives.

As we see greater success against ISIL in Iraq
and Syria, the return of foreign terrorist fighters will
become a challenge for many nations, my own included.
Cooperation across such areas as policing, border
control and aviation security will be increasingly
important. Policies relating to the detention and
reintegration of terrorist detainees present questions
that are both complex and challenging.

As I have already said, the Security Council has
a central role to play in guiding a comprehensive
international response to combating terrorist narratives
and ideologies. At home, in our region and further afield,
New Zealand is committed to playing its full part.

