Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
hope that your work will be crowned with success. I
would also like to thank the Ambassador of Norway for
his excellent leadership of the Council during the
previous month.

I would like to thank you sincerely, Sir, for your
rapid response in convening this emergency meeting,
which is taking place in the light of the dangerous
deterioration of the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, despite the recently adopted
Security Council resolutions, namely resolutions 1397
(2002) and 1402 (2002), the latter being adopted last
Saturday.

Israel's immediate rejection of resolution 1402
(2002) and the dangerous escalation of the activities of
the Israeli armed forces in the occupied Palestinian
territories, as well as the continuation of the siege
imposed on President Arafat's compound, represent a
flagrant defiance of international law and international
humanitarian law. They clearly demonstrate that the
policy of the Government of Prime Minister Sharon is
based on a rejection of the peace option and is an
endeavour to abort any international or Arab initiative
that could lead to a comprehensive and just settlement
of the Middle East problem.

The fact that the Israeli Prime Minister has
threatened to exile President Arafat from his country
and homeland marks a new stage in the deterioration of
the situation, revealing the genuine intentions of Prime
Minister Sharon, who has flagrantly disregarded
international law, international humanitarian law and
the 1949 Geneva Convention. Those actions confirm
that he is continuing his policy of physical elimination,
that he is perpetrating war crimes punishable under
international law and that he considers the reoccupied
Palestinian territories as zones closed to journalists and
the media. This is further evidence of Prime Minister
Sharon's intentions, namely, the physical elimination
and genocide of the unarmed Palestinian population.

We consider that Israel's persistence in pursuing
such a futile policy and political adventurism not only
is harmful to the civilian population but will also have
serious repercussions for the Israelis themselves. In
fact, the excessive recourse to military force does not
guarantee the security of Israel. It can, in fact, lead to
further deterioration and to a flare-up in the region as a
whole, thereby creating a clear threat to international
peace and security.

In the light of this painful situation, we consider
that there is no alternative to withdrawing all Israeli
forces from all occupied Palestinian territories, the
lifting of the siege imposed on President Arafat's
compound and addressing immediately the security
situation so that peace negotiations can be resumed.

The Arab States hope that the Security Council
will now call for the immediate implementation of
resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002) - as strongly
called for by the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
during his meeting with the Council and in his
presentation of his report - while recalling the need
for the immediate application of operative paragraph 1
of resolution 1402 (2002) without any linkage, as
called for by the Secretary-General and the previous
Security Council President, the Ambassador of
Norway. This should be done before a vote is taken on
any resolution.

International protection for the Palestinian people
has become one of the most urgent and overriding
requirements because this is the only guarantee
available thus far to halt the dangerous and very tragic
escalation of violence.

