The President (spoke in Russian): As this is the
first meeting of the Council for the month of December
2011, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Jose Moraes Cabral, Permanent Representative of
Portugal, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of November 2011. I am sure I
speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Moraes Cabral and
his delegation for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Libya

Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2011/727)

The President (spoke in Russian): Under rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Libya to participate in this
meeting.

The Security Council Will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
2

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2011/752, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France, Germany,
Lebanon, Portugal, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/727, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Gabon, Germany, India,
Lebanon, Nigeria, Portugal, Russian Federation,
South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and United States of
America


The President (spoke in Russian): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2022 (2011).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.15pm.
11-61799

