Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the valuable information provided by
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs Lynn
Pascoe and by Mr. Craig Boyd, Director of United
Nations Support Office for the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM). We also commend the valuable
efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Somalia, Ambassador Ahmedou Ould
Abdallah. Similarly, we welcome the presence among
us at today's meeting of Ambassador Elmi Ahmed
Duale, Permanent Representative of Somalia.
Given the alarming situation of insecurity in
Somalia - and indeed the region - Mexico would

like to acknowledge the valuable contributions of the
United Nations and the African Union, through
AMISON, aimed at ensuring stability on the ground
and the basic conditions necessary to strengthen the
Government in Somalia. We also acknowledge the
efforts of the Transitional Federal Government to
promote national reconciliation and dialogue with
opposition groups in accordance with the principles of
the Djibouti Peace Agreement, as well as to improve
the Government's capacities and lay the foundations
for a national security mechanism.

However, we are concerned mainly by the
following aspects: the increasing insecurity in the
entire territory, including the country's coasts; the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation and of
human rights; and growing organized crime. It is clear
that the lack of security is the most serious problem
that Somalia faces. It is having a constant impact on
the Government's capacity and its prospect for future
viability. Likewise, the number of victims among the
civilian population, including women and children,
continues to grow day by day.

We are particularly concerned about the
vulnerability of the forces of the Transitional Federal
Government and of AMISOM. in the face of terrorist
attacks, such as the attack of 17 September against
AMISOM. headquarters, which left 21 people dead and
40 wounded. We extend our acknowledgement to the
troops of Burundi and Uganda and to their
Governments for their steadfast commitment. But we
should also be very clear: the incident of 17 September
should not have happened. It concerns us that security
is not guaranteed, even in the area under AMISOM's
control, which portends extremely badly for the future.

We consider it of the greatest importance that the
Government of Somalia make strengthening the
National Security Forces and planning for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
operations of former insurgents a priority. In that
regard, we commend the work of the recently
established Joint Security Committee given its
importance as a political forum to foster the
development of the national security strategy.

Turning to the fight against piracy, we
acknowledge the international efforts to counter that
threat to the security and the economy of the region.
Mexico recently took part in the fourth meeting of the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
where the large number of the participating countries
became aware of the impact of piracy on the arms
embargo and on access for humanitarian aid.

My delegation expresses its deep concern
regarding the alarming humanitarian situation in
Somalia, which has drastically worsened. The lack of
security that affects the humanitarian operations
throughout the country is unacceptable. The upsurge in
looting and attacks on humanitarian missions, and in
killings, abductions and threats against humanitarian
personnel, together with scant progress on the ground,
mean that almost 50 per cent of Somalia's population
remains dependent on humanitarian assistance, which
it is increasingly difficult to deliver.

We urgently call for all parties to the conflict to
comply with international human rights standards and
with international humanitarian law and to protect the
civilian population, including aid personnel. We also
underscore the vital importance of ensuring secure and
unrestricted access to humanitarian assistance. In that
regard, we commend all efforts on the part of the
Transitional Federal Government to ensure that the
civilian population, in particular the most vulnerable,
receive the inputs and services most essential to their
survival, such as those provided by the World Food
Programme. Press reports that such provisions have at
times been traded illegally for commercial ends are of
great concern. Moreover, we are equally concerned by
the human rights situation in the southern and central
areas, the continuing impunity in that regard in the
entire country, and the recruitment of children by
armed groups.

My delegation is aware that the lack of stability
hinders the progress needed in the economic and social
spheres. The piracy and the organized crime activities
in the Horn of Africa, in particular the trafficking of
drugs and persons and the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons, are severe obstacles to improving
security in the country. We believe it necessary to seek
cooperation mechanisms to strengthen the ability of the
region's authorities to tackle such threats and to regain
control of strategic points, such as the sea ports and
airports.

Mexico backs the importance of the continuing
focus on deployment of the United Nations presence in
Mogadishu, particularly in the light of the ongoing lack
of security in that capital. We commend the work of all
the Organization's agencies involved in that task, and
we trust that the efforts on the political and security
fronts will produce the necessary results to advance
that phase.

Lastly, Mexico, as Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
751 (1992) concerning Somalia, believes it important
to reiterate its appeal to the international community, in
particular the countries of the region, to support the
independent work of the Monitoring Group on Somalia
and to cooperate in the implementation of its mandate.

We are aware that the arms embargo and the
targeted sanctions regime are key instruments in the
peace process in Somalia, which, given their technical
nature, have a political impact that can benefit the
peace process as a whole. On 21 October, the
Committee will receive the Monitoring Group's mid-
term report, which the members of the Committee will
analyse and report on to the Council, together with the
other developments in the Committee's work.

Lastly, in our delegation's View, the possible
implementation of the sanctions by the Security
Council should be consistent with the approach that we
wish to pursue not only in Somalia but also in the
subregion, taking into account the complexity of the
situation and its many different political actors.

