Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Sir, for convening this timely meeting
in the presence of the President of the Federal Republic
of Somalia. I would like to express my appreciation to
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud for joining us today
in the Security Council, and commend his leadership.
I also thank him for his very forceful presentation.
Let me also join others in thanking Mr. Michael
Keating and Ambassador Tete Antonio for their
informative briefings.

After a long endeavours, Somalia is at last moving
towards State-building. This year is especially crucial
for the political transition process in Somalia. Successful
implementation of the electoral process is a test case.
Japan welcomes the decision by the federal Government
of Somalia on an electoral model for 2016 based on
inclusive, Somali-led discussions. We are also delighted
at the very encouraging news on the National Leaders
Forum on 12 April, where the detailed structures and
modalities of the electoral process were agreed among
the Somali leaders. It is now important to deliver on the
electoral process in August, as expected. We call upon
all parties of Somali to engage constructively towards
that end. There is an urgent need to make progress on
the completion of the State formation and constitutional
review processes and on the political road map in order
to realize a one person/one vote election by 2020.

We look forward to the constitutional conference
producing a positive outcome in May. The Security
Council should continue to do all that it can, and Japan
fully supported the adoption of resolution 2275 (2016),
which extended the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) until the end

of March of next year.

Turning to the security aspect, Al-Shabaab still
remains a major threat. Japan strongly condemns all
territorial attacks and pays tribute to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali National
Army for their work under the harsh conditions on the
ground. In order to prevent Al-Shabaab from making
further gains, we believe that it is crucial that offensive
operations against it be carried out in an even more
closely coordinated manner. We welcome the holding of
the recent summit of the troop- and police-contributing
countries to AMISOM, as well as the commitment to
improving coordination within AMISOM. as a step in
that direction.

Security sector reform is also important. The
coordinated integration of regional forces in the
Somali National Army will make joint operations with
AMISOM. more effective. Extending basic policing
services throughout the country, including within the
liberated areas, is equally important, as is capacity-
building for the maritime police force. We welcome
President Mohamud's commitments to push forward
those reforms.

Somalia's State-building efforts must be Somali-
led, but at the same time be supported by the
international community. For its part, Japan recently
provided additional assistance in the amount of
$38.5 million, which will be implemented by various
United Nations agencies. That assistance will be used
for State-building in Somalia, enhancing basic social
services, strengthening the capacity of the security
sector and revitalizing the economy. Assistance for
tackling the challenges that I have mentioned today is
included, such as support for the establishment of the
national electoral commission and strengthening the
police force. They will be implemented by ANSOM. and
the United Nations Development Programme.

Let me conclude by reaffirming Japan's strong
commitment to assisting Somalia at this crucialjuncture.

