Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation is grateful
for the briefing provided by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths.
We take this opportunity to express to him our utmost
support and our gratitude for his tireless ongoing
efforts to achieve a negotiated solution to the conflict in
Yemen. We are grateful also for the briefing delivered
by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, Mr. Mark Lowcock.

My delegation welcomes and commends the active
and constructive participation of the parties to the
Yemeni conflict in the United Nations-led conference
hosted by the Government of Sweden. The outcome of
the conference provides a glimmer of hope that must
continue to shine ever brighter until we can achieve a
peaceful, negotiated solution to the delicate situation
prevailing in Yemen.

We take this opportunity to convey to the
Government and the people of Sweden our sincere
gratitude and appreciation for their contribution to
ensuring the holding of this important event. We also
express our utmost gratitude to the Special Envoy for
all the consultations and negotiations held and the
measures taken to ensure that the necessary forum for
constructive dialogue was in place, as was seen during
the conference.

We also commend the role played by various
Member States, including Oman, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia,
the United Arab Emirates and the permanent members
of the Council. We wish to highlight also the leadership
of the Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres, in this
important undertaking.

There can be no doubt that one of the most
important achievements of the conference was the
signing of the agreement on a ceasefire in the port
and city of Al-Hudaydah and on the withdrawal of all
armed groups from the ports of Saleef and Ras Isa.
The implementation and oversight of the agreement
will be entrusted to a committee comprising the
United Nations and the parties to the conflict. We
would also underscore the commitment undertaken by
parties to grant an active role to the United Nations in
supporting the Yemen Red Sea Ports Corporation in
the administration of the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef
and Ras Isa. The agreement provides for the income
generated at those ports to be directly transferred to the
Central Bank of Yemen for the benefit of the population
at large.

We also take note of the progress made towards
continuedtalks between the parties in order to agree upon
the future reopening of Sana'a airport, and we highlight
the measures taken to initiate a dialogue on the situation
in Taiz and on the implementation of the prisoner
exchange agreement as a confidence-building measure.

It is important to bear in mind that after four years
of clashes and violence, it is the civilian population that
has been the most acutely affected by the scourge of
war, as has been eloquently stated by Mr. Lowcock.
We must recall also that more than 10,000 people have
died and more than 2 million have been internally
displaced. Food insecurity afflicts approximately two
thirds of the population, 8 million of whom are on the
brink of famine. This grave situation represents a threat
that must be contained and mitigated through effective
measures, which will be possible only if all parties
commit to facilitating the safe and unhindered entry
of humanitarian assistance, food and basic consumer
goods, which are crucial to the survival of the
population in general and especially for the more than
400,000 children suffering from acute malnutrition,
who require urgent assistance.

In that respect, we call on the parties to maintain
the spirit of commitment and dialogue that prevailed
at the conference and to fully implement and adhere to
the agreements reached, as well as to continue to work
unconditionally with the Special Envoy to continue the
dialogue in January next year, in order to ultimately
achieve an agreement that benefits the Yemeni people
and promotes their well-being.

We also appeal to the members of the Council
to maintain the unity that is necessary to effectively
support the aforementioned efforts.

