Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Madam President, for
organizing this debate. Allow me to stress three points
on the subject of peacebuilding that are important for
Switzerland.

First, we share the analysis that the funding of
early recovery activities would benefit from strategic
reflection at the highest level and should be dealt with
in the context of the peacebuilding architecture as a
whole. The experiences of past years clearly show that
considerable gaps between promises and the actual
disbursement of funds exist; that allocation criteria are
inadequate; and that there are multiple funds whose
governance remains fragmented. The goal is thus
obvious. We should have more coherent financial
structures that would be able to respond to
humanitarian allocation criteria, that is, that are
flexible, rapid and realistic in terms of risk. At the
same time, such funds must have the predictability and
the critical mass of development funds.

Secondly, the roles of the United Nations country
teams and of the mission leadership on the ground are
crucial. The complexity of tasks and of mandates
requires that the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General and their teams possess a wealth of
knowledge and professional skills. We could consider a
standard quartet of excellence for complex missions,
made up of a Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and deputies for the role of resident
coordinator/humanitarian coordinator, for civil affairs
and for military operations.

Moreover, it is in the best interests of Member
States that the Security Council not create parallel
institutional structures and that it ensure that the lines
of command and of decision-making are always clearly
defined.

Thirdly, civilian personnel play a critical and
increasingly important role in recovery efforts within
United Nations missions. My country will continue to
provide expertise in various areas to the United
Nations, both by providing training and by seconding
experts on the ground. At the national level, there are
numerous pools of civilian peacebuilding experts in a
variety of areas. However, there is still a lack of the
relevant instruments within the Secretariat, and that
prevents a systematic and coherent deployment of such
experts.

The Secretary-General must therefore strengthen
the capacities of the system and optimize collaboration
among the United Nations, the World Bank and
existing national structures. Moreover, the rosters
within the United Nations system in various areas of
competence are important resources that could be
exploited more systematically and could thus improve
selection procedures.

Continued concerted efforts aiming at enhancing
the quality of international support in the area of early
recovery efforts and peacebuilding are both welcome
and necessary. I hope that this discussion will be
pursued in all of the appropriate forums.

