Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Argentina on its
presidency of the Security Council and to express our
thanks and appreciation to its Government for having
convened today's meeting. We would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his presence here this morning
and his personal commitment to the Palestinian cause,
including through his recent visit to the Gaza Strip.
We agree that the Security Council and the entire
membership of the United Nations should proceed to
consider the best means for achieving a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East, in particular a two-State
solution. The recent escalation in Gaza is a reminder of
the need to reach a lasting solution to the situation there
and in the entire occupied Palestinian territory. We have
come to the conclusion that temporary solutions or a
piecemeal settlement are neither viable nor acceptable.

As we express our condolences to the brotherly
people of Palestine following the catastrophic tragedy
caused by the military aggression against Gaza, we
stress that it is high time for the Security Council to
assume its legal and moral responsibilities and take
action to ensure that such an escalation does not
recur - an escalation that had negative consequences
on both sides, especially the Palestinian one.

We call on the Council once again to adopt a
resolution to oblige Israel to end its occupation of the
Palestinian territories, cease its construction of illegal
settlements and put an end to all other practices that go
against international humanitarian law. We also call on
the Council to adopt a time-bound and clearly defined
political plan for the realization of the two-State
solution. Security, stability and peace in the region,
including that of Israel, require daring steps towards
such a solution - that is, the establishment of the State
of Palestine on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel.
The solution should include the withdrawal from all
of the occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian
Golan, the Sheba'a farms and the Lebanese villages.

The desecration of holy sites and the denial of the
freedom to worship in Palestine must be stopped, as
must Israel's policy regarding Al-Haram Al-Sharif,
including the attacks and the denial of the right to
prayer.

Qatar is among the States that have sought, and
continue to seek, to play a genuine and positive role
in working towards a lasting and fair solution to the
question of Palestine. We were among the first States
to take audacious steps to support means to reach
a peaceful settlement to the Palestinian question.
However, at the time ofthe recent military aggression in
Gaza, Qatar took diplomatic measures to bring an end
to the violence, which contributed to the agreement that
ended the aggression. In that respect, Qatar welcomes
the agreement reached in Cairo, brokered by Egypt.

On the humanitarian front, Qatar responded to
the humanitarian needs in the Gaza Strip, announcing
at the Gaza reconstruction Conference held recently
in Cairo that it would contribute $1 billion for the
reconstruction of the Strip, representing half of the
financial contributions needed according to the United
Nations plan for the reconstruction of Gaza.

Qatar, through collaboration with the relevant
agencies of the United Nations, has contributed in
many other ways to strengthening stability in Gaza and
supports the efforts of the national unity Government in
Palestine to benefit the Palestinian people and enhance
their national unity. We welcome the convening by the
Government of Palestine of its first meeting in Gaza.

The recent developments in Syria and the broader
region call for a coordinated international response in
keeping with the principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. The crimes committed by terrorist
groups have recently reached an indescribable level, and
they share characteristics with the crimes committed
by the Syrian regime against its people. The regime's
continued mistreatment of its people led to the conflict,
which has had such a negative impact on Syria and the
broader region and has created the breeding ground for
the terrorism we are witnessing. Qatar warned against
such developments at the Security Council in January
2012 (see S/PV.6710).

The humanitarian situation in Syria has become
one of the worst in the world, including the situation
of the internally displaced persons and refugees. As
made clear by the remarks of the Secretary-General,
the repercussions of the crisis on Syrian infrastructure,
especially in areas that are hard to reach, are
extremely significant. The Syrian refugee crisis is
the most serious situation in the world, calling for
an international response in line with the magnitude
of the burden now being borne by the host countries.
Qatar continues to provide humanitarian assistance
for the Syrian people affected by the crisis, pursuant
to the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and Security Council, including resolution 2139
(2014). We contributed $20 million to the consolidated
humanitarian appeal to enable Syrians in hard-to-reach
areas to rebuild their lives.

