Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to express
sincere thanks to Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun,
Mr. Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and the Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission configuration,
Ambassador Vieira, for their briefings on the situation
in Guinea-Bissau.

We would like to take this opportunity to thank
Special Representative Toure for his hard work in
Guinea-Bissau and warmly welcome the incoming
Special Representative, Mr. Filho, to the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS) team. We also commend the important
work of UNODC on the ground, particularly in the
light of the new mandate stipulated in resolution 2404
(2018), and we look forward to working closely with
UNIOGBIS as the situation in Guinea-Bissau continues
to improve.

Regarding the situation in Guinea-Bissau and
the implementation of resolution 2404 (2018), I
would like to focus on three aspects: the positive
developments on the ground in Guinea-Bissau; the
importance of supporting regional efforts, particularly
by the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS); and the importance of the continued
engagement of the Security Council.
First, we would like once again to welcome the
developments on the ground in Guinea-Bissau. The
appointment of a consensus Prime Minister, the
formation of an inclusive Government and the setting
of a concrete date for legislative elections are positive
steps. Those steps show the goodwill of the key
political actors in Guinea-Bissau and create space for
UNIOGBIS to work on its mandate, with a Government
and Parliament that are functioning.

We would like to highlight the critical role played
by women's organizations in breaking the political
impasse in Guinea-Bissau, and to reiterate that their
full and equal participation in Guinea-Bissau is key. We
encourage the Guinea-Bissau Government to continue
to engage with women in all steps and at all levels of
the political process.

It is important that the Government, the President
and the other political actors continue to work
towards organizing free and fair legislative elections
on 18 November and presidential elections next year.
Moving forward, it is essential to restore faith in
democratic institutions and work towards national
reconciliation in Guinea-Bissau.

That brings me to my second point, namely,
support for the region. Five key political
organizations - UNIOGBIS, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, the European Union,
the African Union and particularly ECOWAS, also
known as the P-5 - play an important role in Guinea-
Bissau. It is important that the Security Council
continue to support the active engagement of ECOWAS
and the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau, as well as
the strong collaboration among ECOWAS, UNIOGBIS
and the rest of the P-5 in moving forward. We cannot
underestimate the role that ECOWAS played in
breaking through the political impasse. It will be vital
that the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General continue to support ECOWAS and to stimulate
that collaboration in the coming months, particularly in
the light of the organization of the elections.

I come to my third point. There is no room for
complacency on the issue of Guinea-Bissau. The
Security Council must remain engaged. While the
recent developments in Guinea-Bissau are positive,
we must not lose sight of the importance of the full
implementation of the Bissau six-point road map and
the Conakry Agreement. While welcoming the positive
developments, we must also shed light, when necessary,
on the issues that concern us, such as the appointment
of the new Minister of State Botche Cande by President
Vaz. Botche' Cande' is on the ECOWAS sanctions list,
and his appointment serves as a reminder that, while
the political situation has improved, the situation in
Guinea-Bissau is still fragile.

Those political improvements may be short-lived if
the underlying structural issues are not addressed. The
new Government is tasked with building a Government
programme that supports national unity. It is key that
the stakeholders of Guinea-Bissau be able to move past
the political impasse.

In conclusion, we urge the political actors and
the P-5 on the ground to continue to work towards
supporting the inclusive Government in Guinea-
Bissau, the organization of free and fair presidential
elections and the full implementation of the Conakry
Agreement and the Bissau six-point road map. The
continued engagement of the Security Council will
remain essential in moving forward.

