Mr. Captan (Liberia): I am grateful to you,
Madam President, and to the Council for this
opportunity to comment during these deliberations.
Although my Government has not had sufficient time
adequately to study the report of the Panel of Experts
on Liberia (S/2001/1015, annex), submitted pursuant to
paragraph 19 of resolution 1343 (2001), I am pleased
none the less that the report is finally officially out so
that the Liberian Government will not be repeatedly
confronted with selective leaks and speculation via the
Internet and in the print media.

The Liberian Government finds the report to be
devoid of any substantive relevance, especially as it
relates to the mandate of the Panel of Experts
established under paragraph 19 of the resolution. The
report of the Panel is, as members may have observed,
absolutely consumed with activities antecedent to the
adoption of resolution 1343 (2001) by the Council on 7
March 2001. It is reasonable to conclude, therefore,
that the Panel has merely sought to vindicate itself with
respect to the inherent flaws of the original report
(S/2000/1195), which contributed to the imposition of
sanctions on Liberia.

My Government has arrived at that conclusion
based on the fact that the report does not in any
meaningful way address the question of compliance by
the Government of Liberia with the critical provisions
set forth in the paragraph 2 of resolution 1343 (2001).
All of the actions and steps taken by the Government in
compliance are unfortunately relegated to meaningless
comments made in passing, while a disproportionate
amount of time is spent on issues that should have been
adequately addressed in the original report.

I should now like to draw the Council's attention
to the core issue we face: the situation in Sierra Leone,
for which resolution 1343 (2001) was adopted. The
Council wanted peace in that country, and it made
stringent demands that Liberia expel all members of
the Revolutionary United Front (RUF), cease all
financial and military support to the RUF, prohibit the
importation of uncertified Sierra Leonean diamonds,
freeze all assets of the RUF in Liberia and ground all
aircraft under Liberian registry.

The Council has had the time to come up with a
realistic checklist on progress in peacemaking efforts
in Sierra Leone, and on Liberia's compliance or lack of
compliance vis-a-vis the conditions or demands in
resolution 1343 (2001). Let me say unequivocally that
the Government of Liberia is in compliance with
resolution 1343 (2001), and that these issues should
have been the primary focus of the Panel's report. The
resolution clearly differentiated between its objectives
and the means intended to achieve those objectives.
The Panel's report did not concentrate on the concrete
and measurable progress made to achieve the
objectives of the resolution, but concentrated rather on
the means, as though they were ends in themselves,
thus losing its focus on the intentions and the purpose
of the resolution.

The Council intimated to my Government that the
sanctions were intended to bring pressure to bear on
the Government of Liberia and were not intended to be
punitive in nature. In essence, the adoption of
resolution 1343 (2001) and the measures imposed were
intended, according to paragraph 3 of that resolution,
"to lead to further progress in the peace process in
Sierra Leone".

My Government, as a Member of the United
Nations, is fully committed to the principles of the
United Nations and holds the Security Council in high
esteem. It would not be in Liberia's national interest to
ignore demands made upon it by this body. This body
should not dismiss my words or consider them trite
when I say that we are fully aware that instability or
insecurity in Sierra Leone has a negative impact on the
entire subregion.

Let me assure the Council that Liberia is aware of
and pleased with the success of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) in its mission of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of the
RUF and other militias while correspondingly
deploying its own forces and extending the authority of
the Government of Sierra Leone into areas which were
under the control of the RUF. The President of Liberia
has recently communicated to the Secretary-General
his views on the issues underpinning the crisis in Sierra
Leone, on the impact of sanctions on Liberia and on
regional efforts at establishing peace and stability
within the subregion.

The Mano River Union countries, namely Liberia,
Guinea and Sierra Leone, have held and continue high-
level discussions generally aimed at enhancing peace,
security and stability within their territories. Those
discussions will also contribute to consolidating and
sustaining the gains made in the Sierra Leonean peace
process. The inter-governmental meetings that took
place at Monrovia, Freetown and Conakry resulted in
agreement on specific and concrete recommendations
and a work plan and timetable for implementation.
Crucial among the measures to be taken are:
deployment of joint border security and confidence-
building units; sharing of intelligence information;
expulsion of all dissidents to their countries of origin;
opening of common borders; establishment of a legal
framework to deal with dissidents and those in
violation of the Mano River Union Non-Aggression
and Security Cooperation Treaty; and protection of
refugees, among other measures. Mano River Union
Ministers for Foreign Affairs will meet at Freetown on
11 December 2001 to assess the level of progress
achieved in the implementation of the measures
recommended by the Joint Security Committee. The
heads of State of the three Mano River Union countries
are scheduled to meet in January 2002, which will be
the culmination of the ongoing efforts undertaken by
the three Governments.

While attending the fifty-sixth session of the
General Assembly, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
the Mano River Union countries will meet the
Secretary-General to brief him on current
developments within the subregion and to solicit his
support for the implementation of the measures
adopted by the Joint Security Committee of the Mano
River Union.

There are, however, three issues of critical
concern to the Government of Liberia which must be
addressed by the Council, given its mandate. The first
issue has to do with Liberia's security concerns. In the
past, the international community and the Security
Council have ignored this issue, even though it could
have a long-term negative impact on the subregion.
Liberia has been under sustained attack from dissidents
in Lofa County, in the northern part of the country,
since April 1999. Many Liberians of all ages have been
killed, thousands more have become internally
displaced or have been turned into refugees, and most
villages have been burnt and destroyed. Conditions in
the camps for internally displaced persons are critical,
with severe cases of malnutrition among children and
the elderly, while hunger and diarrhoea continue to
afflict members of displaced populations, who live in
constant fear of renewed armed attacks.

It has been most difficult to put an end to this
incursion and provide for the security of our people,
because the Liberian Government has been unable to
secure the means to adequately defend its territory and
people. My Government would like this Council to
remove those constraints, which are severely limiting,
so that Liberia, in a transparent way, can defend its
territory and sovereignty, as is the inherent right of
every Member of this Organization under its
constitution and Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations.

Secondly, as a matter of moral responsibility, I
must call this Council's attention to the suffering of the
Liberian people. Liberia underwent a protracted seven-
year civil crisis and has yet to receive meaningful
assistance from the international community in the
revitalization of its human and physical resources and
infrastructure. What was bad has been made worse
with the imposition of sanctions. Resolution 1343
(2001) is engendering punitive effects. Liberia has
received no official development assistance, and donor
assistance for United Nations agencies and non-
governmental organizations operating in Liberia has
substantially declined over the past four years.

The current unemployment rate is 85 per cent,
while 80 per cent of the population lives below the
poverty line. According to the United Nations
Children's Fund, the illiteracy rate is estimated at 80
per cent. Half of all school-aged children do not attend
school. Infant mortality stands at 133 out of 1,000 live
births. Disability prevalence in the population is 16.4
per cent, of which 12.7 per cent is war-related. The
World Health Organization rate for a post-war country
is between 7 to 10 per cent. The prevailing causes of
disabilities are alarming, with 91.5 per cent acquired
through trauma and disease. About 21 per cent of urban
dwellers and 80 per cent of rural dwellers have no
access to safe drinking water. Adequate sanitation is
unavailable to approximately 70 per cent of the
population. An estimated 8 per cent of the population is
reportedly HIV-infected.

This country, Liberia, a victim of war, poverty
and disease, is today also the victim of a sanctions
regime with which its people must learn to cope in
their daily lives. Available statistics show a direct
correlation between the imposition of sanctions and the
decline in the living standards of the Liberian people.
Today, I stand impatient as I await this Council's action
to alleviate the human suffering in my country.

The third issue of concern to the Government of
Liberia is the apparent inequity with which resolution
1343 (2001) is administered. The report of the Panel of
Experts has finally admitted and drawn attention to the
negative influence of non-State actors along the Mano
River frontier and their sponsors. The Panel confirms
their attacks on Liberia as commencing as early as
April of 1999. There has been no condemnation of
these attacks; nor has there been any reference to the
violation of paragraph 4 of resolution 1343 (2001).
These attacks into Liberia by dissidents are the major
cause of all the human suffering in Lofa County.

The Security Council is obliged to respond to
these acts of aggression against innocent Liberians, as
it would respond to similar attacks of aggression
elsewhere. When double standards are used in the
disposition of international disputes, efforts to achieve
genuine peace are undermined.

Madam Chairman, permit me to remind the
Council that 10 months ago there was no dialogue
between the Governments of Liberia, Guinea and
Sierra Leone. There was no significant progress in the
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration (DDR)
process in Sierra Leone. There was no significant
deployment of forces of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) in territory controlled by the
RUF, and the prospect for elections in Sierra Leone
was bleak.

Today, some 10 months after the adoption of
resolution 1343 (2001), the three Governments of
Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone have engaged in
extensive dialogue that will lead to a summit of heads
of State of the Mano River Union. Significant progress
has been reported in the DDR programmes in Sierra
Leone. UNAMSIL forces have been deployed
throughout Sierra Leone, including in former RUF-
controlled territory. The authority of the Sierra
Leonean Government has been extended throughout the
territory of Sierra Leone, and elections in Sierra Leone
have been set for May 2002.

What will this Council do to help encourage,
consolidate and sustain, in a positive way, the progress
achieved within the Mano River Union, and Sierra
Leone in particular?

