Ms. Bensouda: I welcome the opportunity to once
again engage with this body as I present my Office's
twelfth report on the situation in Libya, pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1970 (2011).

Allow me at the outset to emphasize that the
Office of the Prosecutor is grateful for the support it
received during the reporting period in conducting its
work on the situation in Libya. My Office has received
that critical support from an increasing number of
both States parties and non-States parties to the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
including members of the Council. That cooperation
has greatly facilitated our work vis-a-vis Libya and
must be recognized.

To cite one example, the Council will recall that
during my last briefing on 26 May (see S/PV.7698), I
reported on my official visit to Cairo and on the positive
dialogue and engagement between my Office and the
Egyptian authorities on several matters. In conformity
with its mandate, my Office continued to pursue
issues of mutual interest with the Egyptian authorities,
including in relation to the situation in Libya and the
challenges facing the region of North Africa, such
as the security and destabilizing threats posed by
terrorism and extremist groups, such as the so-called
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, or Da'esh. Since
my visit, my Office has continued to liaise with the
Arab Republic of Egypt in order to advance our shared
goals of bringing justice to the victims of grave crimes.

I am hopeful that in my next report in May 2017,
I will be able to report tangible results of that positive
engagement. I am confident that the Arab Republic
of Egypt will be a leading example by building on
the existing level of cooperation and continuing and
strengthening its voluntary cooperation with the Court.

Let me provide a brief update on the Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah al-Senussi cases. Following
that update, I will discuss the current situation in Libya
and my Office's plans for further investigations.

As the Council will recall, on 26 April, my Office
filed a request with the Pre-Trial Chamber of the Court
for an order directing the Registry to transmit a request
to Mr. Al-'Ajami Al-'Atiri for the arrest and surrender
of Mr. Al-Qadhafi to the ICC. Mr. Al-'Atiri commands
the Abu-Bakr al-Siddiq Battalion in Zintan, Libya,
and has control of Mr. Al-Qadhafi. On 2 June, the
Pre-Trial Chamber ordered the Registry of the Court to
communicate with the Libyan authorities as to whether
the request for arrest and surrender of Mr. Al-Qadhafi
could be served directly on Mr. Al-'Atiri either by the
Libyan authorities or the Court. Recently, on 28 October,
the Registry filed an update on the progress of the
Pre-Trial Chamber's order. That update contained in a
confidential annex a reply from the Libyan Attorney-
General's Office, dated 29 September. In the update,
the Registry sought guidance on what further course of
action it should take to communicate with the relevant
Libyan authorities. My Office is awaiting the Pre-Trial
Chamber's decision on the next steps in relation to
that matter.

Also in relation to the Al-Qadhafi case, in July
media reports suggested that Mr. Al-Qadhafi had been
released from detention in Zintan on the basis of a
grant of amnesty. I must report that reliable sources,
including the Libyan Prosecutor-General's Office,
have confirmed that information to be incorrect. From
the information available to the Office, it is clear that
Mr. Al-Qadhafi remains in Zintan and is still outside
the custody and control of the Presidency Council of
the Government of National Accord. My Office again
calls on the Libyan authorities to ensure that they do
everything possible to have Mr. Al-Qadhafi transferred
to the ICC without any further delay, in keeping with
their obligations under the Rome Statute.

Regarding the Al-Senussi case, my Office awaits
the full report of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya on the conduct ofthe domestic trial and will study

it carefully when it is available. At this stage, my Office
remains of the view that no new facts have arisen that
negate the basis on which the Pre-Trial Chamber found
Mr. Al-Senussi's case inadmissible before the Court. As
I have repeatedly stated, including before the Council,
my Office will continue to review its assessment on the
matter as and when new information becomes available
in accordance with article 19 (10) of the Rome Statute.

Allow me to offer a few words about the current
challenging situation in Libya. In short, the situation
continues to deteriorate and innocent civilians continue
to bear the brunt of the fighting between the warring
factions vying for control of Libyan territory. The
current state of affairs in which civilians are victimized
is completely unacceptable. As stated in my Office's
twelfth report to the Council, multiple conflicts across
Libya consume the country and parties to the conflict
allegedly continue to commit serious crimes.

The Council has repeatedly condemned crimes
allegedly committed by Da'esh, Ansar Al-Sharia and
other parties to the conflict in Libya. Executions,
including allegedly by Da'esh, reportedly account for the
largest numbers of killings during the reporting period.
Reports of mass graves are on the rise. There are also
multiple reports of civilian deaths from indiscriminate
air strikes, shelling and gunfire. Abductions and
unlawful detentions continue. The number of internally
displaced persons in Libya is believed to number
approximately 350,000. Finally, Libya is a major hub
for the illegal migration trade, which I will discuss in
more detail shortly.

I must also take this opportunity to join the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and
others in strongly condemning the attempt in October
to seize the headquarters of the High Council of State
in Tripoli. I share the view reflected in the 25 October
joint communique issued by the League of Arab States,
the African Union and UNSMIL that such actions are
detrimental to the stability and security of the country.
The persistent instability and armed conflict prevent my
Office from conducting investigations within Libyan
territory in relation to both existing and potential new
cases. Nevertheless, my Office continuously analyses
the security situation through a variety of sources in
order to identify opportunities to investigate in situ in
Libya. The Office will continue to work in partnership
with the Libyan Prosecutor-General's office to find a
solution to safely conduct investigations in Libya as
soon as possible.

In relation to those efforts, my Office notes
resolution 2291 (2016), and in particular the Council's
request to all parties to cooperate with UNSMIL and
ensure the security of United Nations and associated
personnel in Libya. I urge the Council to expressly
extend the request to include ICC personnel conducting
investigations in Libya. Doing so will help facilitate
one of my Office's major goals of ensuring that our
investigators return to their work inside Libya as soon
as possible. My Office is committed to intensifying
its efforts to deter the current climate of impunity in
Libya. Notwithstanding the many difficulties posed by
the investigations of the Libya situation, including in
particular resource challenges, my Office will do all it
can to significantly expand investigations in 2017. The
new investigations will consider bringing charges for
recent and current instances of alleged serious criminal
activity falling under the Court's jurisdiction, which
could potentially include alleged crimes committed by
Da'esh and affiliated groups.

My commitment to making Libya a priority situation
in 2017 is compelled by a number of factors, including
the widespread violence, lawlessness and impunity
that currently prevail in many parts of the country; a
desire to provide justice for victims of Rome Statute
crimes and alleviate the suffering of those civilians
who continue to endure the tragic consequences of
the conflict in Libya; and, finally, the opportunities
for further investigation that the Office has identified.
Furthermore, my Office's ongoing efforts in regard
to the arrest of an additional suspect or suspects have
advanced significantly. I can report to the Council that
my Office intends to apply for new warrants of arrest
under seal as soon as practicable and hopes to have new
arrest warrants served in the near future. The timely
execution of the new arrest warrants will be crucial,
require coordinated efforts by States and may also
require support from the Council.

My Office cannot accomplish its goals in Libya
acting alone. Addressing the widespread criminal
activity that continues to beset Libya requires a
coordinated approach andjoint efforts by all concerned.
It is with that in mind that my Office continues its efforts
of working with our partners to develop coordinated
investigative and prosecutorial strategies to close the
impunity gap for ICC crimes in Libya. Pursuant to
its Strategic Goal 9, the Office convened a two-day
operational level meeting in The Hague in October,
bringing together judicial and investigative agencies
from several States. The productive meeting resulted
in agreement in principle that the Office would work
collectively with the States with a view to augmenting
their respective, independent investigative efforts.

In particular, the Office is engaging with
those agencies investigating individuals involved
in organized crime and facilitating and financing
illegal migration through Libya. The importance of
investigating alleged crimes related to illegal migration
is reflected in resolution 2312 (2016), adopted by the
Council on 6 October. In 2017, my Office intends to step
up its cooperation with States in relation to that issue
and will continue to study the feasibility of opening
an investigation into alleged criminal acts against
refugees and migrants in Libya, including any alleged
acts of sexual violence or crimes against children that
fall under the Court's jurisdiction.

In discussing collaboration, Imust also acknowledge
with gratitude that the Office's investigative
efforts have greatly benefitted from the operational
investigative support and cooperation that it continues
to receive from the Libyan Prosecutor-General's office.
Regional States, including in particular the Republic
of Tunisia and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,
have also continued to cooperate with my Office in
its investigations in Libya, for which my Office is
grateful. Exceptionally, certain States have proved far
less cooperative, and I take this opportunity to urge
all States that have not responded to our requests for
assistance to do so without further delay.

Despite the challenges Libya that currently
faces, certain initiatives demonstrate that peaceful
negotiated outcomes to conflicts are achievable and
must be supported. One commendable example is the
31 August Misrata-Tawergha Agreement on the Return
of the Displaced and Compensation of those Affected.
My Office encourages other such initiatives aimed at
improving the lives of the people of Libya. My Office
continues to receive many delegations from various
parts of Libya, who represent civilians adversely
affected by the conflict. I welcome the opportunity
to meet with those delegations and hear directly
about the experiences of the Libyan civilians whom
they represent.

In the same vein, the Office also continues to
receive, from nongovernmental organizations, private
citizens and other sources, information and potential
evidence of acts that have allegedly caused grave
harm to civilian populations. In particular, those
include attacks that may adversely impact the civilian
population, preventing them from fleeing violence and
obtaining access to food, medicine and other basic
needs. As a case in point, my Office followed with
concern the recent 6 October statement regarding the
residential district of Ganfouda in Benghazi, made
by Martin Kobler, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of UNSMIL. In particular,
Special Representative Kobler indicated that he is
deeply disturbed by reports that civilians in Benghazi's
Ganfouda neighbourhood continue to be caught in the
cross-fire of fighting and suffer shortages of food,
water and medicines. Special Representative Kobler
indicated that UNSMIL has been working to support
the Libyan mediation process in order to minimize the
suffering in Ganfouda. I understand that an evacuation
plan has been discussed. My Office welcomes that
important development and will continue to closely
scrutinize the situation in Ganfouda and the actions of
all parties to the conflict in accordance with the Rome
Statute criteria.

To conclude, the Council referred the situation in
Libya to my Office. By definition, the referral carries
great responsibility to seek justice for the countless
civilians who have been victims of the Widespread
crimes in Libya since 15 February 2011. Compelled by
this responsibility, I have decided to allocate additional
resources from within my Office's overall budget to
the Libya situation. I have no choice if further concrete
progress is to be made in our investigations. Without
the Council's support, that allocation will necessarily
come at the expense of investigations of other crimes
in other situations. I appeal to the Council to recognize
the collective responsibility arising out of its referral
and to support United Nations financial assistance for
my Office's Libya investigations in 2017. The Libyan
people deserve no less.

Atrocity crimes demand unequivocal and universal
condemnation and accountability. In adopting the Rome
Statute, States recognized not only that reality but also
the intrinsic link between accountability for atrocity
crimes and sustainable peace and security. The Court
remains fully committed to its mandate to help end
impunity for the world's gravest crimes, and in doing
so to contribute to preventing future atrocities. In that
essential mission, we count on the principled support of
this body and the States parties and non-State parties
to the Rome Statute - indeed, of the international
community writ large - to realize the full potential
of the Rome Statute system in Libya and elsewhere.
That is a must if we are to fully respond to the plight
of victims by dispensing justice and to strengthen the
international rule of law.

