Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to express
my gratitude to you, Madam President, for convening
today's meeting. At the outset, allow me to thank
Special Representative Jan Kubis for his unwavering
leadership of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan. I understand that this is his last
appearance in the Security Council. We wish to thank
Mr. Kubis very much. The Mission led by him has been
playing a vital role in the political process regarding
the development of Afghanistan despite difficult
circumstances on the ground.

I would also like to pay tribute to Mr. John Kerry,
Secretary of State of the United States. Secretary Kerry
has been instrumental in facilitating an agreement
on a Government of national unity between the two
presidential candidates, Mr. Abdullah Abdullah and
Mr. Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai.

Since the landmark Tokyo conference of January
2002, the international community has been steadfast
in its commitment to the development of Afghanistan.
In the Tokyo Declaration of 2012, Afghanistan and the
international community established the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework. The Framework aims at
strengthening the international partnership for the
sustainable development of Afghanistan throughout the
transformation decade, which starts next year.

Since 2001, Japan has contributed $5.4 billion
towards the security and sustainable development of
Afghanistan. That makes my country the second largest
donor after the United States. As Japan's first Special
Representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan, I have
had the honour of taking an active part in the process.
As embodied in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, the international community's ability
to sustain support for Afghanistan depends upon
Afghanistan delivering on its own commitments. Long-
term international support presupposes a credible and
legitimate partner on the Afghan side. Hence, Japan
expresses its disappointment at the recurrent delays
in the electoral process. More than five months have
already passed since the first round of presidential
elections on 5 April. Nevertheless, consultations
between the two candidates have yet to lead to an
agreement on the establishment of a Government of
national unity.

Afghanistan stands at a crossroads. We do not
wish to see our partnership put in jeopardy by further
domestic political disarray. We therefore reiterate the
need for a fair, prompt and peaceful conclusion of the
electoral process. Japan urges both sides to live up
to the commitments made on 12 July and 8 August
by accepting the final election results and forming a
Government of national unity as soon as possible.

A vast array of challenges awaits the new
Government. They include the consolidation of
an inclusive political system, fighting corruption,
guaranteeing the safety of the Afghan people, securing
a stable budget and achieving sustainable growth. We
hope that a Government of national unity, supported by
a broad national consensus, will tackle those challenges
without delay.

At the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan in July
2012, Japan committed to providing up to $3 billion
over a five-year period, starting from 2012. Of that
$3 billion, $2 billion have already been disbursed. Japan
looks forward to the day, in a not-so-distant future,
when it can work with a new and legitimate Government
of Afghanistan on its path towards achieving lasting
stability and prosperity.

