Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): I
would like to express our appreciation for this open
meeting on a subject in which the Council and my
country have been deeply engaged over the years.

Before turning to the issue at hand, I would like
to say a word on another subject, on behalf of
Ambassador Holbrooke, who is in Brazil; I would like
to make just a brief comment on the outcome of the 14
August Lusaka summit on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. While we are disappointed in some aspects,
we are encouraged that there was consensus among the
non-Congolese signatories on concrete measures that
could be taken to further the disengagement of
belligerent forces, hasten the withdrawal of foreign
forces and implement the national dialogue.

There was broad consensus on a number of key
issues, including the restoration of a full and effective
ceasefire; full support for the continuation of Sir
Ketumile Masire as the facilitator of the inter-
Congolese dialogue, with an appeal to the Kinshasa
Government to reconsider its opposition; reaffirmation
of the Kampala ceasefire agreement; a call for the
restoration of the 5 April ceasefire line and for the
completion and implementation of the disengagement
plan; strong support for the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) from all belligerent parties,
except the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and also
the Southern African Development Community States'
full endorsement of the need for MONUC to be able to
operate freely and without hindrance and to deploy as
required.

Unfortunately, there was not consensus on these
important points, although I would argue that there is
broad consensus in the international community for
them. We are disappointed that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was not a part of
the consensus on this document and continues to
oppose full implementation ofthe Lusaka Agreement.

The United States calls on the Government in
Kinshasa to honour the agreement it has signed and
will join with all the other parties to the conflict in a
cooperative resolution to the Congolese conflict.

The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo must lend its full support to the Lusaka
process and desist from its efforts to hinder the work of
former President Masire and the implementation of the
national dialogue. It must provide the requisite security
guarantees, access and cooperation that will enable the
United Nations to deploy its peacekeepers.

The United States remains committed to assisting
in the Lusaka process. The Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement is the most viable means for bringing an
end to the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and the United States strongly supports it. We
strongly support MONUC deployment, once adequate
conditions of security, cooperation and access have
been ensured, and we intend to remain fully engaged
on this important issue.

I appreciate the indulgence of my colleagues on
that issue, but it is one that is of great importance and
one that we will be discussing in the Council later this
week.

Now let me turn briefly to the subject at hand, the
open briefing that we have just had from Mr. Miyet.
We appreciate the update.
Five weeks ago, the Council met to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) for another 12 months and to
call for a clear strategy for completing the Mission by
December 2002. As the Secretary-General makes clear
in his latest report, this is a realistic objective that can
be reached if we provide UNMIBH with the resources
it needs to get the job done.

We welcome this briefing on UNMIBH's progress
since June, and the additional opportunity to discuss
the Secretary-General's report, which, in our view, did
not get adequate coverage in June.

My Government supports UNMIBH and the
international community's important priorities: refugee
returns, economic reform and the strengthening of
State institutions. The United States has set aside
significant resources for work in these areas, including
$67.2 million to support minority refugee returns and
close to $2 million for the new State Border Service.
We will also continue our significant contribution,
currently more than 10 per cent ofthe total force, to the
International Police Task Force (IPTF).

We also commend the work of UNMIBH's
judicial system assessment program over the last two
years. It has highlighted critical problems in the
judicial system of Bosnia and made important
recommendations.

We welcome the agreement by the Office of the
High Representative to establish an independent
judicial commission, which will closely monitor and
intervene in the upcoming re-vetting process for judges
and prosecutors in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as
provide oversight for the Bosnian councils which are
responsible for their appointment and discipline. We
are looking forward to more details as to how and when
the handover from the judicial system assessment
programme to the new Commission will occur, as well
as further information on how the programme will be
implemented.

We are encouraged by the positive developments
referred to in the Secretary-General's report. It is
inspiring to see the dramatic increase in refugee
returns, even of minority groups, to areas that saw
some of the most dramatic violence during the war. We
are seeing slow but continuing progress in setting up
the State Border Service, a key element of the New
York Declaration agreed to by members of the Joint
Presidency during their appearance in the Council last
November.
We need to continue our common efforts to
ensure that all of Bosnia's joint institutions are
vigorous and effective.

We are encouraged by signs that the nationalism
and hatred of the past are slowly giving way to new
respect for democracy and the rule of law.

There is also good news from Croatia, where the
new, democratic, Mesie-Racan Government has had a
positive impact on the Croat community in Bosnia. We
particularly applaud the strong message of support to
Croatian moderates delivered by Prime Minister Racan
during his recent visit to Bosnia.

But we cannot tolerate continued obstructionism.
In that regard, my delegation fully supports aggressive
use in Bosnia by the High Representative and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
of the mandates provided by the international
community. We applaud efforts to remove or restrain
all those standing in the way of Dayton's full
implementation: the war criminals remaining at large,
the organized criminals and the nationalist extremists.

Of course, the greatest obstacle to progress in
Bosnia, as in the rest of the region, remains in
Belgrade. The Belgrade authorities continue to obstruct
progress in Bosnia, repress their own people and
threaten democracy in Montenegro. The international
community's efforts to bring the Balkans into Europe
will never fully succeed until the current regime is
gone.

Despite these obstacles, Bosnia is beginning to
knit together. Much work remains to be done. We
reaffirm our commitment, together with our colleagues
in the international community, to see the task through.

