Mr. Kandangha-Bariki (Togo) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I should like to thank Mr. Herve Ladsous
and Mr. Yuri Fedotov for their briefings, which have
the Security Council a good overview of the situation.
I also wish to thank the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan for his statement.

On 20 March, the Council held a debate (see S/PV.6735) highlighting the remaining challenges in
Afghanistan. Three months later, we are compelled to
note that these challenges continue to monopolize our
attention as we attempt to help that country to escape
violence, insecurity and instability. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2012/462) shows that, generally
speaking, the situation in Afghanistan remains
precarious due to ongoing violence.

The bloody attacks that have taken place do not spare
civilians or the defence and security forces. Political
and religious leaders, too, continue to pay the price for
these intimidation campaigns. The assassination on
13 May of a member of the High Peace Council speaks
volumes about that climate of terror. Togo condemns
such killings and all violence committed against women
and children by anti-Government forces, who do not
hesitate to also attack schools.

We deplore the aerial attacks undertaken by the
coalition forces, which sometimes also claim civilian
victims. These acts of violence naturally exacerbate
the situation of asylum-seekers, refugees, returnees
and internally displaced persons. The humanitarian
operations launched to assist these people face
restrictions or, in some cases, are simply suspended,
whereas - as pointed out by Ms. Valerie Amos on
17 May- these populations require urgent humanitarian
aid and assistance. My country firmly hopes that the
new Solutions Strategy for Afghan Refugees, set out in
Geneva in May, will help us to identify the measures
and actions necessary to help Afghan refugees.

Despite the acts that I have referred to, which
inspire bitterness and disapproval, we note a glimmer
of hope, in particular in the peace process that has
been launched among political actors. In that regard,
we welcome the efforts of President Hamid Karzai
to pursue the peace process. Although that process is
currently experiencing difficulties due to diverging
positions among the parties involved, we retain the
hope that they will return to the negotiating table as
soon as possible.

Togo therefore encourages them to pursue dialogue
in order to restore peace and security to the country.
We note the announcement made by the Afghan
President that he will not stand as a candidate in the
next presidential election. We urge him to adopt all
measures necessary to a free and transparent election.
In that respect, we welcome the positive role played by
the Afghan Parliament in adopting relevant laws. We
further welcome the support provided by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and all the United Nations agencies, particularly the
United Nations Development Programme through
its technical assistance to the Independent Electoral
Commission.
The signing of a strategic partnership between
the Presidents of Afghanistan and the United States
on 1 May, the partnership agreements with Germany
and Australia and the announcement that a partnership
had been agreed with China add to our hopes in an
already favourable regional context. Political dialogue
and cooperation with the countries of the region are
undergoing visible changes following the holding of
various meeting, such as the Istanbul Conference for
Afghanistan, the fifth Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan and the sixth trilateral
meeting between Afghanistan, Pakistan and the United
States. We welcome the ongoing efforts being made
by Afghanistan's friends, alongside international
organizations, to bring peace to the country.

Now that international forces have announced their
final withdrawal for the end of 2014, we must call on
Afghan authorities, the country's friends, States of
the region and development and financial institutions
to step up their cooperation in order to overcome
the numerous obstacles that continue to hamper
Afghanistan's development.

We have great hopes for the conference to be held
in Tokyo on 8 July, which we believe will produce
significant commitments with regard to financing the
projects that will be presented at the meeting.

We once again reiterate our support to UNAMA
and all of the United Nations agencies and programmes
that, under very difficult conditions, continue to work to
help bring peace, security and stability to Afghanistan.

