Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh): Mr. President, it is a
pleasure once again to see you preside over yet another
important meeting of the Council. We deeply
appreciate your efforts in coming to the Council and
briefing us on your recent visit to Ethiopia and Eritrea.
My delegation would also like to express its
appreciation to the Secretary-General for personally
briefing the Council on the present situation in
Ethiopia and Eritrea.

The objective of a comprehensive and peace
settlement remains to be achieved. We are, however,
encouraged at the progress made so far in terms of
deployment of United Nations military observers, as
well as the peacekeepers, in a designated area. We
appreciate the cooperation extended in this by the two
sides. With the appointment of the Force Commander
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, the United Nations is now poised to play an
important role in the resolution of the dispute. We
congratulate both Ambassador Legwaila and Major-
General Cammaert.

We extend full support to the efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
trust that, as indicated recently following his first
contacts, he would continue to receive the full
cooperation of the two Governments in discharging his
responsibilities.

We recall with gratitude the tenacious efforts of
President Bouteflika and the OAU in facilitating the
cessation of hostilities. We now look forward to a
successful outcome of the proximity talks in achieving
a comprehensive peace.

My delegation remains concerned over the
humanitarian situation and the need for demining to be
pursued in earnest. In this regard we welcome the
progress made and the favourable disposition of the
two parties.

As regards demining, Bangladesh remains ready
to contribute to this activity and my delegation is in
contacts with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations on this.

There is no denying the fact that the talks have
not been easy, and difficulties remain. What we all
agree, we think, is to maintain the calm in the area and
sincere efforts to implement the agreement on cessation
of hostilities. While the efforts of the mediators are
ongoing, we believe the Council should continue to
keep watching the situation and do what it can to help
the two parties reach agreements on the outstanding
issues.

In this regard, Mr. President, we find your
initiative timely and extremely useful. We commend
the efforts of your delegation in putting forward some
ideas for building confidence between the two parties
to be formalized in the Presidential Statement. We
broadly agree with those ideas and are ready to work
with other members in finalizing the text in the coming
days.

