Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Due
to the time constraints, I wish only to take up a few
specific points that we deem important for the issue
under consideration.

First, the mission to West Africa, headed by
Mr. Ibrahima Fall, represents a qualitative move in the
United Nations approach to security, political, social
and humanitarian problems in the region, which
transcend the boundaries of the States of the region and
negatively affect the security and stability of the
region.

Given this backdrop, I would like to place on
record our appreciation to the Secretary-General and to
Mr. Ibrahima Fall for their commendable efforts and
for the valuable recommendations included in the
report of the mission. We hope that these
recommendations will become the basis for the
international Organization's efforts, together with its
specialized agencies, each within its own mandate, to
provide the necessary support to all the States of West
Africa, both individually and collectively, to deal with
the various challenges they face in various fields.

Secondly, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) represents the largest, most
comprehensive regional framework for dealing with
transboundary challenges faced by the States of the
region. We believe that all activities undertaken by the
United Nations to assist the subregion should be
conducted in close coordination and consultation with
ECOWAS, and all should be aimed at dealing with the
immediate and long-term needs determined by
ECOWAS itself.

We are encouraged by paragraph 69 of the
mission's report, reflecting the centrality of this issue,
and we hope that the new United Nations Office for
West Africa, which will be established on 1 January,
will represent a focal point of contact through which
ECOWAS priorities can be determined and various
programmes can be laid down and implemented.

Thirdly, the crisis faced by Sierra Leone has
always been at the forefront of the problems faced by
the subregion; therefore, reaching a final and
comprehensive settlement of that crisis should remain a
top priority for the international community in the near
future. Taking this into account, with the presidential
and legislative elections next May, we hope that the
Security Council will seriously consider expanding the
military component of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) further, to its mandated size,
in accordance with resolution 1346 (2001) so as to
enable the United Nations to maintain security in all
parts of the country and to provide the necessary
conditions for holding those elections in a free, fair and
secure environment. We would like to reaffirm that the
organization and the holding of these elections will not
represent the end of the efforts that have been
deployed. We previously witnessed a sudden
deterioration of conditions in Sierra Leone, even when
we had anticipated the best prospects for the peace
process. Therefore, we hope that the Security Council
will not consider a reduction of the size or functions of
UNAMSIL. Rather, it should work to implement the
agreed concept known as "No exit without strategy".

Fourthly, the international community should pay
more attention to other actions to be carried out in
order to lead the peace process in Sierra Leone to its
desired objectives. We call on donor countries and
institutions to contribute generously to the financing of
a special tribunal for Sierra Leone so as to enable the
implementation of its mandate as soon as possible. We
also call for the redoubling of assistance for the
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process of former combatants,
particularly since the Secretary-General made it clear
in his report on Sierra Leone last September that the
deficit in the Trust Fund established to finance the
reintegration of former combatants in civilian life has
reached the amount of $33 million.

Fifthly, efforts to improve relations and
confidence-building measures among Mano River
Union States are a prerequisite for the restoration of
peace and security in Sierra Leone. It is also extremely
important to avoid tragic humanitarian crises such as
the one we witnessed on the common borders of Sierra
Leone, Guinea and Liberia at the end of last year.
While we welcome ECOWAS efforts to reconcile the
three States and to hold a summit meeting among their
leaders, we also note that the activities deployed by the
United Nations in the region should serve the same
purpose. We cannot secure peace in Sierra Leone
without maintaining the moratorium on weapons and
diamonds vis-a-vis the Revolutionary United Front. We
cannot prevent further flows of refugees to Guinean
territory without putting an end to the support provided
to all armed militias in the region. We cannot be certain
that Liberia has complied with the provisions of
Security Council resolution 1343 (2001) without
establishing a specific mechanism to verify
compliance.

In this regard, the delegation of Egypt believes
that the most appropriate way to deal with the issue
would be to reactivate efforts to establish and deploy
an ECOWAS disengagement military force on the
borders of the three States, or otherwise to consider the
possibility of expanding the United Nations military
presence in the region to include the supervision and
monitoring of these States, in accordance with
paragraph 87 of the report of the inter-agency mission.

Sixthly and lastly, the report of the United
Nations inter-agency mission contains a number of
other recommendations relating to increasing the
capacity of ECOWAS and to elaborating a
comprehensive development strategy for West Africa,
with a view to giving momentum to the efforts to
establish peace in the region and to promoting respect
for human rights and good governance in the States of
the region.

While we welcome the coordinated and
comprehensive approach taken by the Secretariat in
support of the West African region, we would like to
reaffirm the need to respect the delicate balance among
the Security Council, the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and other United Nations
bodies, in terms of their original mandates, their
spheres of competence and their legislative mandates,
in monitoring and supervising any activity carried out
by the United Nations in implementation of the
recommendations of the mission.

