The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the Gambia.

My delegation wishes to thank the Secretary-General
for his report on the Central African Republic, contained in
document S/ 1998/ 148, which apprised us of the recent
developments in the Central African Republic. We are
encouraged to note that significant progress has been made
in the implementation of the Bangui Agreements. We are
more particularly encouraged by the commitment shown by
President Patasse to implement the reforms necessary for
the full implementation of the Agreements.

Although the security situation in the Central African
Republic has improved steadily, it is still a cause for
concern. My delegation would like to congratulate the Inter-
African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the
Bangui Agreements (MISAB) for the role it has played in
restoring calm and normalcy in the Central African
Republic. The security situation is, however, still precarious
and the mandate of MISAB will soon end.

In the light of these two facts, it is imperative that
some intervention be made in order to consolidate and
build upon the gains already made by MISAB. The
intervention required would therefore be a United Nations
peacekeeping mission to the Central African Republic.
The resolution we have just adopted establishes the
necessary intervention, that is, a peacekeeping mission.

From the report of the Secretary-General, we have
learned that substantial economic and financial reforms
need to be undertaken urgently. Otherwise, the present
negative socio-economic conditions in the country are
likely to continue seriously to undermine the overall
security and stability in the country. Due to this fact, my
delegation found it fitting that the resolution calls on
States to contribute to the Trust Fund for the Central
African Republic and also on international organizations
and financial institutions to assist in post-conflict
development in the Central African Republic.

Central to the peacekeeping operation is the request
made to Member States to contribute personnel,
equipment and other resources to the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA).
These provisions are very important to my delegation, and
we hope that States and international organizations will
respond positively.

One other important provision is the request made to
the Secretary-General to report on the progress made by
the Government of the Central African Republic in
adopting an electoral code and developing plans for the
legislative elections. It is the view of my delegation that
such a provision puts some pressure on the Government
of the Central African Republic to act.

On balance, my delegation believes that this
resolution goes in the right direction. We have joined the
consensus with the other delegations in support of it.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
its consideration of the item on the agenda.
 

The Secun'ty Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 12.30 pm.
