Mr. Kebe (African Union) (spoke in French): I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for October. We are
sure that under your leadership significant progress
will be made on the important items on the Council's
agenda. I would like also to thank you for inviting the
African Union to participate in this public debate on
the threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts.

The events of 11 September 2001 reverberated
like an earthquake that roused our consciousness from
its slumber, shook our certainties and marked a radical
break in the way we see the world and envisage the
future. The world became suddenly and brutally aware
that a hideous monster was there, crouching in the
shadows, ready to strike anywhere and anyone, and that
it had extended its tentacles through an international
network. It became aware also that, given its diabolical
plans and its worldwide scope, only an
uncompromising, coordinated and global response
would be able to overcome it. It is good that the world
woke up on 12 September 2001 with a clear
understanding that it needed to coordinate its efforts
and wage a common struggle to overcome international
terrorism.

I welcome that awakening, because the terrorist
threat has been going on for decades throughout the
world. Countries that were targeted felt that this was
some marginal phenomenon, and they felt they could
cope alone. In third-world countries, where the
phenomenon held sway, and where we did not have the
resources that major countries have - I am thinking,
in Africa, of Algeria, Egypt and Tunisia - we began to
sound the alarm, calling for concerted international
action to overcome this international ring that had
sworn to bring independent sovereign States to their
knees. Nobody wanted to listen, however, to those
faraway voices that were predicting the end of a world.
The reason was, unfortunately, that most of these
terrorist groups had found a foothold in the big capitals
of the world, where they were tolerated to a fault.

Of course, terrorist acts that blindly strike whole
populations, destroy civilian infrastructure, disrupt
national and international transportation and undermine
State authority and the fundamental universal values
that underlie the very survival of the human civilization
are indeed a real threat to international peace and
security. If there is one thing on which there has been
unanimity since 11 September 2001, it is that.

Moreover, everybody agreed on the need to
coordinate all combat actions against this universal
threat since 11 September 2001. So what are we
debating here? It is that the international community
has not been able to find a clear definition for
terrorism, to identify it and to expose it for what it is to
the world.

For the organization that I represent, most of
whose members achieved independence after a long
national liberation struggle, it is intolerable that
populations struggling for their independence against
the occupation of their national territories and against
the denial of their human rights should be confused
with terrorists. To make the struggle a coherent whole
we must, sooner or later - indeed the sooner the
better - all agree on a universally accepted definition
of what terrorism is.

Africa did not wait until 11 September 2001 to
organize the continent against terrorism. I spoke of the
unrelenting struggle that Egypt, Algeria and Tunisia
have waged against terrorist movements for over a
decade. We recall also how Kenya and Tanzania were
struck hard by the 1998 attacks against the United
States embassies in their territories. It is on that basis
that in July 1999, at the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) Summit in Algiers, the heads of State or
Government of the OAU adopted the OAU Convention
on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism, thereby
providing Africa with a unique continent-wide legal
instrument. Our resources being very meagre we felt,
before others, the need to unite to combat the threat
posed by terrorist acts.

In the Dakar Declaration against Terrorism,
which was adopted in October 2001 at the OAU
Summit, member States rejected terrorism and
recognized the devastating impact of terrorism and the
obstacles it poses to development and stability in the
African continent.

On 11 September 2002, recognizing the meaning
of that date and seeking to further consolidate the anti-
terrorist struggle in Africa as part of the worldwide
movement against terrorism, the African Union
organized a high-level intergovernmental meeting in
Algiers on terrorism in Africa. The meeting garnered
the requisite number of ratifications of the 1999
Convention, which will enter into force in the next few
weeks, and adopted a Plan of Action, whose preamble
states:

"The implementation of the Algiers Convention
has become urgent, given the determining role of
Africa in the international struggle against
terrorism and its legal obligations in the context

of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001)."

The African States have undertaken, under the
provisions of the plan of action, to share their
experiences acquired in the fight against terrorism, as
well as their resources.

I am pleased to report to the Council that Africa
is ready to play its part in the overall struggle against
terrorism in all its forms. It also awaits the support and
assistance of the international community to make
effective its legal instruments and the relevant
administrative and judicial provisions.

I would like to end this part of my statement by
mentioning, and welcoming, the fruitful cooperation
between the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, Ambassador Greenstock, and the leaders of
the African Union. That cooperation culminated in
Ambassador Ward's participation in the Algiers
meeting.

That is evidence that this kind of partnership
between the United Nations and regional or
subregional organizations, if cultivated and supported,
can help us make significant progress in matters of
common concern.

I should also like to take this opportunity to
publicly thank the Government of Norway and other
donor countries that have provided such important
financial assistance, which has enabled us to hold this
important meeting.

In conclusion, I wish to offer a final observation.
It is our belief that it is illusory to focus our common
action solely on the manifestations of terrorism.
Defeating terrorism is not simply a matter of pruning
the branches; we must, above all, attack the deep roots
of evil. In other words, we must make sure that we
wage a relentless fight against extreme poverty,
injustice, frustration and marginalization, which today
afflict almost two thirds of humankind and is fertile
ground for the proliferation of terrorist acts and their
justification.

Without doubt, 11 September changed our world.

Now we must begin to build the foundation of a new
world in which cultural values and civilizations,
instead of confronting and fighting one another, will
accept one another, will talk to one another and will
exchange mutually enriching experiences. Are we not,
after all, a single and unique race on this single and
unique Earth?

If our civilization, which, like any civilization, is
perishable, fails to learn the terrible lessons of the
twentieth century, with its two world wars and the first
use of the atomic bomb, we will no longer be able to
put our hope in man.

We are meeting here today because we place our
hopes in man and the values he embodies, and to
mobilize overall support for them.

