Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): The situation across the
Middle East continues to be a source of grave concern.
Terrorism, violence and humanitarian crises have
escalated and engulfed millions of innocent people in
the region. In the face of that grim reality, we must
maintain our focus on the urgent need to resolve the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Failing to do so will
continue to further destabilize the region and lead to
more radicalization and extremism.

Despite the continuous calls of the international
community, the Israeli violations of international law
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, have been increasing at an alarming rate.
The continuation of settlement activities, which intend
to create new realities on the ground, are particularly
worrisome. That is unacceptable. Resolution 2334
(2016) is clear on the destructive effects of illegal
settlement activities. The provisions of that resolution
must be implemented. Israel should immediately cease
all settlement activities as well as house demolitions,
land confiscations and other policies that deny the
Palestinians' right to development.

There have also been attempts to deny the historical
and legal rights of Palestinian people. According to
United Nations resolutions, Palestinians have the
right to return to their homeland. That right cannot be
withheld. The refugee status of the people of Palestine
is a legitimate right - it cannot be used as a bargaining
chip. The continuation of those practices will only
deepen the sense of injustice and breed desperation.
That is in nobody's interest.

The situation in the Gaza Strip is also deeply
worrying. Gazans, who are under blockade, continue to
live in tremendous despair and insecurity. That tragedy
is compounded by the worst financial crisis in the history
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Until a
just and lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestine conflict
is achieved, the work of UNRWA will remain vital. It
is our collective and moral duty to support the Agency.
As Chair of the UNRWA Advisory Commission and the
Working Group on the Financing of UNRWA, Turkey
will continue to contribute to the Agency's work and
calls on all actors to do the same.

The latest developments remind us once again of
the urgency of revitalizing the peace process. A two-
State solution, with the establishment of an independent
State of Palestine within the 1967 borders and with
East Jerusalem as its capital, remains the only way for
a just, comprehensive and lasting peace. Any peace
plan or initiative should be based on those established
parameters. That could be achieved, and we should
have reasons to be optimistic.

Last week, the State of Palestine assumed the
chairmanship of the Group of 77 (G-77) and China.
That is a historic development. We congratulate the
State of Palestine and wish it success. Palestinians
have first-hand experience of many of the major global
problems. Their chairmanship is an opportunity for
the G-77 and the General Assembly. We hope that the
State of Palestine will soon be a Member of the United
Nations and that Palestinians will take their rightful
place among us in order to contribute to the United
Nations agenda across all pillars.

Let me also highlight a couple of points on Syria.
We continue to support the advancement of the political
process through our efforts to finalize the establishment
of the constitutional committee. The involvement of the
United Nations and a balanced composition are crucial
for a legitimate and credible constitutional committee.
In recent months, we have intensified our consultations
with the other Astana guarantors and the Special Envoy
for Syria to that end. We will continue to cooperate
closely with the new Special Envoy, Mr. Geir Pedersen.
Turkey's resolve to fight terrorism in Syria is firm,
which we have proven through two major counter-
terrorism operations against Da'esh and the Democratic
Union Party and Kurdish People's Protection Units.
We will not tolerate the finding of safe havens for any
terrorist organizations right next to our borders. We
will not consent to the pursuit of any agenda that works
against Syria's unity and the will of the Syrian people.
As a global coalition member, Turkey is committed
to ensuring the permanent defeat of Da'esh. Turkey
and the United States have agreed to coordinate the
withdrawal process to avoid the creation of a power
vacuum to the east of the Euphrates. Turkey stands
ready to continue to do its part for a stable, peaceful
and democratic Syria, while preserving its political
unity and territorial integrity.

In each and every open debate on the Middle East,
we are obliged to focus on a dim picture. But these
problems are not inherent to the history or culture of
the region. We can overcome them, as long as we work
together and in the right direction. We can start by
collectively upholding international law. That requires
unity, courage and resilience, particularly on the part of
the Security Council.

