Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I have the honour to
report to the Security Council pursuant to paragraph
19 (e) of resolution 2140 (2014) on the work of the
Committee from 15 May 2014 to date. This is my
second report to the Council.

I will start with the most significant development
in the work of the Committee, which occurred on
7 November, when it designated three individuals - Abd
Al-Khaliq Al-Huthi, Abdullah Yahya Al-Hakim and Ali
Abdullah Saleh - as subject to the assets freeze and
travel ban measures. Those individuals were deemed to
meet the criteria for designation outlined in paragraph
17 ofresolution 2140 (2014) for engaging in or providing
support for acts that threatened the peace, security or
stability of Yemen. All Member States are now required
to implement these measures under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations. There are specific
exemptions in place for each measure, but they have to
be availed of properly, in accordance with resolution
2140 (2014) and the guidelines ofthe committee. Should
Member States need any guidance on the scope and
implementation of the two measures, or any assistance
in improving their capacity to implement the measures,
they are encouraged to approach the Committee.

During the reporting period, the Committee met
five times in informal consultations and convened
one formal meeting. The informal consultations
were organized primarily to hear presentations by
the Panel of Experts on its update report, interim
report and statements of case concerning individuals
who, in the Panel's assessment, met the criteria for
designation; to hold an interactive discussion with
the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee on issues of mutual relevance
in relation to Yemen; and to hear a briefing by the
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on Yemen.
The focus of the formal meeting, which was convened
after the designation of the three individuals, was on
implementation-related aspects of the sanctions regime
in Yemen and the region.

Allow me to now go into some detail on the
discussions held in the Committee. In interactions
with the Panel of Experts during the first phase of
its work, Committee members expressed support for
the Panel's efforts and looked forward to the rapid
development of specific lines of inquiry and focused
case studies in relation to potential spoilers of the
political transition in Yemen. They requested that the
Panel keep the Committee continuously apprised of any
relevant information gathered, regardless of the official
reporting timelines. The Panel, which has reached its
authorized strength since my last report to the Security
Council (see S/PV.7175) with the appointment of the
fourth expert on 2 July, delivered on this request. The
Panel has conducted three visits to Yemen, all of them
during the present reporting period, and it has also
travelled to each of the member countries of the Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC). The Panel met with a
wide range of interlocutors and both Government and
non-Government entities.

At the joint informal consultations with the two
other committees, to which Yemen, the Special Adviser
of the Secretary-General on Yemen and the three expert
bodies that support the three committees were also
invited to participate, participants underlined the need
for targeted international support to Yemen to combat
terrorism and identified a range of opportunities to
enhance coordination and cooperation among the
relevant United Nations and Security Council entities
in delivering support. The participants emphasized
the need for the Panel of Experts and the Al-Qaida
Monitoring Team to share information relevant to the
potential designation of individuals and entities linked
to political spoilers in Yemen and Al-Qaida in the
Arabian Peninsula, including possible links between
them, as well as pertaining to their financial sources.
The briefing by the Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General on Yemen was an opportunity for
the Committee to hear directly from him on the state
of play of the political transition in Yemen and the
Obstacles it faces. While the informal consultations
were held before the designation of the three individuals,
the formal meeting was convened afterwards. At that
meeting, to which Yemen, the GCC countries and
the GCC organization were invited to participate, the
participants heard a briefing by the Panel of Experts
on the implementation frameworks in place in the
countries visited by the Panel. In the discussion that
ensued, meeting participants expressed support for the
objectives ofresolution 2140 (2014), which seeks to deter
and constrain the activities of potential spoilers of the
political transition. Committee members encouraged
Member States to respond in a timely manner to the
information requests submitted by the Panel of Experts
on Yemen on implementation-related aspects of the
assets freeze and the travel ban. I would like to reiterate
that encouragement today.

On 25 November, the Committee approved a
cooperation agreement with INTERPOL, which
provides for an exchange of relevant information
between INTERPOL, the Committee and the Panel of
Experts and allows for the issuance of INTERPOL-
Security Council special notices regarding the
designated individuals. The agreement entered into
effect on 4 December 2014, when INTERPOL conveyed
its agreement to the procedures for cooperation.

Before I conclude, I would like to draw the Council's
attention to the efforts that have been undertaken to
promote cooperation, synergies, information-sharing
and transparency in relation to the work of the
Committee. To date, the Committee has met on three
occasions with representatives of Yemen, and twice
with those of the Gulf Cooperation Council countries.
On three further occasions, I informally briefed those
delegations at the working level. The Committee also
met twice with the Special Adviser of the Secretary-
General on Yemen, and on one occasion with two
other subsidiary bodies of the Security Council with
responsibilities relating to Yemen. In addition, the
Committee regularly issued press releases after any
significant discussion or decision had been undertaken.
I am also happy to note that both my first and my current
reports to the Council have been presented in a public
meeting. The Committee welcomes the cooperation that
has been extended to the Panel of Experts by Yemen
and other countries. It looks forward to the further
deepening of such cooperation.
