I thank you, Madam President, for organizing this meeting. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Special Envoy Pedersen for their briefings. Since the previous Syria humanitarian meeting (see S/2020/915), the number of cases of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in the north-west has increased dramatically. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs reports that over 13 per cent of current cases are among medical health workers, and another 7.5 per cent among other workers involved in the health sector. These figures justify our concerns regarding the shortage of protective equipment among doctors and nurses. The increase in confirmed cases comes with an increase in testing capacity, as two additional laboratories became active in Jarablus and Afrin, bringing the total in the north-west to three. The indiscriminate military offensive by the regime displaced hundreds of thousands of civilians, squeezing millions into a narrow area along our borders. Given the dense living conditions across the region, one of the primary reasons for the increase in COVID-19 cases remains the difficulty of physical isolation. It is not surprising that half of the cases detected are in northern Aleppo. The failure of the Security Council to reauthorize the Bab Al-Salam crossing point limited cross-border humanitarian operations. With resolution 2533 (2020) we lost the most direct, effective and highly monitored route to reach 1.3 million people in northern Aleppo. This resulted in the further deterioration of the health situation. Unfortunately, we will witness further increases in cases among the population in this particular area. I repeat our call to the Security Council to immediately consider reauthorizing the Bab Al-Salam crossing point within the cross-border mechanism. Two weeks ago, on the International Day of the Girl Child, we emphasized the need to empower girls and celebrated the power of young women around the world. In Syria, women, girls and children, in general, remain prisoners of an endless horror, under the rule of the murderous regime and terrorist organizations. In the north- west, nearly 1.5 million people, 80 per cent of whom are women and children, live in more than 1,100 camps in extremely difficult conditions. As winter is imminent, our priority should be to provide shelter to these people and address their basic needs. We expect donors to pay attention to the grave humanitarian situation on the ground and channel additional contributions. We must also focus on the deteriorating situation in the Al-Hol camp, where 40,000 children from more than 60 countries continue to suffer in lamentable conditions. Long-term solutions are urgently needed and these children, like all children affected by conflict, have the right to be safeguarded, including with family reunification and repatriation to their home countries. With the multiplier effect of COVID-19 vis-a-vis the humanitarian situation, access to safe water should be a priority throughout Syria. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs reports that only 57 per cent of water stations in the north-west are functioning, of which only 80 per cent are disinfecting water. In Al-Bab, where 30 per cent per cent of COVID-19 cases in the region are detected, hundreds of thousands of people have been affected by the water disruption of the pumping station since February 2017. The Secretary-General, in his latest report (S/2020/1031), highlights that since then the population has been reliant on alternative, insufficient and unsafe sources. As for the Allouk water station, in the north-east, I would like to repeat once again that sustainability of the water station relies on the supply of electrical power without interruption. The local population has borne the brunt of the deliberate and regular disruption of electric lines by the Kurdish Workers Party/Kurdish People's Protection Units (PKK/YPG) terrorist organization since last year. Electric supply to the region still remains only 29 per cent of that actually needed. While we exert the utmost effort to respond to the humanitarian consequences of the Syrian crisis, we also pursue our endeavours for advancing a political solution in line with the resolution 2254 (2015); maintaining calm on the ground; enabling the return of Syrian refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) to their homes in a voluntary, safe and dignified manner; and denying safe haven to PKK/YPG and Da'esh and eradicating terrorist organizations from Syria. Turkey, as an Astana guarantor, played a leading role in the establishment of the Constitutional Committee and wholeheartedly supports its work. We deeply appreciate the facilitation role of Special Envoy Pedersen and continue encouraging the opposition to constructively engage with the Committee. The next round of the Constitutional Committee should be held as soon as possible. We reiterate our call for accelerating the work of the Committee in a constructive and results-oriented manner. Turkey remains fully committed to ensuring a lasting ceasefire in Idlib. Preserving the ceasefire in Idlib is essential for protecting civilians, ensuring unhindered humanitarian access, enabling the return of IDPs and advancing a substantial and results-oriented political process. We are taking the necessary military measures to maintain calm on the ground. Ceasefire violations and provocative actions to the detriment of the relative calm should be avoided. The terrorist organization PKK/YPG is one of the major obstacles to stability and peace in Syria. The PKK/YPG poses a serious threat to the territorial integrity of Syria and to the national security of Turkey. My country will continue to firmly stand against the PKK/YPG?'s attempts to gain legitimacy under the guise of so- called "Syrian Democratic Forces", as well as against its efforts to consolidate power throughout the north-east by oppression and economic incentives. In the last 12 months alone, the PKK/YPG carried out over 250 terrorist attacks, resulting in the death and injury of hundreds of Syrian civilians. The terrorist attack in Al-Bab on 6 October, which killed over 20 civilians, was one of the starkest examples of the PKK/YPG's bloodthirsty campaign. The international community can no longer remain silent in the face of these brazen terrorist attacks against civilians. The PKK/YPG continues its attempts to infiltrate areas cleared of terrorists by Turkey. The terrorist organization goes as far as releasing Da'esh detainees when it serves its interest. It also takes steps towards usurping the natural resources of Syria, engaging in so-called oil contracts with third parties. We will continue our resolute fight against all terrorist groups, including the PKK/YPG and Da'esh, that target the security and stability of Turkey and Syria. There is a clear path forward for a genuine political solution that ensures the implementation of all aspects of resolution 2254 (2015). Let me recall the formula of resolution 2254 (2015): a negotiated political settlement; and elections under United Nations supervision, with the participation of all Syrians inside and outside of the country, with a new Constitution. As the country hosting the most refugees in the world, Turkey is now home to 20 per cent of the pre-war population of Syria. These people will be the ones who will rebuild their country with the hope of achieving a brighter future for future generations. Towards that objective, Turkey maintains dialogue with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and neighbouring countries alike, guided by the principle of the voluntary, safe and dignified return of Syrians to their country. Unilateral initiatives that neglect these principles and exclude key players and Syrians have no credibility, other than attempting to support the regime's agenda to suppress the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. We reiterate once again our unwavering, principled support for the Syrian people's aspirations to live in dignity, and our determination to continue doing our utmost for their well-being. As to the delusional remarks of the shameless regime representative, these are nothing but futile efforts to divert the international community's attention from the regime's well-documented record of crimes against humanity, its inhuman cruelties against the people of Syria and its enormous destruction in Syria. He is not a legitimate representative of the Syrian people, and therefore not worthy of my reply.
