Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): At this first
public meeting of the Security Council for the month of
May, Senegal would like to congratulate the brotherly
country of Egypt on its assumption of the Council
presidency for this month. I also commend China for its

outstanding conduct of our work in the month of April.
This meeting is also an opportunity for me to welcome
the leadership of Egypt, Japan, New Zealand, Spain
and Uruguay for having presented the text of resolution
2286 (2016), which is fully in line with the priorities of
the delegation of Senegal. My country gives particular
attention to the issue of health at this troubling moment.
I also thank the Secretary-General and our briefers,
namely, the Presidents of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and of Medecins Sans Frontieres,
whose descriptions of the situation on the ground leave
us all the more concerned, even though we continue to
trust in the capacity of the international community to
address the issue.
Theresolutionwehavejustadoptedcondemnsattacks
against civilian and medical personnel, equipment and
their means of transport and medical infrastructure.
It also demands that the parties to conflicts respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
Moreover, the resolution expresses the determination of
the Council to include, wherever appropriate, the issue
of protecting the delivery of humanitarian assistance in
the mandates of peacekeeping missions. It also calls on
the Secretary-General to provide recommendations on
how to prevent such acts. In line with the importance it
attaches to the issue of providing health care, Senegal
welcomes the Council's decision to include that issue in
peacekeeping mandates.

Senegal's determination to address the issue
of health care is reflected in our participation in the
African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises,
which includes Senegalese armed forces operating
various field hospitals in a number of peacekeeping
operations, which provide services for both uniformed
personnel and civilians.

The Council's consideration of the issue of
health care in armed conflict must also touch on the
very serious issue of women and children in need of
medical assistance. In that connection, on behalf of my
delegation, I strongly condemn indiscriminate shelling,
the use of car bombs, acts of terrorism, the dropping
of barrel bombs and the use of famine as a weapon of
war. Long involved in efforts aimed at ending obstetric
fistulas, which is the goal of a draft resolution that
my delegation traditionally introduces at the General
Assembly, we condemn the placing of obstacles in the
way of women accessing emergency obstetric services
in countries in conflict, which is at the heart of the
increased levels of maternal and newborn morbidity
and mortality.

Given the delays that the Ebola epidemic produced
for the peacebuilding processes in the affected
countries, above and beyond the areas covered by
today's resolution, the Council should take up the issue
of health care in conflict situations in the most thorough
way possible. Aware of the importance of the matter,
Senegal's 2015 chairmanship of the Foreign Policy and
Global Health Initiative - the Oslo Group, which, in
addition to Southern African countries, includes Brazil,
France, Indonesia, Norway and Thailand - focused
on improving ways to address international health
emergencies that could jeopardize international peace
and security. That is the aim of Senegal's full support
for today's resolution, which we hope will make a
significant contribution to improving the humanitarian
situation in armed conflicts.

The holding of this meeting just a few days prior to
the convening of the World Humanitarian Summit, to
be held in Istanbul on 23 and 24 May, is a source ofhope
and satisfaction. That will be the first meeting of its
kind and will provide an opportunity for world leaders
to reiterate their commitment to putting an end to the
worst global humanitarian crisis, including addressing
the issue of health care in the context of armed conflict.
I am pleased to reiterate Senegal's tireless commitment
to resolving such conflicts.

