Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and Egypt, for your and your Mission's
able stewardship in the month of August, which was
less quiet than expected, and for deciding to convene a
formal wrap-up session.

I will focus on two overarching horizontal issues
that were featured prominently during the month,
namely, non-proliferation and terrorism.

On non-proliferation, at the beginning of August,
the Council unanimously adopted resolution 2371
(2017), sending once again an unequivocal message of
unity from the international community. By strongly
condemning North Korea's increasing provocations,
we showed our determination to confront this new level
of threat to international peace and security by taking
further action. The resolution, adopted on 5 August,
provides for the broadest, most comprehensive set of
sanctions applied by the Security Council in decades.

As Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006), we are committed to ensuring
the full and effective implementation of all relevant
measures. We are continuing efforts in that regard by
reaching out to the entire United Nations membership
to ensure that the latest measures are understood and
applied quickly and comprehensively. I would also
like to recall that we are also committed to ensuring,
as reaffirmed in resolution 2371 (2017) itself, that the
sanctions regime should not have a negative effect on
the humanitarian situation in the country and that the
sanctions remain a tool in a broader strategy aimed at
the peaceful political resolution of the issue.

In any case, the most recent ballistic missile
launches by the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, which Italy condemns in the strongest terms,
confirmed the need for the Council to remain alert on
this very sensitive issue. The swift adoption yesterday
of presidential statement S/PRST/2017/l6, following
consultations, confirms once again the Council's unity
on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea file.

On terrorism, the recent attack in Barcelona, Spain,
in which citizens from more than 30 countries were
affected - including Italy - reminds us of the global
nature of this scourge. The Egyptian presidency rightly
made counter-terrorism a priority during this month,
as only collective solutions can tackle this challenge.
Early in the month, the Council adopted resolution
2370 (2017), on preventing terrorists from acquiring
weapons. It is a substantial step forward, in our
view, in the international community's commitment
to combating the illegal trafficking in weapons,
which represents a threat to peace and security and
undermines the stability of State institutions. We look
forward to meeting the new Under-Secretary-General
of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism in
September to discuss how the United Nations and the
international community can comprehensively tackle
terrorism and violent extremism.

I also want to briefly highlight that this month the
Council received the first briefing by the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya and
head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
Mr. Ghassan Salame (see S/PV.8032). Significantly,
Mr. Salame delivered his briefing via video-conference
from Tripoli, thereby showing his commitment to work
as much as possible in Libya. The Council confirmed its
full support of Mr. Salame' and his first initiatives in that
role, thereby injecting new momentum into the political
process and the central mediation role of the United
Nations. During the briefing, a number of delegations,
including Italy, also raised the issue of migration and
the need to address it using a comprehensive approach.

To conclude, I would like to refer to the Council's
working methods. Under the able leadership of Japan,
and as Ambassador Koro Bessho just reminded us,
the Council has completed the revision of Note by
the President S/2010/507, on working methods. The
new note represents a significant step forward in the
constant improvement of the working methods, the
transparency and the accountability of this organ. Of
course, as Ambassador Bessho also mentioned, daily
practice of what has been agreed will make the true
difference, as I mentioned during the meeting on the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon meeting (see S/PV.8037). In that
respect, allow me to draw members' attention to the
need for negotiations among Council members - in
particular when renewing peacekeeping mandates - to
be conducted in the most inclusive and transparent way
possible, and for the need to give due consideration to
the positions of troop-contributing countries and of the
countries hosting peacekeeping missions.

In conclusion, Mr. President, congratulations again
on your presidency. We look forward to a busy and
productive month of September under the presidency
of Ambassador Tekeda Alemu and the Ethiopian team.

