The President (spoke in Chinese): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
July, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr.
Johan Verbeke, Permanent Representative of Belgium
to the United Nations, for his service as President of
the Security Council for the month of June 2007. I am
sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Verbeke
for the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted
the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts

The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Spain and Yemen, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Sheikh
(Yemen) and Mr. Ydfiez-Barnuevo (Spain) took
seats at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council unequivocally
condemns the terrorist attack that took place in
the

Marib, Republic of Yemen, on 2 July 2007, and
expresses its deepest sympathy and condolences
to the victims of these attacks and their families
and to the peoples and Governments of the
Republic of Yemen and the Kingdom of Spain.

"The Security Council underlines the need
to bring the perpetrators, organizers, financiers
and sponsors of this horrendous act to justice, and
urges all States, in accordance with their
obligations under international law and
resolutions 1373 (2001), 1566 (2004) and 1624
(2005), to cooperate with and provide support and
assistance, as appropriate, to the Government of
Yemen in this regard.

"The Security Council reaffirms that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security and that any acts
of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation, wherever,
whenever and by whomsoever committed.

"The Security Council further reaffirms the
need to combat by all means, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, threats to
international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts. The Council reminds States that
they must ensure that any measures taken to
combat terrorism comply with all their
obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law.

"The Security Council reiterates its
determination to combat all forms of terrorism, in
accordance with its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2007/26.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.
07-41815

