Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): Since this is the first time
that I address the Council under your presidency, Sir,
let me congratulate you on Angola's assumption of the
Council presidency for the month of March, and express
my full support to you and your mission.
(spoke in Spanish)

I also wish to express my deep gratitude to
Ambassador Ramirez Carrefio and his team for
their outstanding work in the Council presidency
for February.

(spoke in English)

Japan welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2270 (2016), which is comprehensive and
ground-breaking. We would like to express our sincere
appreciation to the United States for taking the lead.
Our appreciation also goes to China for its efforts. I
also want to thank the 50 Member States, including 10
members of the Security Council, that co-sponsored
this important resolution. Japan also contributed to and
co-sponsored the resolution, because it sends a strong
and unprecedented message to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. Sanctions are important tools for
finding a comprehensive solution to a problem, and,
to that end, there has to be dialogue. In order for the
dialogue to be effective, there has to be pressure at the
same time. That is the very reason that we now have
this robust resolution.

Japan, together with the international community,
strongly condemns the repeated violations of Security
Council resolutions by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. We urge the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to fully comply with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including the one we just
adopted, as well as to honour its other international
commitments. The Democratic People's Republic of
Korea must realize that this message does not only
come from the members of the Security Council, but
from the international community as a whole. Let us
be very clear: no single country in the world supports
the nuclear test or ballistic missile launch by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

This resolution includes many important measures,
but I want to highlight only some of them. It bans the
importation from the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea of natural resources such as coal, iron, gold and
rare earth minerals. It bans supplying the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea with aviation fuel, including
rocket fuel. And it calls for mandatory inspection of all
cargo coming into and out of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. I will not go into further details,
simply because the robustness of the resolution speaks
for itself.

Resolutions and sanctions are effective only when
implemented. Therefore, what we have achieved today
is not the end, only the beginning. Now we must fully
implement the measures set out in the resolution. I
take this opportunity to call on all Member States
to fulfil their own obligations under the relevant
Security Council resolutions. I wish to confirm that
Japan will fully implement the resolution. In that
connection, I would like to propose that the Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006) - the Permanent Representative of
Spain, Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi - arrange an
open briefing to go through the provisions of the new
resolution with all United Nations Members.

Sanctions are not the final objective. I would like
to draw the attention of Member States, especially
that of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, to
paragraph 51 of the resolution, which affirms that the
Council

"shall keep the DPRK's actions under continuous
review and is prepared to strengthen, modify,
suspend or lift measures as may be needed in light
of the DPRK's compliance".

Depending on the behaviour and attitude of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the Security
Council is prepared to suspend or lift sanctions.

Before concluding my statement, I would like
to make clear that these sanctions are not meant to
target the ordinary citizens in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. We must not forget that the nuclear
and ballistic programmes of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea are being pursued at the expense of
the welfare of the people of that country. We therefore
welcome the fact that a stronger emphasis was made
in the resolution on humanitarian and human rights
concerns, which include the abductions issue, one
of Japan's most greatest concerns with regard to the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. In order to
bring a comprehensive solution to the problems related
to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, it is
essential that the Security Council remain seized of
the situation in that country in all relevant aspects.
We will continue to closely cooperate with our fellow
partners in the Council and all Member States of the
United Nations.

