Mr. Hunter (United States of America): The United
States would like to thank Security Council members for
a collaborative negotiation and express our gratitude for
France's extraordinary efforts in developing resolution
2480 (2019) and conducting the negotiations. I also
want to join our colleagues today in bidding farewell
and expressing our gratitude to Ambassador Delattre.
He has served France honourably both in New York and
in Washington, DC, and his service to this organ has
been instrumental in maintaining international peace
and security, as well as promoting liberty and equality
around the world. We will truly miss him, and we wish
him all the best.

With another year of insufficient progress in
implementing the 2015 Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, agreed in Algiers, and worsening
insecurity in central Mali, we cannot accept the status
quo for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). We needed
to create the right mandate to respond to the escalating

violence and hold the signatory parties accountable.
Resolution 2480 (2019) will help accomplish both.

First, we have made the significant decision to
create a second strategic priority for MINUSMA
focused on central Mali, the most dangerous region
in the country. The number of attacks, human rights
violations and abuses and civilians killed has reached a
level not seen in Mali since 2012. This second strategic
priority shows Malians that MINUSMA, with more
than 16,000 personnel and a budget over $1 billion a
year, will prioritize support to the Malian Government's
efforts to improve civilian protection and respect for
human rights by re-establishing a constructive and
rights-respecting State presence in the centre. The
Government has the primary responsibility for ensuring
security, opportunity and access to services there, and
it needs to act accordingly.

Secondly, this mandate again makes clear that the
Mission's key focus is to support implementation of the
peace agreement, as it has done for the past four years.
The United States has consistently noted our deep
disappointment with the parties' lack of progress on
that agreement. This resolution includes new specific
and measurable benchmarks focused primarily on the
political and security pillars of the agreement. We
expect the parties to make significant progress on those
benchmarks, and to do so soon.

To reinforce that expectation, the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374
(2017), concerning Mali, is on the verge of designating
more individuals under the regime of resolution 2374
(2017). The timely message of these designations
makes clear to all the parties that the Council will hold
accountable those who block progress on the agreement
to clear the way for leaders who will work together to
achieve the agreement's goals: power-sharing through
institutional reform, redistricting and more elections.

This is no ordinary mandate renewal, because
MINUSMA is no ordinary peacekeeping Mission.
Since its creation, in 2013, MINUSMA has operated
in a challenging, dangerous and asymmetrical
environment. It is a peacekeeping Mission in a counter-
terrorism environment. MINUSMA peacekeepers are
consistently and purposefully attacked by unrelenting
violent extremists who are mobile, smart and organized.

Mindful of those unique and deadly challenges,
this mandate more adequately focuses its attention on
MINUSMA's troops, which make up more than 80 per
cent of the Mission and the main share of its budget. It
calls for improved troop and police performance, more
control and flexibility for the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Force Commander and
better predeployment training for incoming troop-
contributing countries.

Significantly, it asks for a level of detailed
reporting that we have not received so far. Resolution
2480 (2019) mandates bi-annual assessments by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
in coordination with the Force Commander, on
performance, operations, rotations and the Mission's
work with the other security actors in Mali. It also calls
for the Mission to work with those other security actors
to develop a transition plan to coordinate the eventual
transfer of security responsibilities. We very much look
forward to hearing about those plans. The United States
intends to ask both the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Force Commander to present
them in person next year.

We note that the resolution contains references to
the International Criminal Court (ICC), and refer to the
United States policy on the International Criminal Court
as announced by the United States on 10 September
2018. In particular, the United States reiterates its
continuing and long-standing principled objection
to any assertion of ICC jurisdiction over nationals of
States that are not parties to the Rome Statute, such as
the United States and Israel, absent a Security Council
referral or the consent of such a State. Mali, as a State
party to the Rome Statute, has consented to the ICC's
jurisdiction and, as noted in the resolution, has referred
the situation to the ICC.

The United States remains a leader in the fight
to end impunity and continues to support justice and
accountability for international crimes, including war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. We
respect the decision of those nations that have chosen
to join the ICC, and in turn we expect that our decision
not to join and not to place our citizens under the ICC's
jurisdiction will also be respected.

Finally, the Council expressed support in the
resolution for the delivery of life support consumables
to the contingents of the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) operating outside
Mali through the reimbursable support mechanism
originally detailed in resolution 2391 (2017) and
later in the United Nations, European Union and G-5
Sahel's technical agreement. We have seen minimal
use of this option inside Mali itself and look forward
to the Secretary-General's assessment next June as we
consider whether to continue this mechanism.

On that note, the threat of terrorism is a reality
across all of West Africa, not just the Sahel, and the
Council should review the problem comprehensively. It
is time to transform the stand-alone report and briefing
on the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
into a broader discussion of terrorism challenges across
West Africa, including the devastating conflict with
Boko Haram and the Islamic State in West Africa
Province, and the increased threat to littoral countries.
This broader discussion should draw attention to the
conflict's impact on millions of people across the
region and the efforts of all regional forces to combat
terrorism. We have not had a dedicated meeting on the
Lake Chad basin region since April 2018 or a meeting
dedicated to security and humanitarian issues there
since September 2017. It is high time we merged those
subjects into one, rather than focusing exclusively on
the Group of Five for the Sahel.

In conclusion, we salute the soldiers, civilians and
contractors in MINUSMA who risk their lives for a
brighter and more secure future for the people of Mali.
The United States honours the sacrifices that they and
their families make each day, and most of all we hope
that the Malian parties see in this resolution a clear,
collective message that they must take urgent steps
to implement the Peace Agreement in order to create
stability in Mali and an opportunity for its people.

