Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): I, too, would like
to join you, Sir, in warmly welcoming Mr. Yusuf
Hassan Ibrahim, the Foreign Minister of Somalia, and
to thank him for the rather comprehensive statement
that he gave us in the private meeting earlier, which I
found to be very helpful.

I also want to congratulate you for putting this
very difficult file on the agenda of the month. You may
recall that, in the final wrap-up meeting of last year, we
discussed the successful files, not-so-successful files
and moderately successful files. Clearly, Somalia is one
of the most difficult files that the Council is faced with
and, to be very candid, we do not think that we have
the answers to the problems faced on this issue. We
hope that, in the course of this discussion, the Council
will try to find some answers.

You have asked us to be brief, so what I propose
to do is to make just four points.

The first point, of course, is the obvious one,
which is that the problems of Somalia can be solved
only by the people of Somalia. Indeed, the Foreign
Minister very approvingly quoted the Secretary-
General's statement in his report of 21 February, in
which he says:

"Only Somalia's leaders can decide to end the
suffering of their people and only they can decide
to negotiate an end to the conflict. They need to
rise above their differences and put the interests
of the people of Somalia first and foremost."
(S/2002/189, para. 65)

I think we are all agreed on that. At the same
time, I think it is very helpful that Somalia has
neighbours that are trying to play a helpful role. Many
have commended Djibouti for the Arta process and we
are now, hopefully, going to see some progress in the
process initiated by the lntergovernmental Authority on
Development. As long as the neighbours work on the
principle of respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity of Somalia,
I hope that they will make a contribution to the
solution of the problem of Somalia.

The second point I wish to make is, of course,
about the role of the international community. Here, it
may be recalled that last week, speaking in the
informal consultations, I asked the question of whether
or not we in the international community have decided
what exactly is our role on the Somali question. Are we
like the medical doctor, analysing and at the same time
providing prescriptions and medicine? Are we just a
pure political scientist, analysing the situation without
providing any assistance? Or are we, perhaps, just a
bystander, watching what is going on without getting
involved? I am not sure what the answer is to that
question, but at some point it might be helpful for the
international community to work out where, exactly, it
stands on the Somali question.

The third point I wish to make is that, in terms of
analysing or understanding what we can do, perhaps
one point we may want to bear in mind is that, post-ll
September, it is actually in the interest of the
international community to encourage all States - and
I would emphasize this point: all States - to have
strong national Governments. Strong national
Governments are an essential requirement in the fight
against international terrorism. We hope that, wherever
there is an exception, the international community will
try to find the answer to it. In that sense, I think that
the international community has a vested interest in
trying to re-establish a strong national Government in
Somalia.

My fourth and final point is, of course, that I
hope, in trying to look at the Somalia question, we will
not look just at various aspects of it. There is a huge
humanitarian problem that, I think, has been touched
upon. We also need to work out a comprehensive
policy on Somalia over the long term that I hope will
provide a solution to the problem. At the same time,
having heard what both the Foreign Minister and the
Permanent Representative of Somalia said this morning
on the question of the Al-Barakaat accounts, I think it
is clear that the freezing of the accounts has aggravated
the humanitarian difficulties of the Somali people. I
hope that we will find some way or another to unfreeze
the accounts to ensure that those who, in a sense, are
the honest recipients of the funds will get their funds
back as quickly as possible.

