The Secretary-General: I thank the United
Kingdom presidency for having convened this debate, as
reconciliation processes supported by the international
community can have a critical impact on the lives of the
people we serve.

Successful reconciliation contributes to preventing
a recurrence of conflict and to building more peaceful,
resilient and prosperous societies, particularly in
the aftermath of large-scale violence and human
rights violations.

From Cambodia to Rwanda, Northern Ireland and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, reconciliation processes have
played a crucial role in resolving ethnic, religious and
political differences and enabling people to live in
peace. Reconciliation helps to repair fractures caused
by an absence oftrust between the State and the people,
when institutions and individuals acknowledge their
role in past crimes and both victims and perpetrators
muster the courage to face the truth. It is a process
through which societies can move from a divided past
to a shared future.

Promoting reconciliation and breaking cycles
of impunity are therefore integral to all our work.
Resolutions adopted by the Council have guided us by
stressing that reconciliation is part of a comprehensive
approach to sustaining peace.

We all acknowledge the vital importance of
reconciliation, but our concept of reconciliation must
evolve to keep up with the changing nature of conflict.
It can no longer be limited to those directly involved in
waging war. Today's conflicts are complex and drawing
in neighbouring countries and great Powers. Social,
economic and political inequalities are growing and
amplified by the climate crisis and new technologies.
Democratic space is shrinking and stoking identity-
based politics, discrimination, intolerance and hate
speech. Today's reconciliation processes must respond
to those challenges by being broader, deeper and more
inclusive than ever.
Reconciliation must have an impact at the individual,
interpersonal, institutional and sociopolitical levels, if it
is to succeed. There is growing awareness of the role of
reconciliation in addressing the root causes of conflict,
from the climate crisis to structural discrimination,
inequality, impunity and the divisive narratives
that play a part in radicalization and engendering
Violent extremism.

We are currently witnessing a wave of protests
around the world. While every one is unique, they share
some common features - a deficit in trust between
people and political institutions, and the negative
impacts of globalization and technological change
that are deepening inequalities. I urge Governments
to respond to those protests with respect for freedom
of expression and peaceful assembly and to address
people's grievances through dialogue and reconciliation
to counter deep polarization.

We need a social contract that is inclusive and
equitable; that enables everyone, including young
people, to live in dignity; that affords women and
girls the same opportunities as men and boys; and that
protects those who are sick, vulnerable or living with
a disability. Social and economic reform can play a
central role in reconciliation, demonstrating the need
to address corrupt practices and systems that serve
the interests of a small elite. Today's reconciliation
processes must fulfil two conditions.

First, they must be based within the communities
and societies affected by conflict. Reconciliation
must come from within, with the participation of all,
not only political leaders and organizations. Women
representatives and civil society groups must be
included at every stage. Religious leaders have the
moral authority to mobilize local support and build
trust. Young people and marginalized groups are
critical players with an inherent understanding of the
grievances that lead to conflict. Peace agreements and
reconciliation processes that ignore those voices are
unlikely to succeed.

Local ownership and broad participation are also
critical to overcome attempts by powerful elites to
avoid accountability and exclude certain groups. Such
manipulation can contribute to weak agreements that
lack specific reforms and measures to bring communities
back together. Successful reconciliation restores trust
in the State and its institutions. When people deem
their institutions legitimate, they turn to them, rather
than to violence, to address their differences.
Secondly, successful reconciliation processes
address the pain and suffering of victims, understand
the motivation of offenders, render justice, provide
remedy and ensure truth. There is no reconciliation
without justice, and there is no justice without truth.
Transitional justice mechanisms, including truth and
reconciliation commissions, can be an effective way
to achieve these goals, as we have seen in Guatemala,
Sierra Leone, Timor-Leste and elsewhere. They can
help societies unite around a shared narrative that
affirms our common dignity and humanity

Reconciliation, however, cannot be a substitute for
accountability or pave the way for amnesty for serious
crimes under international law. The Council has rightly
emphasized the importance of accountability for gross
violations of human rights and humanitarian law. While
renderingjustice, successful reconciliation mechanisms
must advance equality and human rights, even in cases
in which those did not exist prior to conflict.

Human rights violations impact women differently.
Transitional justice must be transformative justice that
addresses gender imbalances, is rooted in local realities
and is based on broad consultation.

(Spoke in French)

The United Nations is working to integrate
reconciliation frameworks into peacemaking and
peacebuilding activities in countries throughout the
world. Our mediators and envoys are emphasizing
the importance of practical provisions that encompass
the need for dialogue, confidence-building and
reconciliation in peace agreements. We have also
worked to include provisions that address the past
in agreements mediated by regional organizations,
including in the Central African Republic and South
Sudan. In that context, I welcome the new transitional
justice policy of the African Union, a framework that
takes account of the complexities of mass violence,
while at the same time respects local traditions
involving reconciliation and justice.

We have always stressed the importance of
transitional justice - notably in Colombia, as well as
in other countries. We also provide technical support
for national processes that contribute to collective
healing, for example, in Tunisia and Yemen, where
we provide our expert advice to facilitate national
dialogue. Throughout the world, the United Nations
supports nationally led and victim-centred transitional
justice processes. In the Gambia, for example, we have
provided critical support in the development of the
comprehensive national strategy for transitional justice
and the establishment of the Truth, Reconciliation and
Reparations Commission.

We will continue to encourage Governments to
make use of their national capacities, while ensuring
respect for international norms. Our support for
dialogue, consultations and political processes at
the national level, including elections and drafting
constitutions, is another crucial measure to promote
people-centred and inclusive institutions.

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is
our road map for countering the drivers of conflict and
promoting inclusive governance and respect for human
rights and human dignity. The entire United Nations
system is helping Governments to strengthen good
governance, the rule of law, respect for human rights,
accountable institutions, the provision of basic services,
gender equality and the inclusion of young people and
marginalized communities in political processes.

Ultimately, reconciliation must be underpinned
by key economic and political changes to the very
institutions that gave rise to conflict or repression.
Revisiting, understanding and overcoming a painful
past together is extremely challenging. In the words of
Archbishop Desmond Tutu,

"There is no shortcut or simple prescription for
healing the wounds and divisions of a society in
the aftermath of sustained violence. Creating trust
and understanding between former enemies is a
supremely difficult challenge."

Successful reconciliation is therefore both a goal and
a process. As we near the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations and the decade of action for the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, reconciliation
based on establishing trust among peoples and nations
is imperative to ensuring peace and prosperity for all
on a healthy planet.

