Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): In the
wake of our moment of silence, I would once again
like to express France's shock and firm condemnation
regarding the attack on the Poway synagogue.
Anti-Semitism is the enemy of us all. Anti-Semitism
and, more broadly, religious hatred are the complete
opposite of all we believe in and constitute an existential
threat to us all. We also condemn in the strongest terms
the recent terrorist attacks in Burkina Faso. More than
ever, the fight against terrorism in that country and
throughout the Sahel must be our shared priority.

I want to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her very
informative briefing, as well as Ms. Nada Majdalani
and Mr. Gidon Bromberg, of EcoPeace Middle East.
Their briefing gave us a valuable perspective on a
dimension of the conflict that the Council has not
sufficiently addressed. Their joint briefing, like the
work they do together on the ground, is also exemplary
and send us all a particularly welcome message of hope.
I want to thank them warmly, and I am also grateful to
the German presidency for taking the happy initiative
to invite them. I would like to emphasize once again
that it is more important than ever to ensure that the
Israeli and Palestinian authorities work to maintain
a pluralistic, open space within their respective civil
societies. In our view, that is one of the conditions of
dialogue and peace.

Today I will focus on the dangers facing the
possibility of a two-State solution. We are close to a
point of no return, and the solution is threatening to
vanish before our eyes like a mirage in the desert. The
developments related to the policy of settlement in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem described last month in
the Secretary-General's report on implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016) (see S/20l9/251) are particularly
worrying and are leading inevitably to the erosion of a
two-State solution on the ground. That is my first point.

Since the beginning of the year, more than 4,500
new housing units have been approved in the West
Bank. That continues the efforts of 2017 and 2018. Last
year was marked by a record level of announcements
of nearly 16,000 housing units. The increase is even
more serious because it is based to an unprecedented
degree on the creation or expansion of colonies
located deep in the West Bank. At the same time, in
recent months the policy of legalizing so-called wild
settlements in Israeli law has continued. Similarly,
the practices of demolitions of Palestinian structures
and expropriations and forced displacements of their
inhabitants is intensifying and increased by more than
50 per cent in the first three months of 2019 compared
to the same period last year. That trend is particularly
alarming in East Jerusalem, especially in the Old City
and its surrounding neighbourhoods. It is accompanied
by a slow but steady erosion of the status quo in the holy
places of Jerusalem, which led to renewed tensions last
month around the Esplanade of Mosques. With more
than 600,000 settlers in East Jerusalem and the West
Bank, we cannot avoid the inexorable reality that we
are now close to a point of no return.

That brings me to my second point - the current
shift towards de facto annexation of West Bank.

I have just mentioned the settlement policy, which
is illegal under international law and fuels a dynamic
of de facto annexation. Other trends contribute to
this phenomenon, such as the seizure of Palestinian
resources, particularly water resources, which was
mentioned earlier by our civil society briefers. In
addition to the developments on the ground, there
have been legal changes that run counter to the
Fourth Geneva Convention, including the adoption
of several laws in recent years that have extended the
prerogatives and powers of the Israeli State, as well as
the applicability ofIsraeli law to residents ofWest Bank
settlements. Palestinians in the West Bank continue to
live under Israeli military orders and to appear before
military courts. The territorial grouping that is taking
shape before our eyes therefore already manifests the
unequal coexistence of two populations within the
same territory.

One of the consequences is the ongoing risk of
violence. We condemn all forms of terrorism and
violence, including the launch of rockets from Gaza
into Israel. We must also ensure that violence does not
become entrenched.

In accordance with its obligations under
international law, France does not recognize any
Israeli sovereignty over the occupied territories, be it
Jerusalem, the Golan, the Gaza Strip or the West Bank.
We have reiterated that position on several occasions,
including following the American decisions concerning
Jerusalem and the Golan Heights, which are contrary
to international law and applicable Council resolutions.

If the trends I have just described were to be
carried through to completion, they would make it
impossible for Palestinians to fulfil their national
aspirations, which requires the establishment ofa State.
For Israelis, it would mean a fundamental contradiction
of the democratic character of the State of Israel, which
is an integral part of its DNA. We must recommit to
internationally agreed parameters. That was message
sent by France and several of its Arab and European
partners at the Dublin meeting in February, and it is the
takeaway message of my statement.

In the absence of any political perspective,
there may be a temptation to break away from the
agreed framework based on international law and the
resolutions of the Council, and to turn instead towards
unilateral decisions. We must all fully appreciate
the danger of the temptation of unilateralism. We
must remember that any attempt to deviate from the
parameters agreed by the international community
would be doomed to failure. Those parameters are
neither menu options from which to pick and choose
depending on political circumstances, nor old software
that must be updated. As a whole, they are the basis
for any future agreement. That does not mean that we
cannot also consider creative means of achieving them,
but let us be clear - those parameters have no viable or
realistic alternative.

The fates of the Israelis and the Palestinians are
intertwined; neither of the two peoples can achieve its
aspirations at the expense of the other. The disappearance
of the two-State solution would irreversibly signal
that both parties had given up on the national project
as each has defined it thus far. France, as a friend to
both Israelis and Palestinians, cannot accept that. The
Council, which has crafted the parameters and outlines
of a future peace agreement, cannot accept it. The
increasingly deafening silence of the Council on this
conflict since the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016)
in December 2016 is all the more incomprehensible,
both for the sake of the Council's credibility and for the
world, which is watching the Council. France, for its
part, does not intend to abandon its efforts to promote a
just and lasting peace in the region.

