Ms. Bolafios Perez (Guatemala): We thank the
delegation of France for organizing this very timely
open debate, which allows us to address violations
against the most vulnerable people - children - and
the comprehensive concept note (S/2015/168, annex)
that it circulated to all delegations. We also thank the
main speakers, especially Junior Nzita, former child
soldier from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and goodwill ambassador for the action plan in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for his striking
statement.

The abuses committed against children by
non-State armed groups constitute a violation of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
and are an affront to our humanity, as they deprive our
children of a better world. They can have devastating
long-term consequences for victims, their families and
the communities where they reside. We must devote
special attention to the protection of children, who are
unquestionably most at risk in armed conflict. They
are recruited by armed groups and are the victims of
rape, sexual exploitation and abuse. As if that were
not enough, they are then stigmatized within their
own communities. We would like to highlight here the
"Children, Not Soldiers" campaign and the progress
achieved to date in the six countries committed to that
campaign.

As the Secretary-General noted in his briefing
this morning and suggested in his most recent report
on children and armed conflict (S/2014/339), the
world's children should be students, not soldiers.
That is why the necessary assistance and support for
the rehabilitation of these children and their proper
reintegration into their communities should be
ensured. We urge Governments and the international
community to ensure that disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes receive the necessary
resources and funding to operate in the affected
communities.

We consider it necessary to reiterate the provisions
of resolutions 1998 (2011) and 2143 (2014) in which the
Council called upon the parties to conflict to refrain
from actions that impede children's access to education.
We once again call on Member States to consider
concrete measures to stop the military use of schools
by armed groups. We underline the civilian nature of
schools in accordance with international humanitarian
law and strongly condemn the attacks in recent months
in C6te d'Ivoire, Afghanistan, Yemen, the Democratic
Republic of Congo and Nigeria. We therefore have
supported initiatives to combat the problem, such as
the Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools and
Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict,
which we consider to provide a good framework for
calling both State and non-State actors to immediately
cease attacking and threatening schools, students and
teachers and refrain from actions that impede the access
of children to education.

We are concerned about the emergence of new and
more radical armed groups, the fragmentation of armed
forces and the expansion of other, harsher groups, such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Boko
Haram, which have changed the landscape of armed
conflict by forging alliances, as well as the emergence
of other structures, some in opposition to Governments
and others associated with them. We categorically
condemn the deplorable acts committed by extremist
groups, including the use of children in suicide attacks.
We are dismayed at the mass kidnapping of children
by these non-State armed groups. Who can forget the
276 girls abducted in Nigeria by Boko Haram, the 153
Kurdish boys abducted by ISIL in Syria and the case of
hundreds of Yazidi children who were also kidnapped
by ISIL in western Iraq? We call for the immediate
release of these children. These cases, among others,
show the need to broaden the criteria for inclusion of
other parties to armed conflict in the annexes of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.

We would like to highlight the importance of
Member States improve their subregional, regional and
international cooperation, including through exchange
of intelligence and information, coordinated action and
the development of best practices to prevent, document
and address violations against children in armed
conflict. The fight against impunity must remain one of
the fundamental aspects of our efforts not only to react
to grave violations against children but also to prevent
them. We must make better use of tools available to
the Council - and use them consistently - to ensure
that those responsible are prosecuted, include them
in sanctions regimes, redouble efforts to strengthen
national capacity in the judicial sector and strengthen
the framework of international justice by, inter alia,
referring those responsible to the International Criminal
Court.
The conviction in 2012 of Thomas Lubanga Dyilo
and the referral to the Court in 2013 of the Bosco
Ntaganda case have sent a clear message about the legal
consequences of child recruitment, which is considered
a war crime. We are in favour of a closer dialogue with
the International Criminal Court.

Finally, we call on the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative to ensure that armed groups
listed in the annexes to his annual reports are informed
of these listings and guarantee that action plans to put
a stop to these violations are implemented. In addition,
strategies should be developed to ensure that armed
groups are informed of the conclusions reached by the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

