Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain is gratified by the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1566 (2004), of which, with other members
of the Council, it was a sponsor. We believe that the
resolution contributes significantly to endowing the
United Nations and the international community as a
whole with a set of practical and effective tools to
combat terrorism. Terrorism remains a threat to us all,
as we have seen, tragically, in the past few hours in
different parts of the world.

Our work over the past two weeks since the
Russian Federation introduced its initial draft
resolution has been intense, but we are convinced that,
as a result of everyone's efforts, we have managed to
reflect the broad consensus that exists not only within
the Council, but also among all the States Members of
the United Nations.

We also wish to highlight the very important
statement made at the beginning of the meeting this
morning by the representative of Turkey on behalf of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference. We all
agree to stress our unequivocal condemnation of
terrorism from any quarter, for which there can never
be any justification whatsoever. At the same time, the
preambular part of the resolution also reflects the need
for improved dialogue and broader understanding
among civilizations. In that context, I cannot fail to
refer to what the President of the Spanish Government
said at the 4th plenary meeting of the General
Assembly, on 21 September, when he offered the idea
of establishing an alliance of civilizations to combat
terrorism, extremism and pointless violence.

The resolution we have just adopted illustrates
the fact that one of the priorities of the Security
Council and the United Nations as a whole continues to
be the fight against terrorism, which we agree is one of
the most serious threats to world peace and security. At
the same time, we wish to emphasize that in combating
terrorism it is essential to always adhere to the norms
of international law, especially with regard to
humanitarian, refugee and human rights law.

The resolution strengthens the Security Council's
commitment to developing effective tools to combat
terrorism by emphasizing the essential role being
played in that regard by the Security Council's
Counter-Terrorism Committee and, in particular, the
Committee's recently established Executive
Directorate.

Similarly, we view favourably the establishment
of an ad hoc Security Council working group to
consider concrete measures to further promote the
international struggle against terrorism. Among other
things, that should include looking into the most
appropriate and effective ways and means to identify
individuals, groups and entities involved in, or
associated with, terrorist activities. We believe that the
most appropriate way to do that would be to establish a
list of such entities and persons. We know that there
could still be difficulties and complications in drawing
up such a list. It is true that there are many issues and
details that will have to be dealt with, but we are fully
confident that the working group will know how to
address them both seriously and effectively.

We also cannot forget another key aspect of the
resolution: that it reflects concern for the victims of
terrorism through a provision calling for the working
group to consider the possibility of establishing an
international fund to compensate victims and families.
We believe we are sending out a very positive message
by raising the possibility that assets seized from
terrorists or terrorist groups could be used to
compensate the victims of terrorist acts and their
families - bearing in mind that the ultimate decision
to do so will lie with the authorities of the State that
has confiscated the assets.

In conclusion, the resolution we have just
adopted is good news for everyone, as it enables us to
continue to move towards the common goal of
eradicating the plague of terrorism with growing
resolve and perseverance until such time as the
international community prevails over intolerant and
violent extremists.

