Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia; the candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey; the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and
Montenegro; and the European Free Trade Association
countries members of the European Economic Area
Iceland and Norway align themselves with this
statement.

The European Union expresses its appreciation to
the Security Council for presenting an opportunity for
the international community to discuss how we can
work in concert to overcome the challenges faced by
West Africa.

As this is the first time in 2004 the European
Union has had the opportunity to speak on African
issues here at the Security Council, it is appropriate we
take this opportunity to emphasize the great importance
we attach to our partnership with Africa and its people.

The European Union enjoys a rich and deep
engagement with Africa, both directly and in
partnership with the United Nations. Our commitment
to Africa results from our belief that the promotion of
peace and sustainable development in Africa
constitutes one of the major challenges to the
international community today. Our approach to this
challenge is to forge ever stronger ties with Africa
through mechanisms such as the Cotonou Agreement
and the proposed African Peace Facility, which will
assist the African Union and the regional organizations
to enhance their capacity and allow Africans to take the
lead in resolving conflicts on the continent.

A fundamental principle of the European Union's
relationship with Africa has been to assess our
engagement there on a continental, regional,
subregional, national or local level, as called for by the
issue at hand. Nowhere has the need for a subregional
approach been more evident in recent years than in
West Africa. With that in mind, the European Union, in
this Chamber in May 2003, welcomed the Security
Council's decision to send a mission to West Africa.
The mission's report, its recommendations and the
Secretary-General's insightful responses to those
recommendations have shown that the mission was, as
expected, an undertaking of the greatest importance.
The European Union is convinced that the mission's
recommendations on a comprehensive regional approach
and their endorsement by the Secretary-General are not
only welcome but, in fact, represent the only viable
way we have to ensure success in West Africa.
West Africa has suffered years of violence,
population displacement, human rights abuses of the
most heinous kind and economic depression. The
conflicts at the core of the suffering have been
exacerbated by regional rivalries and insecurities that
at times appeared to be motivated more by individual
greed than by any real security threat in the subregion.

Today, the situation in West Africa is
considerably improved. In Sierra Leone, the
international community is considering how the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) can
disengage from the country while concurrently building
Sierra Leone's national capacity in areas such as
security and reconstruction. The Special Court for
Sierra Leone is playing an important role in re-
establishing the rule of law and promoting national
reconciliation. In Liberia, the United Nations, week by
week, is bringing security and hope to the people of
that shattered nation, and the formerly warring parties
are participating in an effort to rebuild a national
capacity for governance. In cote d'Ivoire, the parties to
the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement are making progress
towards fully implementing the programme for national
reconciliation, and the Council is considering the
authorization of a new peacekeeping force to succeed
operations in that country by the United Nations
Mission in Cote d'Ivoire (MINUCI) and the mission of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in Cote d'Ivoire (ECOMICI). In Guinea-
Bissau, the initial steps by the transitional Government
are encouraging.

While the European Union recognizes and
welcomes the significant progress made in each of
those countries, we continue to urge all parties to
implement fully all the elements of the respective
peace agreements. Furthermore, the European Union
underscores the need for the international community
to continue its support for West Africa. The upcoming
donors conference for Liberia will be an important
opportunity to demonstrate our support for the peace
process and reconstruction there.

While recognizing the regional causes of conflict
in West Africa, it would be wrong not also to recognize
the regional contribution to their solution. That is most
notably the case in C6te d'Ivoire and Liberia, where
the assertive action by the Economic Community of
West African States was critical to the restoration of
peace. The European Union commends ECOWAS for
its leadership and continuing engagement, and we are
continuing to develop and strengthen our relationship
with ECOWAS. The European Union believes that
regional cooperation and dialogue will only strengthen
the security of West Africa, and in that regard the
European Union calls on all the leaders in the
subregion to engage in meaningful and constructive
dialogue at the bilateral and subregional levels.

The conflicts of West Africa and the
circumstances of their genesis have resulted in
common challenges across the subregion. As the
international community addresses issues such as the
reintegration of child soldiers, disarming and
demobilizing irregular and sometimes mercenary
forces that do not respect national borders, protecting
women and children from sexual violence, facilitating
the return and resettlement of displaced persons and
refugees, tackling the culture of impunity, restoring the
rule of law, overcoming environmental degradation and
stemming the proliferation of small arms, we must take
a regional approach.

With this in mind, the European Union welcomes
the Secretary-General's initiative in requesting a report
from his Special Representative for West Africa, Mr.
Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah, on defining a holistic
strategy to bring West Africa out of the nightmare of
conflict and suffering in which it has been lost for far
too long. The European Union is also actively
considering a regional strategy for West Africa, which
will focus on conflict prevention and resolution.

The European Union welcomes the increasing
interaction between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council in addressing the
challenges of peace-building in countries emerging
from conflict.

The European Union looks forward to strengthening
our partnership with the United Nations in pursuit of our
shared objectives for this region. In this regard, the
European Union Presidency's Special Representative,
Mr. Hans Dahlgren, and the Union as a whole stand ready
to deepen our dialogue with the Secretary-General and
his staff, with the United Nations operations in West
Africa, with ECOWAS and the Mano River Union
countries and with all the other countries of the region
to ensure that our approaches are in concert, mutually
reinforcing and ultimately successful.

