Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation voted against the
draft resolution (S/2017/315) on the chemical weapons
incident in Khan Shaykhun on 4 April. That outcome
was predetermined as we have consistently expressed
our categorical disagreement with the distorted nature
of the document, which, as events and consultations
unfolded, did not undergo the slightest change. Russian
concerns and priorities were ignored and brushed aside
under artificial pretences. The primary problem was the
fact that the draft resolution by the troika designated
the guilty party prior to an independent and objective
investigation. That approach is incompatible with legal
standards. Those members were aware of our concerns,
but, once again, put their unilateral and consequently
doomed draft resolution to the vote. Has it become a
national sport to intentionally undermine the unity of
the Security Council?

The strike on the Syrian air base, which was
undertaken before an international investigation was
undertaken, was in violation of international law and
lacked the approval of the Security Council. Voting in
favour of the Western troika draft resolution would have
meant legitimizing those illegal actions, which from the

point of view of international law and common sense is
absolutely unacceptable. If our partners believe that it is
necessary to adopt a generic resolution on chemicals in
Syria, then we need to sit down together at the table and
seriously agree on a comprehensive document, in which
we will naturally include our assessments, backed by
facts, on the use of chemical weapons by terrorists. In
other words, we need to work on the basis of mutually
taking into account each other's interests and concerns.

If the goal of our Western partners in the draft
resolution was to react to specific events in Khan
Shaykhun, then, instead of adopting a one-sided
anti-Syrian bias, it should have aimed at ensuring
that the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) be able to implement its mandate in
conducting an impartial investigation. That is precisely
the main difference between the Western and Russian
draft resolutions. The troika's draft is vague about
the investigation; it routinely mentions the fact that
the OPCW Fact-finding Mission to the Syrian Arab
Republic will, at its discretion, determine the places
that it would like to Visit. Incidentally, a big question
mark hovers over whether it would like to do so.

The Russian document contains a clear mandate to
do that and in such a way as to leave one doubt that
every available resource and all means were exhausted
in preparing its conclusions, and, most importantly, that
there was a visit to the site at which the incident occurred.
We also insist that the staffing of the mission should be
decided based on a broad geographical diversity. The
results of the investigation must be credible.

It is of extreme concern to us that since receiving
news of the alleged use of chemical weapons in Khan
Shaykhun eight days ago, no concrete steps have been
taken to investigate the incident through the relevant
international entities. As usual, the OPCW Fact-finding
Mission appears to be set up to work in remote mode,
without Visiting the sites where the incidents occurred.
We believe that that amounts to a simulacrum of taking
action, which only discredits the OPCW.

After what happened, we are going to have to be
much more rigorous in taking a look at what the OPCW
and the Fact-Finding Mission do. We are convinced that
we need to have a full and immediate investigation.

The possibilities for such an investigation have
not been exhausted. In order to have one, however, an
international team of highly qualified specialists needs
to visit the area of Khan Shaykhun and the Al-Shayrat

air base that was struck by missiles as soon as possible.
In our view, the goal of the visit to Khan Shaykhun is
to determine whether or not chemical weapons were
used there and, if so, what were the circumstances and
who could bear the responsibility for such use. A visit
to the Al-Shayrat air base is also necessary, because
that is how we can determine whether or not the toxic
substances allegedly used in the bombing of Khan
Shaykhun had been previously stored at Al-Shayrat.

We underscore the fact that in line with the
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2118
(2013), all parties in Syria have to provide international
inspectors with free and unfettered access to the areas
of alleged chemical-weapons incidents. Damascus
has displayed, in its position statement on that point,
openness and readiness to cooperate. On 11 April, the
Syrian authorities approached the Director-General of
the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW, Mr. Uziimcii,
with an official request to send a mission to Khan
Shaykhun and Al-Shayrat. We need to make use of that
proposal by the Syrian authorities, instead of doing
what we did after the chemical-weapons attacks in
eastern Ghouta and Khan al-Asal, when people ended
up being afraid to carry out an investigation. There were
all sort of provocations there, and we almost got to the
point where some permanent members of the Security
Council were on the verge of armed attacks on Syrian
territory. Fortunately, reason prevailed.

Like the Syrian authorities, the general coordinator
of the opposition's High Negotiations Committee,
Mr. Hijab, sent a letter to the United Nations with a
request to initiate an investigation at Khan Shaykhun
and said that he stood ready to help in the investigation,
which, for us, means providing safe access to the site of
the alleged chemical incident. In other words, we have
ended up with a very unusual situation where both the
Government officials in Damascus and the opposition
together are asking for an independent investigation,
while the OPCW is doing nothing, for reasons unknown.

But if we are to talk professionally, then, in order
to carry out an investigation by competent international
authorities of what took place in Khan Shaykhun, and
by that we mean first and foremost the OPCW, there
is no need for a new Security Council resolution, and
that is something that was being said during the past
week by the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, except that he was putting a different spin
on those words. It turns out that for him a resolution
was necessary in order to predetermine the outcome
of the investigation. We should not forget the fact that
our country was present at the inception of a unique,
unprecedented process of the chemical demilitarization
of Syria, which - and this has been acknowledged by
authoritative international organizations - was carried
out successfully.

However, some capitals still have an anti-Syrian-
regime slant. We are left with the very clear impression
that in actual fact the authors of the draft resolution
do not want to work with the people whom they have
sponsored and who feel very much at ease in Idlib
province. They do not want to fulfil their responsibility
to make sure that international specialists have free
and safe access. Once again, let me repeat, they are
afraid of an impartial investigation that could show that
there is a developed system for manipulating chemical
weapons. We have every reason to believe that after
Khan Shaykhun other provocations by extremists using
toxic substances could follow.

We once again emphasize that collective efforts
today should be aimed at supporting the peace process
using the Astana and Geneva platforms to strengthen
the ceasefire regime and jointly combat terrorism,
using a single standard. One of the first steps here
should be the launching of an impartial, unbiased and
truly independent investigation of the tragedy in Khan
Shaykhun, which necessarily includes travelling to the
place of the incident. Remote investigations must no
longer be used. We are looking forward to the specific
decisions that will be issued on that matter on 13 April,
namely, at the meeting of the Executive Council of the
OPCW on that date.

Once again I would like to ask speakers not to
insult and offend Russia in their statements. We have to
remain within some bounds of courtesy.

