Mr. Ikouebe (Congo) (spoke in French): I too
welcome the convening of this debate in a format open
to non-members of the Security Council, enabling them
to express their views on the management of
peacekeeping operations, a matter that is of the greatest
concern.

I entirely understand the Council's legitimate
concern that it be regularly informed about the
functioning of operations that the Council itself has
established. But above all, I understand the concern of
the General Assembly that it review the outcome of
work that it requested. I believe that the Council's
inclusion of members of the General Assembly in
today's debate is an indication of the transparency of
our work.

I thank Mr. Malloch Brown for his excellent
briefing. Indeed, it is because of his presentation that I
must set aside the statement I had planned to make this
morning. Mr. Malloch Brown has dissipated my
concerns, but I should like to express the frustration of
a Member State that learned from the media the content
of a report that we received only a few days ago. I
know that neither Mr. Malloch Brown nor his superior
is responsible for that situation, but I believe that the
Secretariat has a responsibility to bear in this matter. I
hope that there will be improvement in this area.

Turning to the briefing, I congratulate
Mr. Malloch Brown. As I said, it has largely dissipated
misgivings and misunderstandings. It has changed what
I believed only a few days ago. He has said that
investigations are under way, some of them concluded
and others ongoing. I take it that this is an interim
report, not a final one, so it would be premature for me
to offer any evaluation today. I take particular note of
the willingness of the Secretariat to take action where
management rules have been broken in cases of fraud
or embezzlement. I am certain that Mr. Malloch Brown
is not prepared to permit such embezzlement to
continue; I welcome such action and I welcome his
commitment. But above all I take note of the
willingness of the Secretariat to carry out
improvements on the basis of the recommendations.
That is a true part of the transparency and visibility of
the reform process, which are among the goals we are
striving for. It is important above all to ensure that such
action is an element of management reform, and I
welcome the approach that Mr. Malloch Brown
described, which will, above all, result in improved
methodology.

At the appropriate time, when all the
investigations and audits have been completed, I
believe that it would be legitimate for the Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly to consider their
outcome, to enable us to gain a real understanding of
what remains to be done. That would be the best
procedure to follow.

Let me conclude on the same point as Mr. Malloch
Brown, relating to the role of peacekeeping operations.

I come from Africa, where most such operations
are deployed. Our interest in the activities of the
international community is therefore obvious. In many
countries engaged in armed conflict, the men and
women of the international community are the symbols
of its solidarity. I myself have never visited the field;
Mr. Malloch Brown has and we can benefit from his
experience. Those people deserve some consideration.
It would be unfair and unproductive on our part to
represent them as criminals, rapists or agents of
corruption, either confirmed or alleged. I do not
believe that that is what participants at this meeting
wish to do.

This debate can shed light on the situation. Such
human endeavours have their limits. Mr. Malloch
Brown is quite right to give careful consideration to the
ways in which those operations are functioning, to note
dysfunctions and to assure us that he will take action
wherever necessary. Above all, safeguards should be
put in place to avert breakdowns. That is the most
important thing of all, but in order to ensure it we must
keep cool heads. This debate should help us to do so.
