Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I am pleased to congratulate you,
Sir, on your presidency of the Council for this month
and I wish you every success in your work. I am also
pleased to express my appreciation to your predecessor,
the Permanent Representative of Nigeria, for her
leadership of the Council last month.

For more than 60 years, the entire world has relied
on the Charter of the United Nations and the Security
Council as instruments of the international community
to ensure peace and security in the world. The Security
Council was given the mandate to implement that
crucial role, and today we are trying to carry out to
nuclear disarmament and the elimination of all weapons
of mass destruction.

Saudi Arabia has made great strides in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004). With a view to strengthening
cooperation at the regional and international levels to
maintain peace and security in the area of disarmament,
the resolution aims at preventing non-State actors from
manufacturing, possessing, developing, transferring,
transforming or using weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) through national legislation and foreign
policy.

Saudi Arabia was one of the first countries to adopt
international resolutions on nuclear disarmament,
including resolution 1540 (2004). It has paid special
attention to developing an infrastructure for nuclear
security and to training in the area of human resources.
It established an academic programme on nuclear
science and organized an international workshop on
resolution 1540 (2004) in Riyadh in January 2011, with
a view to raising awareness of the resolution through
the participation of many delegations from countries in
the region.

In 2012, Saudi Arabia contributed $500,000 to
help the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) fulfil its mandate.
Three different events were organized in cooperation
with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United Nations
University and the 1540 Committee. Many officials
from countries, universities and specialized institutes
participated in those events to raise awareness of
the work of the 1540 Committee and its impact on
international peace and security. Your own delegation,
Mr. President, had a very important role in the success
of those events, since it was Chair of the Committee at
that time.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has clearly
demonstrated its international commitment to resolution
1540 (2004) by acceding to international conventions
and treaties on WMDs, nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons, as well as to the 1925 Geneva Protocol on
toxic gases. That reflects Saudi Arabia's commitment
to support international efforts to eliminate WMDs for
the achievement of international peace and security.

Saudi Arabia has announced its intention to
develop an ambitious programme to use nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes to achieve the sustainable
development goals and preserve the hydrocarbon

resources for the coming generations. That programme
is completely in line with the nuclear security
requirements and use the guidelines of the International
Atomic Energy Agency in the planning, establishment
and operational stages. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
is committed to the establishment of an international
monitoring system to control nuclear material. We
make every effort to control our borders, customs and
all law enforcement agencies to stop any illegal trade in
those materials.

We reiterate that nuclear security strategies must
be cooperative and based on mutual confidence. They
must not obstruct peaceful nuclear programmes around
the world. We would also like to reiterate the legitimate
right of all countries to possess nuclear technology for
peaceful purposes, in accordance with the guidelines of
the International Atomic Energy Agency.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia emphasizes the
importance of the efforts to prevent the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and the need for the
international community to adopt similar measures
through legal frameworks to achieve a world free
of terrorism and nuclear weapons, especially in the
Middle East. Security and stability in any region cannot
be achieved through weapons of mass destruction.
However, it can be achieved through cooperation
and consultation with other countries, development,
progress and by avoiding a destructive arms race.
Israel's possession of nuclear weapons therefore
represents a major obstacle to the achievement of
stability and security in the Middle East. We therefore
reiterate our call for the establishment of a zone free of
nuclear weapons and all weapons of mass destruction
in the Middle East, including by inviting Israel's to
declare its nuclear weapons and submit it nuclear sites
to the supervision of the International Atomic Energy
Agency.

Based on our position on the need to rid the Middle
East of nuclear weapons, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
reiterates its regret at the failure to hold the conference
on establishing a zone free of nuclear weapons and
all weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East
scheduled to be held in Helsinki in 2012 because of
Israel's refusal. Such a conference must be held as soon
as possible in 2014. One single country in the region
must not be allowed to spoil the chance for all countries
to live in peace, free of nuclear terror.

Saudi Arabia underscores that the Syrian regime
must remove and destroy all chemical weapons and
materiel and end all relevant activities in implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013) and the resolutions of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
We express our concern at the Syrian regime's failure
to meet its deadlines, most recently on 27 April. It is
unacceptable to use the security situation as a pretext.
Indeed, it should be a reason to accelerate the removal
of such weapons, and not the contrary.

We would like to draw the attention of the
international community and the Council to the fact that
the chemical weapons declared destroyed was based
only on what was declared by the Syrian regime. We
would like to see the Syrian regime held accountable for
all chemical weapons and weapons ofmass destruction,
which should be kept in a secure place and must not be
transferred to any other party. It is extremely important
that the international community and Security Council
remain vigilant in that regard.

My Government would like to affirm that eradicating
weapons of mass destruction is the only genuine
guarantee against their use or threatened use. Saudi
Arabia reiterates that the concerns of non-nuclear-
weapon States must be taken into account through an
international instrument guaranteeing their safety and
stability. We also emphasize that nuclear-weapon States
must eliminate their weapons as soon as possible.

