The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Croatia,
Cuba, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iraq, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Montenegro, Morocco, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Pakistan, Peru, Poland,
the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, the
Syrian Arab Republic, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to participate in
this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-
General; Mr. Jiirgen Stock, Secretary General of the
International Criminal Police Organization; Mr. Hamid
Ali Rao, Deputy Director-General of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons; Mr. Chris
Trelawny, Special Adviser to the Secretary-General of
the International Maritime Organization on Maritime
Security and Facilitation; and Mr. Olli Heinonen,
Senior Advisor on Science and Non-proliferation at
the Foundation for Defense of Democracies and former
Deputy Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency.

Mr. Stock is joining today's meeting via video
teleconference from Lyon.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules ofprocedure, I also invite the following
persons to participate in this meeting: Mr. Joao Vale de
Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations; and Mr. Krisztian Meszaros,
Civilian Liaison Officer of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization to the United Nations.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/lO4, which contains the text of
a letter dated 1 February 2017 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/ll9, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Albania, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Iceland, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Malta, Montenegro, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Poland, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of America
and Uruguay.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2341 (2017).

On 21 November 2016, the Security Council held
an Arria Formula meeting on the protection of critical
infrastructure against terrorist attacks. This meeting
demonstrated a growing understanding among States
Members of the United Nations of the importance of
the subject and attested to an urgent need to ensure
a high level of protection of critical infrastructure
and to consolidate international efforts in increasing
resilience against terrorist attacks. In our view, the
resolution just adopted is a timely response by the
international community to emerging and rapidly
evolving threats posed by terrorism. This is a decisive
step towards global preparedness for terrorist attacks
against critical infrastructure and the strengthening of
international cooperation on this matter. I encourage
participants in today's debate to discuss in detail their
priorities and challenges, to provide information on
their current efforts and to share good practices in the
area of protection of critical infrastructure.

I now give the floor to Ms. Viotti,


