Ms. Wronecka (Poland) (Spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset, Mr. President, to warmly welcome your
presence here today. I would also like to congratulate
France for having taken the initiative of organizing this
important debate.
(Spoke in English)

I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir
Voronkov; the President of the Financial Action Task
Force, Mr. Marshall Billingslea; and anti-money-
laundering expert Ms. Mercy Buku for their valuable
contribution to our discussion.

Resolution 2462 (2019), which we havejust adopted,
sends a strong message to Member States reminding
them of their existing obligations within the framework
of countering the financing of terrorism and to give a
political impetus to strengthening national policies in
this area. Terrorists have adapted their methodologies,
and it is time to review the tools at the disposal of
Member States.

In discussing measures to counter the financing of
terrorism, we can distinguish four main objectives.

The first is prevention. Sources of revenue for
terrorists change continuously. They know how to move
from perpetrating costly attacks to carrying out low-
budget ones, which can have equally deadly impacts.
When one source is cut off, they will pursue a different
form of revenue generation.

No matter which tools Member States choose to
fight it, we cannot prevent terrorist financing without
addressing the root causes that attract supporters. In
order to counter extremist and terrorist threats, early
action must be taken to respond to the first symptoms
of radicalization in society. Achieving this goal
can be ensured by a properly designed and efficient
system of prevention measures that have an impact
on the individuals and groups that are exposed to
extremist ideologies.

The second objective is timely detection. Countries
should ensure that policymakers, financial intelligence
units and law-enforcement authorities have effective
mechanisms for cooperation in place. The strategic and
operational analyses provided by financial intelligence
units, along with information-sharing at the national
and international levels, should be regarded as a priority.

Poland considers the application of intelligence and
investigative techniques as one of the crucial measures
leading to the detection and disruption of terrorist
undertakings. Joint efforts can lead to revealing red
flags indicating potential misuse ofthe financial system.

We call on States to apply a risk-based approach,
as required by Financial Action Task Force (FATF)
recommendations. We find national risk assessments
and, in the case of the European Union, supranational
risk assessments to be a significant part of the global
struggle to combat terrorist financing. Country-tailored
risk assessments enable States to address vulnerabilities
in the most comprehensive manner possible.

The third issue is the traceability of suspicious
transactions. Terrorists, whether acting alone or in
organized groups, tend to apply techniques mirroring
those used by money launderers in order to hide money
and erase traces of their incriminating activities. All
of these factors, combined with legal and regulatory
loopholes or differences among States, adversely affect
the tracing and curtailing of financial flows and make
financing investigations more challenging.

The response to the changing trends and new
threats in terrorism financing will be better tailored
when the competent authorities and the private sector
cooperate and share information on a reciprocal
basis and in compliance with international law. The
most difficult task is to follow transactions in real
time. Providing platforms for sharing expertise and
exchanging experience on ways to detect sources of
terrorist funding, methods of financing terrorism and
the evolution of trends is of the utmost importance
as well.

The Polish intelligence unit works actively with
the Counter ISIL Finance Group, operating as one of
the working groups within the Global Coalition against
Daesh. At our initiative, the second meeting of the
Group in 2018 took place in Warsaw. The meeting was
attended by high-level representatives of 32 Member
States, the United Nations, FATF, the European Union
Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation, the Egmont
Group of Financial Intelligence Units and the Gulf
Cooperation Council.

Last but not least are effective asset-freezing
mechanisms. A critical element of the effectiveness
of financial sanctions is timing. Once an individual or
entity's designation by the United Nations becomes a
matter ofpublic record, Member States should facilitate
the process of circulating information to the actors
involved in a timely manner.

In the Anti-Money Laundering and Combating
Financing of Terrorism Act, adopted in July 2018,
Poland introduced new provisions implementing the
regulations of the Anti-Money Laundering Directive
of the European Union, aimed at a more effective
application of asset-freezing mechanisms. We should
cooperate on improving the quality of data concerning
entities on sanctions lists, ensuring efficient and
effective information-exchange channels to verify
potential hits with designations. We cannot turn a blind
eye to the unintended consequences of sanctions, which
can have an effect on humanitarian actions. That is why
Member States, when designating and implementing
measures to counter the financing of terrorism, should
take into account their potential effect on the activities
of non-governmental actors.

Poland is convinced that the relevant Security
Council resolutions and the standards of the Financial
Action Task Force constitute a universal and tangible
framework Within which Member States should plan and
build their measures in combating terrorism financing.
Only by pooling our efforts and sharing knowledge can
we make it work.

