Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): Canada applauds the
efforts of the Joint Special Envoy of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States to resolve the
crisis in Syria. We welcome Syria's acceptance of his
peace plan, but we want to see its words backed by
actions. We are gravely concerned by the fact that
violent incidents have continued since the ceasefire
took effect, on 12 April, and we are disturbed by
reports of Government forces firing on peaceful
protesters, forcing United Nations observers to
evacuate to safety.

Canada welcomes resolution 2043 (2012),
unanimously adopted by the Security Council on
Saturday, which authorizes a United Nations Mission
to supervise the ceasefire. The presence of United
Nations observers is vital to helping stabilize the
situation on the ground. We encourage the Secretary-
General to deploy the Mission as soon as he judges
security conditions conducive to doing so.

We urge President Al-Assad to respect his
commitments to the Joint Special Envoy, withdraw
Syrian forces from populated areas, end the bloodshed
and honour his agreement to allow the United Nations
observers freedom of movement throughout the country,
including in the war-torn city of Horns. We also call on
the opposition to show restraint and respect the
ceasefire.

(spoke in French)

Up until now, President Al-Assad has cynically
exploited peace initiatives in order to stall for time,
rather than taking the opportunity to end this crisis by
acknowledging the legitimate demands of the Syrian
people. It is time for all Security Council members in a
position to influence Syria to urge him to fully honour
his commitments to the Joint Special Envoy. If he does
not, his lack of good faith will be clear to all, and the
Council should act decisively to end the bloodshed in
Syria. Canada remains unwavering in our view that
President Al-Assad must end the violence, relinquish
power and enable a peaceful transition to a free and
democratic Syria that respects the human rights of all
its people, including religious and ethnic minorities.

Turning to Iran, Canada welcomes the leadership
shown by the five permanent members of the Security
Council and Germany (P5+1) in opening discussions
with Iran over its nuclear programme, and we
acknowledge Iran's decision to engage in talks with the
international community without preconditions. We
view the first round of discussions between Iran and
the P5+1 as a constructive first step towards addressing
the international community's outstanding concerns
regarding Iran's nuclear activities.

(spoke in English)

With all eyes now on the second round of that
process, in late May, we urge Iran to engage in good
faith and take meaningful steps towards complying
with its international nuclear obligations. The Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons must
form the basis of any eventual agreement between Iran
and the international community. Iran's full compliance
with its international nuclear obligations is the only
measure that will lead to the easing of international
sanctions against it. As Canada and others have stated
before, implementing international sanctions is not a
step we take lightly. Our desire is not to punish the
Iranian people, but rather to persuade the Iranian
leadership to abide by Iran's obligations.

Canada also remains concerned by the failure of
the Iranian Government to take adequate steps to
improve the human rights situation there. We continue
to see reports of Iran's failure to live up to its domestic
and international human rights obligations, particularly
with respect to deficiencies in its judicial system. We
will continue to work with the international community
to ensure that the rights of the Iranian people are not
forgotten or overshadowed by the nuclear issue.

Concerning the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
Canada remains wholly supportive of the Quartet's
efforts and we welcome its recent attempts to encourage
the parties to resume direct peace negotiations without
delays or preconditions, in accordance with the
Quartet's statement of 23 September 2011 (see SG/2178). We share the goal of a negotiated outcome to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that can result in two
States living side by side in peace and security.

The Quartet is calling on donors to step up to
support the progress made to date by the Palestinian
Authority to build State institutions and provide
security. In that area, Canada remains committed to
implementing its assistance package of $300 million
over five years, in support of security and justice
reforms by the Palestinian Authority. We commend the
progress that has been made and encourage continued
reforms.

Canada urges both parties to take further
confidence-building measures, avoid unhelpful
unilateral actions and combat violence and incitement
to violence in order to create an atmosphere conducive
to negotiating peace. We encourage both parties to stop
debating about the negotiations and sit down at the
table unconditionally and negotiate a final agreement.
There is no viable alternative to a negotiated two-State
solution.

