Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We thank Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, for their briefings.
South Africa wishes to express its support for
Mr. Griffiths and commends his efforts to find a
peaceful solution to the situation in Yemen. We also
welcome our colleague from Yemen and look forward
to his briefing.

We further welcome the appointment of Lieutenant
General Guha as Head of the United Nations Mission
to Support the Hodeidah Agreement, and we wish him
well in his Mission. We condemn the attack on the Saudi
oil facilities and call on all the countries ofthe region to
de-escalate tensions that might undermine security and
stability in the Gulf region, the supply and security of
global energy, and the security of maritime trade.

My delegation would like to address two points in
our statement today: first, the political situation, and
secondly, the dire humanitarian situation in Yemen.

First, on the political situation in Yemen, we
continue to call on all parties involved in the conflict
in Yemen to de-escalate tensions and fully commit to
the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement. We
reiterate our support for a negotiated political settlement
that engages all parties in an inclusive Yemeni-
led dialogue to resolve differences and address the
legitimate concerns of all Yemenis, in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions. South Africa
supports dialogue and the cessation of hostilities in the
country, including in the southern region of Yemen.

It is only through a diplomatic and negotiated
solution that the people of Yemen can achieve
sustainable and lasting peace. We therefore continue to
stress that the differences among the parties in Yemen
cannot be solved by military means, as such a course
of action would only further aggravate the situation.
We call upon the Council and the countries of the
region to spare no effort in supporting the political
process in Yemen. South Africa welcomes all efforts
and interventions of neighbouring countries to find
an inclusive, peaceful political settlement in Yemen.
Moreover, we believe that accountability is an essential
part of achieving lasting peace and stability.

On the humanitarian situation, South Africa remains
extremely concerned about the dire humanitarian crisis
in Yemen, which has caused immeasurable suffering
for millions of civilians, as reported this morning by
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock. We note the latest
report of the Group of Eminent International and
Regional Experts on Yemen (A/HRC/42/ 17), which
calls on all the parties to do their part to address the
humanitarian situation in Yemen.

The impact ofthe conflict on civilians in Yemen has
been devastating, as over 24 million people, or nearly
80 per cent of the population, requires humanitarian
assistance and protection. The number of civilian
casualties continues to rise, and the Human Rights
Council has certified 7,508 civilian deaths - including
those of 1,997 children - since March 2015.

The continued violence committed by all parties
to the conflict is not conducive to peacebuilding
measures. South Africa reiterates its call on all parties
to de-escalate the fighting in other parts of the country

and commit to a general ceasefire so as to enable
dialogue and inclusive peaceful negotiations. South
Africa remains extremely concerned about the serious
humanitarian crisis in Yemen. To date, over 15 million
people - more than half the population of Yemen - are
facing starvation; 1.1 million are affected by cholera,
and 3 million have been forced to flee their country.

Vulnerable groups, especially women and children,
often face the most severe consequences of war, and
this is no different in Yemen. Those statistics shows
that the humanitarian crisis in Yemen continues to be
the world's worst, and the Council has to pay more
attention and dedicate more time to addressing it. South
Africa joins Mr. Lowcock in calling on all parties to
abide by their obligations under international law,
including international humanitarian law and human
rights law.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that the only
sustainable solution to the conflict will be a negotiated,
Yemeni-led political settlement that is inclusive and fair
and puts the interests and well-being of all the citizens
of Yemen first.

