Mr. Qazi: The report of the Secretary-General
before the Council provides a sobering description of
the difficulties facing the Government and people of
Iraq in their search for basic security, basic human
rights and basic social welfare. The ever-present
menace of political, sectarian and criminal violence is
yet again a major feature in the Secretary-General's
report, reflecting as it does the grim reality of life in
Iraq.

While the resulting humanitarian and human
rights crisis has deepened, it has also attracted
unprecedented attention in the reporting period through
the actions of the United Nations system, specifically
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights.

Because of the severity of the crisis facing Iraq,
the Government and the Multinational Force in Iraq
(MNF-I) have begun to implement a new security plan
for Baghdad. To date the results have been mixed but
not insignificant. On the one hand, there has been a
marked reduction in the number of violent incidents
and of unidentified bodies found tortured and murdered
on the streets; militia and insurgent leaders have been
arrested from both sides of the sectarian divide; Iraqi
security forces have undertaken operations throughout
Baghdad's neighbourhoods; and some initial success
has been achieved in encouraging displaced families to
return to their homes in safety.

On the other hand, there is a widespread belief
that the problems that have confronted the people of
Iraq and Baghdad in particular may be in temporary
abeyance; there have been continuing mass casualty
attacks on civilians in east Baghdad and in other towns,
mainly through vehicle-borne improvised explosive
devices; and chlorine has been used to terrorize the
population, even though casualties sustained as a result
of its use have not been significant.
07-27094
The Government of Iraq and the Multinational
Force recognize that security measures in themselves,
however successful, can provide only part of the
solution. To re-establish an acceptable level of security
in Baghdad and in Iraq in general, there must be
simultaneous progress on the political front. The
Government of Iraq will be taking all necessary
measures to ensure that all its citizens perceive its
actions to be on their behalf and in their interests. Only
then will security operations help to bring the people of
Iraq together. Previous initiatives, plans and statements
did not result in the desired improvements for Iraq's
long-suffering citizens.

Conditions must therefore be created for an
inclusive and participatory political process to emerge.
For there to be progress, there also has to be a general
acknowledgement that the constitutionally elected
Government must be fully supported and assisted in
implementing its reform programmes. The
Government, in turn, needs to accord the highest
priority to bringing about genuine political
reconciliation among the diverse peoples of Iraq,
without which no security, political or economic
progress will bring lasting stability to the country.

In that context, the constitutional review and
legislative processes can be very effective instruments
for strengthening national reconciliation, compromise
and consensus on fundamental issues. The international
community has a significant supporting role to play in
that respect. The Baghdad meeting, held on 10 March,
of Iraq's neighbours and Security Council permanent
members, which was attended by the United Nations
and regional organizations, offered an invaluable
opportunity to focus on regional and international
support to Iraq in its efforts to improve the political
and security conditions in the country.

Tomorrow's meeting of the International
Compact for Iraq, under the chairmanship of the
Secretary-General, which will also be attended by the
Vice-President of Iraq, will be able to review what
political, legislative, security and economic progress
the Government has made and intends to achieve in
moving towards a shared national vision for Iraq. I
sincerely hope that meeting participants will be able to
agree on tangible steps resulting in the official launch
of the initiative, thereby setting in motion a national,
regional and international process to assist the
Government of Iraq in fulfilling its obligations to its
people.
07-27094
In my discussions with senior officials throughout
the region, I have been struck by the commonalities in
their views on Iraq, especially their commitment to its
unity and territorial integrity. Each of them was
concerned about the deteriorating security situation and
its adverse consequences, not only for Iraq but for the
whole region. All declared their readiness to contribute
to a process that could reduce violence, strengthen
dialogue and bring about conditions for an economic
revival that would improve the living conditions of the
Iraqi people. It was recognized that failure in this
respect would entail severe costs for Iraq's neighbours,
including a substantial further increase in the number
of Iraqis who would be compelled to seek refuge in
neighbouring countries. As the report makes clear,
Syria and Jordan have already borne a disproportionate
share of that burden.

In my recent discussions in the neighbouring
countries, I assured them that the United Nations was
committed to ensuring a more coordinated, effective
and appropriate response to the growing humanitarian
crisis in Iraq. The UNHCR has organized a major
conference in Geneva on 17 and 18 April to explain the
need for such a response and to encourage donors to
make this possible. It is a very positive sign that the
Baghdad meeting of the neighbouring States and of
countries that are permanent members of the Security
Council unanimously recognized that coordinated
regional and international action was needed, and that
agreement was reached agreed to establish working
groups, including one specifically dedicated to the
plight of displaced Iraqis inside and outside the
country.

Given the very difficult security situation, none
of Iraq's neighbours insisted on an immediate
withdrawal of the MNF-I, whose presence in Iraq is at
the request of the elected Government. Many, however,
stated that they looked forward to the Government
taking full responsibility for its national security at an
early date.

Iraq's neighbours have legitimate interests,
expectations and views, which a peacebuilding process
in Iraq should take into account. In turn, Iraq's
neighbours need to agree on a shared strategy of
support for the Government's reform programme and
reconciliation efforts. A mechanism to achieve such
regional coordination in support of Iraq needs to be
considered. The proposal made at the recent Baghdad
meeting to establish working groups on security,
3
refugees and energy supplies could be an important
component of such a mechanism. Iraq must be
transformed from a theatre of conflict to a theatre of
reconciliation, peace and reconstruction. Prime
Minister Al-Maliki observed at the meeting that Iraq
should not be used as a venue by the regional and
international powers to wage their conflicts.

The Secretary-General's report makes clear that
the United Nations will encourage all neighbouring
States to develop a shared strategy of support for Iraq.
This needs to be encouraged by the wider international
community. All concerned should do their utmost to
ensure that further conflict in the region is avoided, lest
this set up a dynamic that spirals out of control.

In recent months, I have been repeatedly struck
by the number of times the United Nations has been
urged by senior officials in Iraq and in the region, as
well as by many of our Iraqi interlocutors, to play a
more active, direct and substantive role across a much
broader range of issues. In response to the very
difficult security situation in Iraq, it is only natural that
people's expectations of the United Nations should
increase with regard to the restoration of peace and
stability in their country. The Government and the
people of Iraq deserve the best the United Nations can
offer in terms of facilitating reconciliation, as well as
human rights and humanitarian protection processes,
including addressing the urgent problem of internally
and externally displaced Iraqis.

In closing, I would like to thank the Government
for its generosity and ongoing support of the Mission. I
wish also to thank the Government of Jordan and the
Government of Kuwait for their generous logistical
support of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI). I wish also to thank the MNF-I and the
Member States that have provided security and
logistical support to UNAMI. In particular, I thank
Finland, Germany, Ireland and Luxembourg for their
recent contributions to helping ensure the continuation
of the force operating as the distinct entity under the
command of the Multinational Force. The protection
provided by that force is an important component of
United Nations security in Iraq, without which the
United Nations presence would not be tenable.

