Mr. Kahona (Sri Lanka): Let me join the
previous speakers in thanking Portugal for convening

11-5866]

this open debate under its presidency. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, and the
Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross for their
presentations.

The Sri Lanka delegation associates itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned
movement by the representative of Egypt.

The Secretary-General's most recent report on the
subject (S/2010/579), issued in November 2010,
focuses on recurring and emerging concerns regarding
the protection of civilians, the proliferation and
fragmentation of non-State armed groups, the
displacement of populations within and across borders,
the predicament of women and children, and the
continuing impunity in certain situations. By all
accounts, in 2011, the state of civilians in conflict
situations has not qualitatively improved despite the
concerted efforts made by the United Nations, and the
Security Council, in particular. Ad hoc approaches do
not appear to achieve the desired results.

The slow change underlines that the protection
task cannot be addressed solely in theoretical terms, as
it requires us to be conscious of a multiplicity of
different factors, ranging from political realities, socio-
economic factors and basic individual rights to the
proliferation of small arms and the increasing
sophistication of terrorists. The use of modern
technology and subtle propaganda tools by terrorist
groups and their networks of sympathizers are
becoming an increasing challenge in protecting
civilians and require the detailed attention of the
Organization. Many a time, the reality is obscured by
clever terrorist propaganda. Based on the experiences
of Member States, particularly those that have
successfully countered terrorism, the practical realities
must be seriously looked at, instead of theoretically
applying a one-size-fits-all humanitarian framework.

Sri Lanka has taken serious account of the
principles underlined in the Council's thematic
resolutions since 1999. Its commitment is
demonstrated by the manner in which Sri Lanka
addressed civilian protection issues during the conflict
with the very ruthless terrorist Liberation Tigers of
Tamil Eelam (LTTE) and its aftermath. While adopting
a zero civilian casualty policy, at a cost to itself,
despite the use of vast numbers of civilians as human
shields by the terrorists, it subsequently addressed the
question of the resettlement of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) with remarkable speed and efficacy.
The robust nature of its ongoing post-conflict
reconstruction and rehabilitation and the committed
pursuit of accountability and reconciliation processes
are noteworthy.

In the post-conflict phase, the State has invested
heavily in an ambitious development programme in the
former conflict-affected areas, focusing on civilian
infrastructure and livelihood development. Billions of
dollars have been committed for the purpose. Sri Lanka
set up special women's protection units with female
police officers and women's centres in former IDP
camps, and continues to provide counselling services
in the north and east. The Government has given
special consideration to raising the social and
economic status of war widows. Bilateral assistance
has already been obtained to initiate a self-employment
programme for war widows in Batticaloa, in
collaboration with the Self Employed Women's
Association of India.

Children have been a special focus, and over 900
schools damaged during the conflict have been
restored, largely using State funds. The protection of
war-affected women and children is a priority for the
Government, and every effort is being made to ensure
that their lives are returned to normalcy as soon as
possible. The role of UNICEF has been vital in that
respect.

The nature of contemporary conflicts has posed
new challenges to the concept of the protection of
civilians. The LTTE terrorist group, for example, made
the civilian population under its control a part of its
military strategy. During almost three decades of
combating LTTE terrorism in our country, we took the
utmost care to draw a distinction between civilians and
terrorists, while the terrorists callously used the
civilians as a human shield. Their objective was
Machiavellian. The coerced presence of thousands of
civilians around the retreating terrorists was designed
to slow the advance of the security forces and as a
means of formulating an escape strategy for its
leadership. If all else failed, it would provide a useful
foundation to later develop allegations of breaches of
global humanitarian standards.

Throughout the final phase of the armed conflict,
from 2006 to 2009, Sri Lanka engaged with the United
Nations, its agencies, the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) and representatives of the
international community and civil society, both in Sri
Lanka and outside. The challenges that Sri Lanka faced
in protecting its civilians was a challenge to the State
itself and its institutions. Yet, the Government
remained committed to its zero casualty policy. Our
troops underwent training to distinguish between
combatants and civilians. Assistance was obtained
from the ICRC in the training of troops in human rights
law. However, the inevitable casualties of a conflict
imposed on the State, ruthlessly affected by the
terrorists, are now the basis of a massive propaganda
campaign.

I specifically wish to address the question of the
Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation Commission, to
which some delegations have referred. In keeping with
the principle that it is first and foremost the
responsibility of the State itself to investigate
infractions of global humanitarian standards, the
Government established the Commission to address a
range of issues relating to the conflict -
reconciliation, confidence-building, accountability, and
so on. The Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation
Commission was given a wide mandate that allowed it
to recommend measures to ensure reconciliation and
restitution for victims and to address the root causes so
as to discourage the repetition of any internal armed
conflict.

The independent Lessons Learnt and
Reconciliation Commission conducted an exhaustive
inquiry and is due to submit its report this month,
which will subsequently be presented to Parliament.
The Commission has made interim recommendations,
many of which have already been implemented by an
inter-ministerial mechanism. Sri Lanka will submit
itself to the Universal Periodic Review of the Human
Rights Council in October 2012, and looks forward to
that interaction with the Council.

Sri Lanka takes the view that it needs to be given
the time and space to deal with such issues. As
President Rajapaksa said in his address to the General
Assembly in September:

"I am deeply mindful that the battle for
peace is every bit as important and difficult as the
struggle against terror. After the eradication of

11-5866]
terrorism, my Government has turned its
undivided attention to building anew the
foundations of a unified and vibrant nation,
drawing upon the inherent strengths of our
country". (A/66/PV.]9, p. 15)

My delegation hopes that the Council discussion
on the protection of civilians will facilitate practical
outcomes based on ground realities, which differ from
situation to situation. It is also hoped that the Council's
efforts will be channelled towards assisting countries to
achieve the noble goals to which we all subscribe. For
that reason, my delegation has sought to share our
experience, and for all of us to invest greater efforts in
preventing conflicts and their recurrence and to
respond practically and proportionately to situations
affecting civilian populations.

