Mrs. Ashipala-Musavyi (Namibia): We too are
happy to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the Honourable
Mr. Goran Svilanovic, to this meeting and to thank him
warmly for his clear and informative statement. I
would also like to acknowledge Mr. Annabi and to
thank him for his update on the latest developments.

My delegation welcomes the efforts undertaken
by the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to achieve peace, reconciliation and
stability in the Balkan region. We believe that a
peaceful democratic atmosphere will facilitate the full
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) and also
underscore the broad parameters in which regional
problems can be addressed through peaceful political
dialogue. We also recognize that a political dialogue
cannot flourish amidst the threat by military elements
of the Kosovo Liberation Army and of the so-called
Liberation Army of Presevo. My delegation therefore
concurs with the Foreign Minister of Yugoslavia that
resolution 1244 (1999) should be implemented fully
and that the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) take effective measures to put an end to the
undesirable activities of the KLA and their like.

S/PVAZA')

 

In our view, the Security Council should continue
to show the same zeal and determination at a time
when the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Yugoslavia is being challenged.

With respect to the municipal elections, we
concur with the Secretary-General that the elections
went well despite a few hiccups - among other things,
voter processing at few polling centres and a lack of
participation of some minorities. We therefore note
with appreciation that during the period following the
elections, Kosovo has experienced a significant drop in
the level of politically motivated violence. However, as
I mentioned earlier, the escalation of armed
confrontation between the Serbian security forces and
the so-called Liberation Army of Presevo, Medveda
and Bujanovac in the ground safety zone not only
poses a threat to those 5,000 displaced civilians in the
Presevo Valley, but also stands to undermine the
foundations of peace, reconciliation and stability in the
region. Nonetheless, we are pleased to learn that 2,000
of the 5,000 persons who were internally displaced as a
result of the latest fighting have returned to their
homes in the area.

In this context, my delegation commends the joint
security operations and other security-related activities
conducted by UNMIK police and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) geared towards protecting civilians, including
minority communities in Kosovo.

The precarious nature of the security situation in
the Presevo Valley and its adjacent areas requires
urgent attention from, and action by, the Security
Council, and I think we heard this today from the
Minister when he made his remarks. In view of the new
political realities in the region, issues such as that of
refugees and missing persons warrant that UNMIK and
KFOR consult with the authorities in Belgrade in an
attempt to find a proper balance in addressing these
problems.

In conclusion, once again I acknowledge
UNMIK, KFOR and other international humanitarian
agencies for their ongoing work in Kosovo. Finally, we
thank the Foreign Minister for his presence.

