Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank the delegations of the United
States and Japan for having called for the holding of
this meeting. I thank you, Mr. President, for having
agreed to convene meeting so quickly, and Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs Jenea for his
clear and factual briefing.

Mr. President, you very aptly conveyed the
congratulations and gratitude of the members of the
Security Council to the Plurinational State of Bolivia
for its excellent and very productive presidency of the
Council during the previous month. I therefore echo
your words.

It is telling that the first formal meeting under
your presidency is devoted to yet another act of
defiance of the international community and, in
particular of the Security Council - specifically, the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's launching
of an intercontinental ballistic missile yesterday,
4 July, while we all celebrated the national holiday
of the United States with our American friends. The
Senegalese delegation once again most emphatically
condemns the launching of the intercontinental ballistic
missile that landed in the Sea of Japan. That act was
undoubtedly of a new order, because the successful
launching of an intercontinental ballistic missile shows
that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, after
having methodically pursued its nuclear arms and
missile programmes, is more determined than ever to
acquire a nuclear deterrent force.

As Mr. Jenea stated, this launch comes after previous
such acts on the part of Pyongyang that all of us in the
Chamber have condemned. It is not only a threat to the
people of the peninsula and the region but also greatly
undermines the regime of non-proliferation, with
the concomitant ambition of developing the delivery
means for nuclear weapons, thereby considerably
exacerbating tensions in the region and beyond. It is
also a serious threat to air travel both because there was
no warning of such a launch and because the region is
densely populated and its airspace is one of the world's
most travelled.

Once again, the credibility of the Security Council
is at stake. Indeed, despite all of the sanctions and
measures adopted against it, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, far from abandoning its military
ambitions, has gone as far as testing the competence of
the Security Council to address the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's illegal military programme. In
so doing, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
continues to flagrantly violated the repeated resolutions
and prohibitions of the Council.

What are we to do now? We have continued to call
on North Korea to renounce provocations and invited it
to return to the path of dialogue. Indeed, sanctions could
go hand in hand with dialogue in a discrete manner, as
mentioned in the various resolutions on North Korea.

In conclusion, because there is no military solution
to the tensions on the Korean peninsula, my country
reiterates the importance of maintaining peace
and security in that part of the world and calls for a
comprehensive, peaceful, diplomatic and political
solution. To that end, my delegation will work with the
other members of the Council in drafting a resolution
on the supplementary measures that must be taken.

