Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her
briefing. We also welcome the Security Council's
unanimous adoption of resolution 2470 (2019), which
reflects the Council's important support for the work
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) and the Iraqi Government.

China acknowledges UNAMI's effective execution
of its mandate and its important role in supporting
the Iraqi Government in promoting inclusive political
dialogue, national reconciliation and reconstruction,
among other things. We appreciate the host country's
close cooperation with UNAMI, which has yielded
positive results. The Council's extension of UNAMI's
mandate for one year is significant. The international
community should continue to support UNAMI in
carrying out its work as mandated.

The Government and the people of Iraq have
recently been properly addressing both internal and
external challenges, achieving positive outcomes inthe
fight against terrorism, gradually restoring security
and stability and steadily pushing its economic
reconstruction forward. China commends those steps.
China welcomes the Iraqi Government's policy of
openness and friendly relations towards its neighbours.
We appreciate that the Government has formulated its
2018-2020 national programme and a comprehensive
national anti-corruption strategy.

We furthermore commend that the Government
is striving to resolve the outstanding issues that exist
between the central Government and the Kurdistan
Regional Government through dialogue, consultations,
the removal of internal customs checkpoints and the
resumption of salary payments to the civil servants
of the Kurdistan Government. The country is at a
crucial moment in consolidating its counter-terrorism
results, achieving peace and security and advancing
its national reconstruction. I would like to make the
following points.

First, we should support Iraq in continuing to
fight terrorism and strengthening results in that
regard. The country has made immense sacrifices
in the international fight against terrorism. It is still
threatened by terrorist remnants. It needs the support of
all sides for the repatriation of foreign terrorist fighters
and their families. The international community should
fully respect the sovereignty of Iraq and its jurisdiction
and support Iraq in its efforts to bring terrorists to
justice, in accordance with the relevant domestic laws,
and to curb the return and spread of terrorist forces
and activities. We support the efforts of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, in close consultation with the Iraqi
Government, to actively carry out its work based on
its mandate.

Secondly, we should actively promote the economic
recovery and accelerated reconstruction of Iraq.
Development is essential to ensuring the achievement
of peace. The Government should focus on developing
infrastructure, promoting economic reconstruction
and progress, enhance its capacity to provide public
services and improve the living standards of the
population, including internally displaced persons. The
international community should honour its pledges by
continuing to provide support and assistance to Iraq,
helping to ease its humanitarian situation, assisting
in its economic recovery and creating a favourable
environment for its reconstruction.

Thirdly, we should continue to support inclusive
political dialogue and the national reconciliation
process in Iraq. The international community should
respect the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Iraq and promote inclusiveness,
reconciliation and harmonious coexistence among all
Iraqi parties in line with the fundamental interests and
development needs of all Iraqis. It also has a positive
influence on regional peace and stability.

China supports any effort that helps to maintain
peace and stability and to combat terrorism in Iraq. We
will continue to provide humanitarian and economic
assistance to the country and our efforts to improve the
humanitarian situation. We will actively participate in
Iraq's economic reconstruction and help it to achieve
peace, stability and development.

