Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this briefing for us to
listen to Mrs. Ogata on this very important issue. I also
welcome the new format of holding Council consultations
in this transparent manner.

I wish to register my delegation's support for the
invaluable assistance that the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) continues to
give to refugees and displaced persons. Today, the nature
of conflicts has changed. More and more, we are
witnessing innocent civilians and humanitarian personnel
becoming the targets of armed conflict, as warring parties
seek to deliberately use attacks for political and military
objectives. In addition, in recent years we have witnessed
the alarming emergence of armed elements in refugee
camps. In these situations, there is a culture of impunity
that the international community needs to address, a point
that speakers before me have mentioned.

Let me cite some specific cases. In the conflict in
Kosovo, for example, civilians became the target. As a
result, the destruction that the conflict left behind has a
great adverse effect on civilians. This is reflected in the
estimated cumulative displacement of over 200,000
persons at the height of the conflict. In addition, an
estimated 50,000 persons were forced from their homes
into the woods and mountains. In addition, humanitarian
organizations were not able to deliver assistance to these
needy people because of the lack of security brought
about by the nature of the conflict.

Turning to my own continent, Africa, given our
limited resources, my delegation urges the international
community to participate more actively in burden-sharing
in areas such as appropriate capacity-building activities,
training and advisory services to accelerate the enactment
and implementation of legislation relating to refugees.

 

Organizations such as UNHCR, the United Nations
Children's Fund, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the International
Committee of the Red Cross are faced with enormous
challenges in their humanitarian activities. The Security
Council can play an important role in helping address these
challenges. Based on the experience of lessons learned from
recent conflict situations, the Council can provide an
important lead in the protection of refugees and others in
conflict. In this regard, I would like to acknowledge
UNHCR for its ongoing programmes aimed at assisting
host countries such as Kenya and Tanzania, as we have
heard from the High Commissioner.

With regard to the presence of armed elements in
refugee camps, my delegation would like to inquire of
Mrs. Ogata what measures are being taken, first, to ensure
the protection of bona fide refugees; and secondly, to
ensure that assistance meant for bona fide refugees benefits
them and not armed elements?

Finally, to conclude, I think it is worth recalling today
the open debate the Council convened in September on
protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations and, indeed, the report of the
Secretary-General submitted to the Council for that
meeting. I hope that all those who have a role to play in
addressing this important problem will begin to implement
the recommendations contained in that report, which I
thought were very appropriate and relevant to the problem
we are dealing with today.

