Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like at the outset to thank the
Government of Benin for having taken the initiative to
convene this open debate on children and armed
conflict. I am very pleased to see also that the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Benin is presiding over our
work, and we are sure that this will be a great
opportunity to enrich the work of the Council on this
subject.

Likewise, I should also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Otunnu,
for his statement, as well as the Secretary-General for
his fifth report on children and armed conflict, which
will, without a doubt, form the basis for the major part
of our deliberations.

In August 1999, through resolution 1261 (1999),
the Security Council strongly condemned the targeting
of children in situations of armed conflict, including
their killing and maiming, sexual violence, abduction
and forced displacement and the recruiting and use of
children in armed conflicts in violation of international
law.

Since resolution 1261 (1999), the Council has
reiterated its condemnation of attacks deliberately
aimed at children in situations of armed conflict
through the adoption of several resolutions resulting
from constant work that seeks to put an end to one of
the most flagrant violations of human rights - the
violation of the most vulnerable.

In 2001, in resolution 1379 (2001) the Council
requested the Secretary-General to attach to his annual
report a list of the parties in armed conflicts that recruit
or use children in violation of international obligations
in situations that are on the agenda of the Council or
that may be brought to the attention of the Council by
the Secretary-General because, in his opinion, they
may threaten the maintenance of international peace
and security.

Last year, through the adoption of resolution
1539 (2004) the Council took a further step towards the
implementation phase when it asked the Secretary-
General to devise urgently an action plan for a
systematic monitoring and reporting mechanism in
order to provide timely, objective, accurate and reliable
information on the recruitment and use of child
soldiers in violation of international law. Likewise, the
Council expressed its intention to consider imposing
targeted and graduated measures against parties to a
conflict that refuse to enter into dialogue, fail to
develop an action plan or fail to meet their
commitments.

While the Security Council made progress in
formulating rules of protection that were more and
more action-oriented, the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflicts was also developing important
advocacy work to ensure that the issue of children and
armed conflicts became increasingly visible and was
permanently placed on the agenda of the international
community.

At the same time, we have seen significant
collaboration between UNICEF and other entities of
the United Nations system, Governments, regional
organizations and non-governmental organizations in
order to transform protection into concrete initiatives.
Results of this collective effort include, for example,
the incorporation of the protection of children in the
mandates and training programmes for peacekeeping
operations, as well as in programmes of the principal
regional organizations; the development of various
protection initiatives at the local level; the integration
of the interests of children in conflict situations into
peace negotiations, peace agreements and rehabilitation
and post-conflict reconstruction programmes; and the
deployment of advisers on protection of children in the
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

With regard to peacekeeping operations, I would
like to express the firm condemnation of my country
with regard to the sexual abuses committed by civilian
and military staff in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo who were there as part of a peacekeeping
operation sent by this Council. While that action
should be condemned, it is an exception, bearing in
mind the great number of peacekeeping operations that
are in the field, but we feel that these acts must not be
silenced. We call for maximum punishment for those
guilty of those violations of human rights against
innocent victims, the great majority of whom are girls
and boys. We support the zero-tolerance policy
recommended by the Secretary-General to deal with
those acts.

We agree with the Secretary-General when he
affirms, in his report, that the situation of children on
the ground remains grave and unacceptable. On the one
hand, clear rules of protection have been developed
and there are concrete initiatives, but on the other,
atrocities against children in conflict zones have not
decreased.

In that regard, my delegation feels that the
presentation by the Secretary-General of an action plan
for a systematic monitoring and reporting mechanism,
in accordance to the request made in resolution 1539
(2004), constitutes a step forward towards the
implementation phase that we must seek.

We must be careful in the definition of the scope
of implementation of the action plan proposed by the
Secretary-General. The categorization of violations
that can be monitored that appears in paragraph 68 of
the report may vary according to each particular
situation, creating a certain grade of uncertainty in
reference to the scope of implementation of the
mechanism.

The process of gathering, examining and
compiling information must be as accurate and reliable
as possible if at the end of the day we hope to assign
responsibility.

Argentina understands that the Security Council
holds a special responsibility in the protection of
children in armed conflicts because of its close
connection with the maintenance of international peace
and security. However, we feel that there should be
better coordination in addressing this subject between
the Council and the General Assembly on one hand,
and between this Council and the Economic and Social
Council on the other, in conformity with Article 65 of
the Charter. In particular, it is interesting to us that the
General Assembly could consider the possibility of
having a draft resolution on the follow-up and
fulfilment of the provisions regarding children and
armed conflicts within the framework of the item
entitled "Promotion and protection of the rights of
children". As regards the Economic and Social
Council, we should explore the proposal of dedicating
high-level sessions to the examination of the issue of
children and armed conflicts.
We believe that the establishment of the
International Criminal Court is a fundamental step as
much for its dissuasive function as for the possibility
of bringing to justice those who commit war crimes
against children. Perhaps in the future the mechanism
being proposed to us might contribute to this Tribunal,
giving it the available information.

Finally, we believe that it is fundamental that the
organs in the United Nations that compose the system
for the protection of human rights incorporate the issue
of children and armed conflicts in their respective
agendas.

In conclusion, I would like to express the
willingness of my delegation to continue working
seriously on a draft resolution that embraces the
aspirations of the international community and allows
us to make a difference through its implementation.

