Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I would
like to welcome the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Chairperson-in-Office,
Minister Dacie, to the Security Council and thank
him for his briefing on OSCE activities under Serbia's
leadership. The partnership between the OSCE and the
United Nations is critically important, and we welcome
the opportunity to hear about OSCE priorities.

The OSCE has taken on a very difficult and
important set of responsibilities in Ukraine, and we
strongly endorse the Chairman-in-Office's continued
focus on brokering peace in Ukraine and serving as an
impartial observer to the September 2014 agreements
and the February 2015 implementation package signed
in Minsk.

Of course, OSCE engagement and focus cannot
alone turn commitments on the many papers that have
been signed in Minsk into tangible realities on the
ground, though the OSCE can, uniquely, shed light on
those who undermine the path to peace. So it should
come as no surprise that in addition to repeated attacks
on Ukrainian positions well past the agreed line of
contact, repeated failure to withdraw foreign fighters
and military equipment, and repeated failure to pull
back heavy weaponry, Russian-backed separatists have
also repeatedly frustrated the access ofOSCE observers
to the very places they have pledged to ensure such
access. This must end.

It is imperative that OSCE observers be allowed
to operate safely and be granted unfettered access
to all areas in order to effectively monitor the terms
of the ceasefire and the subsequent withdrawal of
heavy weaponry, foreign troops and mercenaries, in
accordance with the Minsk agreements and resolution
2202 (2014), which we just adopted last week.

Under the terms of the Minsk memorandum, OSCE
observers are supposed to be allowed to monitor and
verify the ceasefire, and monitor and verify security
zones in the border regions of Ukraine and the Russian
Federation. Under the terms of the Minsk protocol,
OSCE observers are supposed to be allowed to
monitor the ceasefire, monitor the withdrawal of heavy
weapons, and monitor the withdrawal of all foreign
militarized formations, military equipment, militants
and mercenaries from the territory of Ukraine. Under
the terms of the Minsk implementation package, OSCE
observers are supposed to facilitate the withdrawal of
heavy weapons, and monitor and verify the ceasefire
regime and withdrawal of heavy weapons from day one.

And yet, six months after the signing of the Minsk
memorandum and protocol and almost two weeks after
the signing of the Minsk implementation package,
OSCE observers have yet to receive full access from
the separatists to all areas to monitor and verify the
ceasefire, the withdrawal of heavy weapons and foreign
fighters, or security along the border.

Even today, after laying ruthless and deadly siege
to the city of Debaltseve last week, approximately 30 to
40 kilometres beyond lines established by the September
Minsk agreements, separatists have yet to allow the
OSCE's special monitoring mission unrestricted and
unfettered access to that city to observe the situation
on the ground. So if we are serious about improving
cooperation between regional organizations and the
United Nations, let us start with this: let us recognize
that the work of the OSCE is critical to making the
agreed ceasefire and any effort at de-escalation stick,
as agreed by all 57 OSCE participating States, and let
us take whatever action is necessary to ensure that all
actors uphold their commitment to provide unfettered
access to the OSCE in eastern Ukraine and that all
parties respect the neutrality of its mission and its
monitors.

Protecting their access is important because reports
of the OSCE's special monitoring mission to Ukraine
have been a key source for timely and impartial
information on the situation in the Donbas area and
notably on incidents such as the downing of the MH-l7
plane, the appearance of weapons, troops and support
flowing from Russia into Ukraine, and the shelling of
civilian targets in eastern Ukraine.

We commend the OSCE's efforts thus far and
encourage the Chairperson-in-Office's continued
dedication to monitoring the ceasefire and ensuring
that all commitments made in Minsk are upheld, despite
the very difficult conditions in which the mission
works. He has the full backing of the United States,
and, with the adoption of resolution 2202 (2014), the
endorsement of the Security Council to implement the
Minsk agreements.

The United States strongly endorses the Chairman-
in-Office's focus on bolstering OSCE field missions
and independent institutions such as the Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, the
High Commissioner on National Minorities and the
Representative on Freedom of the Media. The OSCE's
field missions contribute to our collective respect for
human rights and the institutionalization of the rule of
law.

We also welcome the passage by the OSCE
Ministerial Council in December 2014 of two decisions
on countering the phenomenon of foreign fighters
and countering kidnapping for ransom. We support
Mr. Dacie's efforts as Chairperson-in-Office to
encourage implementation of those important decisions
and to continue the work of OSCE field missions
in the Caucasus, Central Asia and the Balkans on
counter-terrorism issues, including countering violent
extremism.

We welcome more OSCE awareness-raising
and capacity-building efforts, which promote a
multidimensional approach to countering violent
extremism, and we encourage collaboration among
stakeholders, particularly in the areas of youth, civil
society, gender, community policing and human-rights-
compliant approaches to addressing terrorism andviolent
extremism. We also thank the Chairman-in-Office for
planning to host a regional expert-level summit in June
to follow up on all of these efforts.

Lastly but importantly, in recent months we have
seen what should be considered an alarming display
of anti-Semitism in Europe, from the shootings at the
Jewish Museum in Brussels, to the horrific anti-Semitic
attack on a kosher supermarket in Paris, to the recent
wide-scale desecration of a Jewish cemetery. Just as
anti-Semitism in Europe is rising, so, too, must our will
to combat and defeat it. For any organization that has
a role in the maintenance of security and peace must
also confront the kind of hate that undermines both,
and anti-Semitism, as history has shown time and time
again, is certainly that.

As such, it is all the more important that the
OSCE has undertaken the important work that it has
to address anti-Semitism and intolerance, including its
declaration to enhance efforts to combat anti-Semitism,
adopted at the Basel Ministerial as a follow-up to the
commemoration in November of the tenth anniversary
of the OSCE Conference on Anti-Semitism in Berlin.

And yet, despite all that has been unfolding
across Europe at this 10-year anniversary meeting of
the historic inaugural session, a third fewer countries
showed up at the 2014 Conference. Of course, meetings
and declarations will never alone quash hate, but they
are important to focus our collective efforts, galvanize
our collective will and force our collective action.
The United States urges the Chairperson-in-Office to
continue the OSCE's critical work on this issue, and we
encourage OSCE participating States to help uphold the
commitments enshrined in the declaration.

The United States, as an active member of the
OSCE, remains fully committed to the important work
of the organization. A strong OSCE is a good partner
for the United Nations and a good partner in our cause
of championing fairness, security, justice and peace.

