Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
On behalf of the Chinese delegation, Sir, I wish to
extend our warm welcome to you and to thank you for
coming all the way to New York to preside over this
important open debate. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his important statement. I also
welcome the representatives of regional and
subregional organizations.

The world is now undergoing complex and
profound changes. Member States are confronted not
only by traditional security issues such as territorial
disputes and armed conflicts, but also by non-
traditional security challenges such as terrorism, a
prevalence of drugs, the spread of diseases and climate
change. No country or international organization can
do the job alone in addressing those cross-border and
even transregional challenges. It is therefore
imperative to promote multilateralism and to give full
play to and strengthen the consultation and cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations.

In recent years, regional and subregional
organizations have made increasingly remarkable
contributions to preventing and resolving conflicts,
promoting post-conflict reconstruction, combating
terrorism and defusing humanitarian crises. China
firmly supports the United Nations in intensifying
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations so as to maintain international as well as
regional peace and security.

In that connection, I wish to make the following
four points. First, in order to give play to the role of
regional organizations in maintaining international
peace and security, the Charter of the United Nations
should continue to serve as guidance. According to the
United Nations Charter, the Security Council shoulders
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and is the core of the
collective international security mechanism. Regional
organizations can take mandatory actions only with the
authorization of the Security Council. Chapter VIII of
the Charter points out that the Security Council should
encourage the development of the pacific settlement of
local disputes by regional agencies. China believes that
this should continue to serve as the basis for supporting
the role of regional or subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security.

Secondly, it is necessary to strengthen
communication and cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
All critical issues have complicated causes and are
hard to resolve. Solutions often emerge during the
interactions between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. The outcome document
of the 2005 World Summit contains recognition of the
contributions made by regional organizations to
international peace and security and support for a
closer link between the United Nations and regional
organizations on the basis of the United Nations
Charter.

In November 2006, the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) signed a declaration on Enhancing
UN-AU Cooperation, opening a new channel for
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. We hope such cooperation will be
further strengthened, particularly in identified areas.
Thirdly, the United Nations should continue to provide
assistance to regional and subregional organizations,
such as the African Union, to strengthen their capacity-
building.

African issues dominate the Security Council's
agenda. The African Union and subregional
organizations such as the Economic Community of
West African States, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the Southern African
Development Community have made arduous efforts to
address local conflicts and facilitate post-conflict
rehabilitation and reconstruction. Owing to constraints
on resources, however, they were not able to give full
scope to their unique strengths in resolving their issues.
Through its resolution 1769 (2007) adopted in July, the
Security Council decided to launch the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, Sudan.
The peacekeeping operation will be deployed jointly
by the United Nations and the African Union, but the
main resources will be provided by the United Nations.
That initiated a new model through which the United
Nations could strengthen the capacity-building of the
African Union. That model deserves to be examined
comprehensively and could be used to settle conflicts
in other parts of the world.
Fourthly, regional and subregional organizations
should be encouraged to play a bigger role. It has been
proven that, thanks to geographical, cultural and other
advantages, regional and subregional organizations can
play a unique and even irreplaceable role in resolving
local conflicts. With regard to issues on its agenda, the
Security Council should, of course, work vigorously to
address them but should also encourage constructive
help with those issues from regional and subregional
organizations. As to issues that do not pose a threat to
international peace and security, it is all the more
important to fully mobilize the initiative of regional
and subregional organizations towards strengthening
communication and coordination with those countries
that are concerned with bringing about solutions at the
regional level.

As one of the most important regional
mechanisms in the Asia-Pacific region, the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has made
unremitting efforts to maintain regional peace and
security. The ASEAN+3 cooperation between ASEAN
and China, Japan and the Republic of Korea is playing
an increasingly important role in promoting regional
peace and security. China firmly supports ASEAN in
playing a leading role in the settlement of critical
issues in the region and is ready to do its utmost to
support and coordinate with ASEAN in that regard.

The Shanghai Cooperation Organization has
emerged as an important platform for promoting
regional security, stability and development. China
supports its active role in combating terrorism and
maintaining regional stability. The building of a
harmonious world of lasting peace and common
prosperity requires the concerted efforts of the
international community. My delegation is convinced
that regional and subregional organizations, as an
important component of the international community,
will play an even bigger role in maintaining
international peace and security in the future.

In conclusion, China wishes to thank the
Indonesian delegation for drawing up the Presidential
Statement. China supports the adoption of the
statement by the Security Council.

