Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I had the honour to
take over the chairmanship of the Al-Qaida and Taliban
Sanctions Committee in January 2009. I would like to
thank my predecessors, Ambassadors Johan Verbeke
and Jan GrauIs of Belgium, for their excellent work in
steering the Committee in 2007 and 2008.

In today's briefing, I would like to give an
overview of the Committee's activities since the last
briefing in November 2008. A more detailed version of
this statement will be distributed today and made
accessible on the Committee's website (http://www.un. org/sc/committees/ 1 267/chairmanbriefmgs.shtml) in
due course. I will therefore concentrate on the
following points.

Almost 10 years after the adoption of resolution
1267 (1999), the threat posed by Al-Qaida and the
Taliban continues worldwide, especially in South Asia.
However, at the same time, over the years the threat
has evolved considerably. The Committee remains
committed to ensuring that the 1267 sanctions regime
becomes an ever more relevant and effective tool for
fighting terrorism.
All Member States have a role to play in helping
to ensure, via timely listing and delisting proposals,
that the consolidated list remains a dynamic instrument
that accurately reflects the current threat. The
Committee will do its part to make sure that the 1267
sanctions regime remains central to the United Nations
counter-terrorism efforts.

On 9 December 2008, after intensive negotiations
under Belgian chairmanship, the Committee adopted a
thoroughly revised version of the guidelines of the
Committee. The updated version is available in all six
languages on the Committee's website.

By paragraph 25 of resolution 1822 (2008), the
Council directed the Committee "to conduct a review
of all names on the Consolidated List at the date of
adoption of this resolution by 30 June 2010". The
review process is one of the key priorities of the
Committee. It currently pertains to 488 names that
were included on the consolidated list prior to 30 June
2008.

Pursuant to the guidelines, each trimester the
Committee circulates a subset or batch of names on the
consolidated list to the designating State or States and
the State or States of residence and/or nationality. As of
today, the Committee has sent out two batches,
initiating the review of 158 names - 125 individuals
and 33 entities - on the consolidated list. A third
batch of approximately 120 names will be circulated
shortly to the respective States.

In this context, I would like to call upon all
reviewing States to thoroughly review each name and
to do their utmost to submit their replies to the
Committee within the stated period. The Committee
very much depends on the cooperation and assistance
of Member States in order to be able to successfully
complete the review process within the time frame set
by the Council.

Once the replies from the reviewing States have
been received, all information available is circulated to
members of the Committee and the Monitoring Team
for possible further input within a one-month period.
At the end of this process, the respective name is
placed on the Committee's agenda. On 4 May, the first
five names were placed on the Committee's agenda,
and so far the Committee has concluded its review of
three names. In the course of the review, the
Committee evaluates all available information,
considers whether listing remains appropriate, and
considers updating the consolidated list. In cases where
a member of the Committee determines that a listing is
no longer appropriate, it may submit a delisting
request, and the Committee will decide whether to
remove a name under review from the consolidated
list.

In the spirit of transparency, it is my intention to
regularly update Member States about the progress of
the review process, including through periodic
briefings, press releases and updates on the
Committee's webpage. The Secretariat will also notify
the States of residence and/or nationality and
designating States, as foreseen in the guidelines.

The review of the 488 names on the consolidated
list is, as I have already said, one of the key priorities
of the Committee, and it is my personal commitment to
ensure that this exercise will be conducted seriously
and thoroughly. There are several names of persons on
the list who are reported to be dead or cases where a
continued listing may no longer seem to be
appropriate. Other entries have very few identifiers and
do not contain sufficient information to allow for the
positive identification of the party concerned, as
requested for new designations by Security Council
resolution 1822 (2008). For these entries, the
application of the measures set out in resolution 1822
(2008) is very difficult, but at the same time they can
affect unintended and innocent individuals. For
instance, for 56 individuals there is no full name and
no date of birth; for 14 individuals there is only one
name available. For these reasons, INTERPOL has
been able so far to post only 317 notices for individuals
and 24 notices for entities, as it does not have the
necessary information for the other entries.

Additional identifiers are therefore necessary in
order to create an effective sanctions regime. The
review is an ideal opportunity to check these entries,
add additional identifiers or remove names from the
list for which listing is no longer considered
appropriate. I therefore count on the cooperation of
Member States in order to be able to conduct a
meaningful review and improve the quality of the
consolidated list.

In paragraph 13 of resolution 1822 (2008), the
Security Council directed the Committee, with the
assistance of the Monitoring Team and in coordination
with the relevant designating States, to make accessible
on the Committee's website a narrative summary of

reasons for listing for each entry on the consolidated
list. The Committee, supported by the Monitoring
Team, is currently working to produce these
summaries. Since the beginning of this year, the
Committee has published a total of 63 narrative
summaries. The Monitoring Team has prepared the first
draft of another 115 narrative summaries of reasons for
listing, which are currently being reviewed by the
designating States. The summaries are published in all
six official United Nations languages.

As of today, the consolidated list comprises 508
names: 397 persons - 255 associated with Al-Qaida
and 142 associated with the Taliban - and 111
entities. Since the last briefing on 12 November 2008,
the Committee has added to the list the names of seven
individuals associated with Al-Qaida. During the same
period, one delisting request was approved, while four
delisting requests could not be acceded to.

In cases of new listings, as foreseen in the
guidelines, the Committee now includes in
communications to the membership, and in its press
release on new listings, the publicly releasable portions
of the respective statement of case. The Committee
trusts that making publicly available a statement of
case following a new listing will further improve the
transparency and effective implementation of
sanctions.

Since the last briefing, the Committee has
received 11 notifications for exemptions to the assets
freeze for basic expenses under paragraph 1(a) and one
request for an exemption for extraordinary expenses
under paragraph 1(b). One notification under paragraph
1(a) is still under the Committee's consideration. The
Committee has also received the first request for an
exemption to the travel ban set out in paragraph 1(b) of
resolution 1822 (2008). The request was granted for
the days of travel specified.

Finally, the Committee has considered the issue
of deceased persons and discussed a paper submitted
by the Monitoring Team on listed individuals who are
reported or believed to be dead. Acknowledging the
importance of addressing this issue, the Committee
decided to undertake a review of the list of deceased
persons in the framework of the currently ongoing
review.

Cooperation and interaction with Member States
are essential elements of the work of the Committee.
Visits by the Monitoring Team to countries are an
important tool for developing a dialogue with Member
States and for gathering information on the
implementation of the sanctions regime. Since the last
briefing, the Monitoring Team has travelled to seven
Member States - Syria, Lebanon, Togo, Malaysia,
Algeria, France and the United States - including two
visits under the umbrella of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force.

In addition, on 30 April 2009 in Vienna the Team
held its seventh regional meeting for the heads and
deputy heads of intelligence and security services from
selected countries in the Middle East, North Africa and
Pakistan, and its third meeting with regional security
and intelligence services on 22 and 23 April in Nairobi
to discuss Al-Qaida influences in Somalia. On
9 February, the Committee itself met with a high-level
delegation from Algeria, which gave a comprehensive
overview of Algeria's efforts to counter terrorism
related to Al-Qaida. On 11 December 2008, my
predecessor held an open briefmg to interested
Member States in which he provided an update of the
Committee's work in relation to the implementation of
resolution 1822 (2008). My intention is to hold another
open briefing next month.

At the end of February, the Monitoring Team
submitted its ninth report (S/2009/245) to the
Committee, as requested under resolution 1822 (2008).
The Committee recently started its consideration of the
report and its recommendations. The report has been
transmitted to the Security Council, published as a
United Nations document and put on the Committee's
website. The Committee will inform the Security
Council of its position on the Team's recommendations
after careful consideration. The Monitoring Team will
submit its tenth report to the Committee at the end of
July 2009. I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the members of the Monitoring Team and the
secretariat of the 1267 Committee for their invaluable
contribution to the work of the Committee.

Let me conclude with a general comment. The
1267 sanctions regime currently faces serious
challenges. There are a growing number of cases
before national and regional courts, filed by listed
individuals and entities taking legal action against
sanctions measures. The review is therefore an
important step towards both improving due process and
strengthening the regime. Either by removing names
from the list where listing is no longer appropriate or
by adding new identifiers and information regarding

names remaining on the list, the review will help to
improve due process and the quality of the
consolidated list and to implement the sanctions regime
more effectively. Further steps towards ensuring and
strengthening fair and clear procedures, as stated in
resolution 1822 (2008), may be sought in the next
resolution, which is due at the end of 2009.

However, the success of the review process and
the Committee's work in general depends not only on
the work of the members of the Committee, but most
importantly on the cooperation of all Member States
involved, in particular designating States and States of
residence and/or nationality. In order to complete the
review process by the deadline in June 2010, it is
essential that all States involved do their utmost to
provide all available information within the time frame
set by the Committee. The continued cooperation and
engagement of all Member States is crucial to achieve
our common and overall objective to counter and
prevent terrorism.

