Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his
briefing, particularly his noting of the systematic
targeting of civilians in eastern Ghouta and the toll that
it is taking on the people there.

Yesterday, Russia's Permanent Representative
requested this meeting in order to "make sure that
all parties can present their views". The view that
Mr. Lowcock presented today is, as the Secretary-
General said and others have repeated, one of hell
on Earth for the people of eastern Ghouta. I would
also like to share the vision of some of the people of
eastern Ghouta.

Bilal is 22 years old, with a wife who is five months
pregnant. He says, "We are waiting our turn to die; this
is the only thing I can say". Abdullah is a construction
worker, with a wife and six children. He says,

"Bombs were falling everywhere near our
house. We have been spending the last week
digging into the rubble of nearby areas with our
bare hands."

Malik is a doctor treating the wounded. He says,
"The hospitals have been overflowing with
blood. We are doing what we can to help, but the
situation is becoming unbearable."

Those are just a few of the overwhelming number of
horrific stories coming out of eastern Ghouta everyday.
The pictures and videos are everywhere - screaming
parents digging through rubble to find their children;
doctors working frantically with no medicine and no
equipment in underground hospitals to save whoever
they can. Those are not terrorists showing up in these
makeshift emergency rooms - they are civilians.
They are ordinary people, under attack by a barbaric
Al-Assad regime that is bent on levelling eastern
Ghouta to the ground, with no regard for the 400,000
men, women and children who live there.

No one needs to use their imagination to know what
the Al-Assad regime is planning. It is exactly what we
saw in Aleppo in 2016, and in Hama and Horns before
that. The Al-Assad regime wants to bomb or starve
of all of its opponents into submission. That is why,
except for two small deliveries of aid, the regime has
not allowed any medical convoys or deliveries of food
into eastern Ghouta since November, and the bombing
attacks have been relentless. The regime wants to keep
bombing and gassing these 400,000 people, and the
Al-Assad regime is counting on Russia to make sure
the Council is unable to stop their suffering.

Yesterday the Russian representative asked for the
parties to present their views, and has put forward a
deeply cynical one today. Those present have now also
heard from the United Nations humanitarian leader
and from people, like Bilal, Abdullah and Malik. The
assault from the regime is relentless, and the suffering is
overwhelming. The Russian Permanent Representative
also asked that we "come up with ways of getting out
of the situation." Yet it appears to be intent on blocking
any meaningful effort to do so.

None of us on the Council need to look very far for the
way out. Thanks to the tireless efforts of our colleagues
from Kuwait and Sweden, the way is sitting in front
of us. We have a draft resolution establishing a 30-day
ceasefire to help shield the people of eastern Ghouta
and allow for deliveries of food and medicine to arrive.
All 15 of us have spent the past three weeks negotiating
that text, patiently attempting to work with each other,
including the Russian delegation. We believed we had
an agreed text. There are no surprises here. The United

States is ready to vote on the draft resolution - right
here and right now. All of us should be ready. Sweden
and Kuwait have consulted everyone on that text.
They have done their part. There is no reason to delay.
Literally, the minute this meeting ends, the Council
can take the clearest possible step to help - vote for a
ceasefire and vote for humanitarian access.

What the people of Eastern Ghouta need is not
complicated, and do not just take our word for it. The
International Committee of the Red Cross head of
delegation in Syria summed it up, "This is madness and
it has to stop". The United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Prince Zeid, asked,

"How much cruelty will it take before the
international community can speak with one voice
to say enough dead children, enough wrecked
families, enough violence, and take resolute
concerted action to bring this monstrous campaign
of annihilation to an end?"

UNICEF can hardly put words on a page. All UNICEF
said in a haunting statement was, "No words will do
justice to the children killed, their mothers, their fathers
and their loved ones". The Secretary-General made his
point clearly yesterday. He supports the cessation of
hostilities because eastern Ghouta cannot wait.

Yesterday Russia's Permanent Representative
asked what we should do about eastern Ghouta. The
people of eastern Ghouta, United Nations officials,
humanitarian and human rights leaders and, indeed,
pretty much the entirety of the Council have answered:
stop the bombing of eastern Ghouta and allow medical
assistance in. The rest of the Council is ready to act.
We urge the Council to move forward with the ceasefire
and humanitarian draft resolution immediately.

