Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Jordan
welcomes the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 2201 (2015), which we submitted along with
the United Kingdom and which reflects our eagerness
to restore security and stability in Yemen as soon as
possible.

The development of events in Yemen has created
a massive political and security vacuum and an
accelerated deterioration of the situation therein. We are
concerned that the continuation of this situation without
the engagement of the international community and the
Security Council will have a dire outcome, not only at
the local level in Yemen but also in the entire region.
Therefore, the unanimous adoption of the resolution
by the Council today reflects the unity of the Council
in addressing developments in Yemen and conveys a
significant message that should be taken seriously by
all Yemeni parties.

The Council has condemned the acts of the Houthis,
inter alia, the seizure of Government institutions and
the dissolution of the legislative authority represented
by the Parliament. They are also obliged to immediately
engage in good faith in the United Nations-brokered
negotiations; to withdraw their forces from Government
institutions, including in the capital, Sana'a; to normalize
the security situation in the capital and other provinces;
to relinquish Government and security institutions;
to release to safety President Hadi Mansour, Prime
Minister Khaled Bahah, members of his Cabinet and all
individuals under house arrest or arbitrarily detained;
and to refrain from further unilateral actions that could
undetmine the political process in Yemen.

We reiterate today the centrality and significance
of a peaceful, inclusive and political transition process
that would involve all parties in Yemen, in accordance
with the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Initiative
and Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of
the National Dialogue Conference and the Peace and
Partnership Agreement, which all constitute a genuine
basis for ensuring the security and stability of Yemen
with a View to finalizing and adopting the draft
constitution, reforming the electoral system and holding
the general elections afterwards. In this context, we
stress the central and significant role of the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General, Mr. Jamal Benomar,
in promoting a convergence of views, brokering the
peaceful transition in Yemen and coordinating the
assistance extended by the international community to
support the political transition process.

The coming period in Yemen will be crucial
and sensitive, as the country is at a crossroads that
requires the international community in general, and
the Security Council in particular, to carry out the
responsibilities assigned to us in order to help the
Yemeni people to move forward on the path of peace,
security and stability.

In conclusion, I should like to express my
appreciation to the States members of the Security
Council that have demonstrated their readiness and
resolve to prevent Yemen from sliding into the abyss
and have heeded Jordan's repeated requests to play
their expected role promptly and unequivocally. We
also commend them for assuming their responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
and for their response to the concerns of the countries
of the GCC, as well as for their consideration of the
potential political and security repercussions for the
entire region if the situation in Yemen were to further
deteriorate, thereby giving terrorism and extremism
a greater opportunity to further expand, seize more
territory, propagate its violence more broadly and
threaten the Middle East, in particular the neighbouring
countries of the Gulf.

