Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me, at the outset,
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Kubis for his comprehensive briefing. Let me also,
shortly before leaving the Council, pay tribute to him
personally and to the whole staff of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their
commitment and for the dedicated work that they are
doing, in sometimes very difficult circumstances.

I align myself with the European Union statement
to be delivered later in this debate.

This debate comes at the end of a crucial year for
Afghanistan. Over the past 12 months, the Government
of Afghanistan and the international community have
engaged in a series of conferences held in Bonn,
Chicago, Kabul and Tokyo. They reaffirmed their
mutual commitments to long-term security, stability
and development in Afghanistan throughout the
transformation decade. The challenge ahead is the swift
and comprehensive implementation of the decisions
taken at those conferences. I would like to touch upon
three issues that are key in that regard.

The first is elections. Conducting free, fair,
transparent and inclusive presidential and provincial
council elections in 2014 is pivotal in ensuring the
legitimacy of the political transition. In that context, we
welcome the Afghan Government's announcement that
it will hold those elections simultaneously on 5 April
2014. Challenges remain, however, regarding voter
registration and the legal framework. We encourage all
relevant Afghan institutions to continue their efforts
to prepare the elections in an effectively coordinated
manner, working towards the common goal of
conducting credible elections. UNAMA can assume
a beneficial role in supporting the Government of
Afghanistan in its preparations. We therefore welcome
the decision taken by the Afghan authorities to request
UNAMA's support for the 2014-2015 elections.

Secondly, we welcome the leading role of the
Government ofAfghanistan in enabling and establishing
the structural framework for the implementation of the
decisions taken at the Tokyo Conference. The political
and technical steering committees, working under the
umbrella of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board, will be instrumental in further improving the
effectiveness of development cooperation. Germany
looks forward to assuming its responsibilities as a
member of those committees, which have already held
their first meetings.

Thirdly, a stable security environment, as we
all know, is of paramount importance in achieving
Afghans' goal of further developing into a democratic
and economically thriving country. We therefore
welcome the continuing and considerable reduction in
security incidents in Afghanistan. Germany remains
committed to supporting Afghanistan in its efforts to
achieve stability, economic growth and development.

The United Nations will continue to play a crucial
role during the transformation decade to come. There
are many essential and challenging tasks for UNAMA:
to support preparations for the upcoming elections, to
protect and promote gains in the human rights situation,
particularly women's rights, and to support the Afghan
Government in ensuring effective coordination
between donors and the Government. Germany will
therefore continue to lend its full support to UNAMA
in implementing its mandate.

I would like to conclude by taking this opportunity
to cordially thank our Afghan colleagues, Ambassador
Tanin and his team, for their trust and friendship over
the past two years, during which my country had the
honour to be a member of the Council and to hold the
pen for this important dossier. Germany will continue to
support Afghanistan and its people on the road towards
Afghan-led security, stability and development.

