Mr. Umemoto (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to thank the United States Mission for its leadership
in convening this open debate. I also express my
appreciation to Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing.

Japan has long understood the aspiration of
Palestinians to build an independent State and has
supported the right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination. Japan therefore endorses a two-State
solution, under which Israel and a future independent
Palestinian State would coexist, side by side, in peace
and security.

From that standpoint, Japan sincerely welcomes
the announcement made by United States Secretary
of State Kerry last week in Amman on an agreement
that establishes a basis for resuming direct final-status
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians. The
entire international community should now mobilize
the political and economic means at its disposal to help
Israel and Palestine overcome their differences.

At this critical juncture, Japanese Foreign
Minister Kishida will visit Israel, Palestine and Jordan
starting today. Through bilateral meetings with his
counterparts, he will urge both parties to conduct
frank and meaningful negotiations in order to make
substantial progress, based on the agreement announced
by Secretary of State Kerry.

My Minister is also scheduled to chair a
ministerial-level meeting with Israel, Palestine and
Jordan to discuss the "corridor for peace and prosperity".
That initiative, which Japan launched in 2006 with the
aim of developing a sustainable Palestinian economy,
has been making tangible progress. Several companies
have expressed interest in its flagship project, the
Jericho Agro-Industrial Park. Japan looks forward to
future investments coming from various countries and
areas for that project.

I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
our commitment to the Middle East peace process
and to close cooperation with the United States, Arab
countries, Europe and other partners. In that context,
Japan will continue to actively promote its initiative
of the conference on cooperation among East Asian
countries for Palestinian development.

With regard to Syria, Japan is deeply concerned
about the serious and escalating situation there. Japan
profoundly deplores the death of many thousands
of people as a result of violence, which continues
despite the Secretary-General's appeal to its cessation
during Ramadan. The briefings to the Council by
United Nations humanitarian agencies last week (see S/PV.7000) were yet another occasion to hear appalling
accounts of the tragic incidents taking place daily on
the ground. Japan concurs with the Council's concern,
expressed in a presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/9)
adopted on 10 July, at the risk of the regionalization of
the Syrian conflict, especially its growing impact on
Lebanon's stability.

Faced with this scourge of war, the entire
international community urgently needs to address the
rapidly deteriorating humanitarian situation in Syria.
Japan remains committed to significantly contributing
to such international efforts. Japan's support through
international organizations and non-governmental
organizations now totals $90 million. Japan has also been
disbursing ¥ 240 million in loans for the stabilization of
Jordan. As part of cross-border assistance, Japan will
provide assistance in health services and other areas
to local residents, in cooperation with the assistance
units of opposition groups and local non-governmental
organizations.

Humanitarian assistance, however, cannot be an
end in itself. The political process needs to be engaged
as a matter of urgency. In that respect, it is regrettable
that recent military offensives by the Syrian army have
made it even more difficult to convene the "Geneva II"
conference. Japan condemns the Syrian authorities for
not keeping their commitments and responsibilities to
protect their own citizens, and calls upon all parties in
Syria to immediately halt the violence and human rights
abuses. We must all strive to create an appropriate
environment that will bring about an early Syrian-
led political transition. Japan hopes to see the Syrian
National Coalition play a major role in advancing the
political process under the leadership of its newly-
elected President Ahmed Al-Jarba.
Before concluding, I would like to briefly touch
upon Egypt. Following the swearing in of the interim
President Adly Mansour, an interim Government has
been set up and begun working according to its political
road map. Japan calls on all the relevant parties to desist
from acts of violence and to exhibit maximum self-
restraint and responsibility. At the same time, Japan
hopes that Egypt will return to a democratically elected
civilian Government as soon as possible through an
inclusive process that respects human rights and the
rule of law.

