Let me first start by congratulating you, Mr. President, and Germany on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month. Germany is an active force for global peace, stability and multilateralism, and we look forward to continuing to work with you, Sir, on addressing regional challenges. We would also like to express our gratitude to the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing. The looming threat of Israeli annexation of parts of the occupied Palestinian territory puts our collective and joint efforts to achieve a just and lasting peace for Palestinians on the basis of the two-State solution in jeopardy. Preventing the annexation of the occupied Palestinian lands and creating horizons for re-engagement through direct negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians towards achieving two States living side by side in peace and security is an urgent priority. On 7 July 2020, the Foreign Ministers of Jordan, Egypt, France and Germany issued a joint declaration on the current state of the Middle East peace process. They stressed that any annexation of Palestinian territories occupied in 1967 would be a violation of international law and imperil the foundations of the peace process. They also concurred that such a step would have serious consequences for the security and stability of the region and would constitute a major obstacle to efforts aimed at achieving a comprehensive and just peace. The ministers also emphasized that such a step could have consequences for the relationship with Israel. Moreover, the Ministers of Jordan, the United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Morocco and Palestine, who are members of the Arab ministerial delegation emanating from the Arab Peace Initiative, along with the ministers of Tunisia, the Arab member of the Security Council; Oman, the current Chairman of the Council of the League of Arab States, and Kuwait, the former Arab Security Council member, as well as Arab League Secretary-General, held a virtual meeting on 7 July, in which they underlined their full solidarity with the Palestinians, who are striving to fulfil their legitimate rights, including the right to freedom and establish a viable state with East Jerusalem as its capital on the lines of 4 June 1967 and on the basis of the two-State solution, in accordance with international law and the Arab Peace Initiative. The ministers called on the international community to take a clear and influential stand and act to deter the implementation of the annexation in order to uphold international law and protect peace, while calling for reviving serious and effective discussions on resolving the conflict on the basis of the two-State solution in accordance with relevant resolutions of international legitimacy. It is important that the international community continue to support the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and ensure it continues to operate in fulfilment of its United Nations mandate pending a durable and just solution to the refugee issue, in accordance with international law and relevant United Nations resolutions, including General Assembly resolution 194 (III), and within the context of a comprehensive solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict on the basis of the two-State solution. During the extraordinary ministerial pledging conference on UNRWA, co-organized on 23 June by Jordan and Sweden, 75 Governments and non- governmental organizations committed $130 million to sustaining the operations and services of the Agency. We thank all States that have shown their support for UNRWA politically and financially. However, we must exert every possible effort to make UNRWA funding sustainable, predictable and sufficient. This means addressing the chronic funding shortfalls and persistent cash-flow crises through multi-year commitments. We also take this opportunity to express appreciation for UNRWA's staff as front-line responders to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and for the Agency's ability to ensure the delivery of its mandate in an increasingly challenging political and financial environment. As the largest host of Palestinian refugees, Jordan will continue to provide, along with its partners, all possible political and financial support to UNRWA to ensure that the agency continues to provide its vital services to Palestinian refugees. In implementation of the directives of His Majesty King Abdullah II, Custodian of Muslim and Christians holy sites in Jerusalem, Jordan will continue to dedicate all its efforts to protect Jerusalem and its holy sites, preserve the historical and legal status quo and protect their Muslim and Christian identity. In conclusion, those who believe in peace must speak against annexation. All those who want an end to the conflict must act to prevent annexation. The achievement of a just and lasting peace that meets all legitimate rights of the Palestinian people is a strategic Jordanian, Palestinian and Arab choice. Any other scenario is a threat to peace and to all of us in the region. We stand at a defining crossroads: we either fall deeper into the abyss of conflict and hopelessness, or we save the peace that is a regional and an international necessity. Jordan will continue to work with Arab countries and the international community towards realizing peace that is lasting and just.
