Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
would like first of all, Sir, to congratulate you and the
friendly Mission of Lebanon on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of May. Let
me also congratulate the Japanese Mission on its very
successful presidency during the month of April.

I welcome the convening of this meeting to
consider the important subject of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. I would also like to thank Baroness
Catherine Ashton, High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy of the European Union, for
her informative briefing. We commend efforts of the
European Union in the fields of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding and its close cooperation with the United
Nations.

We warmly welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Austria to the Security Council today.

Achieving long-term stability remains a growing
challenge for successful conclusion of peacekeeping
missions. Although they are considered to be a
necessary precondition, traditional peacekeeping
activities, which provide a safe and secure
environment, are not sufficient. The experience of the
European Union and its activities related to State-
building, security sector reform and broader efforts to
promote democracy, human rights, good governance
and the rule of law have proved to be very successful
in many of its missions, not only in Europe but beyond.

Bosnia and Herzegovina commends the
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts of the
European Union throughout the world, particularly in
Africa. We recognize the importance of partnership
between the African Union and the European Union. In
that respect we underline the significant role of the
European Union missions in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Darfur and Somalia in contributing to
peace and security in Africa.

Furthermore, the European Union has
comparative advantages not only in dealing with
regional conflicts but also with regard to its capacity to
assist in post-conflict rehabilitation and recovery.
Institutions of the European Union can provide
indispensable contributions to achieving necessary
long-term stability and the consolidation of the social
and economic systems of post-conflict societies. Here,
we would like to underline the importance of the rule
of law missions of the European Union, whose primary
goal is to strengthen judicial and legal systems, which
is one of the major preconditions for achieving
political stability and security, as well as social
stability.

We would like to point out the fact that first
European Union missions were in the region of the
Western Balkans. Also, five years ago, the European
Union established its presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina through its military mission, the European
Union Force Althea, and its rule of law mission, the
European Union Police Mission. The focus of the
current military mission is on training and capacity-
building. However, both missions are making a great
contribution to long-term efforts for the consolidation
and stabilization of the country.

Bosnia and Herzegovina remains fully committed
to strengthening and developing cooperation and
effective partnerships between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations. We are of the
View that the success of cooperation between regional
organizations, including the European Union, and the
United Nations relies on a common vision and common
goals. Nevertheless, reaching those goals will require a
flexible and systematic approach whereby coordination
mechanisms ensure the optimal use of time and
resources.

In conclusion, we would like to stress the
importance of the Lisbon Treaty, which ensures better a
legal framework and institutional capacity for the
timely and efficient conduct of European Union
military and rule of law missions.

