Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Egypt has expressed with utmost clarity its unequivocal
condemnation and total rejection of the reprehensible
operation undertaken by Israel in its extrajudicial
assassination of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin. Egypt has made
clear its opinion that this was both an illegal and an
irresponsible act that failed to foresee its own dire
consequences and that may point to the emergence of
some very dangerous trends in the policies of the
Israeli Government. The Security Council must
therefore shoulder its responsibilities by condemning
this act, which reveals not only Israel's irresponsibility,
but also its miscalculation of the salient issues, the dire
and destructive consequences of which will emerge in
the days to come.

It is no secret to anyone that this Israeli act is but
one in a series of measures consistently seeking to
thwart any effort towards peace, particularly when the
process shows any sign, howsoever insignificant, of
forward movement. Yesterday, the Government of
Israel demonstrated yet again that, in taking such
measures, it is pursuing an approach that runs counter
to humanitarian and international law. It also claims
that such actions are taken in legitimate self-defence,
as if the international community were irrelevant or
non-existent and as if we were not all aware that they
represent an attempt to end the resistance to the
occupation that holds the Palestinian people in its ever-
tightening grip.

The international reaction in capitals throughout
the world has been unanimous in its condemnation of
this act and in calling for the immediate cessation of
similar crimes, which contravene the United Nations
Charter and all international norms and laws. The
Government of Israel's resort to such violence and
illegal assassination threatens the principles of the
United Nations and humanity that we strove to endorse
and to enforce throughout the twentieth century, as
exemplified, inter alia, in the establishment of this
Security Council. The current Israeli approach would
restore relations among States and nations to the law of
the jungle, in which might is right and authority
supersedes principle.

The situation is truly grave. Members present in
this Chamber should never forget that the Arabs, the
Palestinians, the Islamic nation and those of true faith
who exalt the noble principles of humanitarianism
throughout the world are watching how the Council
addresses this tragic situation. It should do so in a
manner that reflects its condemnation and rejection of
such a path. Our Council should send a message
through its assumption of a clear and resolute stance
against this shameless act that calls for the immediate
cessation of all such inhuman violations of the rights of
the Palestinian people. The Council should also stand
firm in the face of all acts of violence and murder that
threaten innocent civilians on both sides.

