Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me start by saying that
terrorism remains one ofthe most complex and imposing
challenges of our time, claiming innocent lives, causing
widespread destruction, undermining social stability
and disrupting State structures. The recent terrorist
attack in Christchurch showed that terrorism cannot
be associated with any faith, ethnicity or nationality.
We express our solidarity with the Government and the
people ofNew Zealand. Nine ofthe victims who died in
that terrorist attack were from my country.

Pakistan has been a principal victim of terrorism,
including terrorism that is supported, sponsored and
financed from abroad. We have lost tens of thousands
of lives, and many more have been injured or maimed.
But those losses have not diminished our resolve to
eliminate this scourge. They have in fact reinforced our
will to fight until the last terrorist is eliminated from
our country.

Pakistan has adopted a multi-pronged strategy
to counter terrorism that includes a military-led
enforcement campaign and a comprehensive plan.
Our 20-point national action plan focuses as much
on countermeasures as on preventive approaches,
including confronting the risks arising from terrorist
financing. By conducting the largest counter-terrorism
operation anywhere in the world, deploying 200,000
of our troops, our security forces have turned the
tide against this scourge. Today terrorist incidents in
my country are at a record low - their lowest point,
in fact, in more than a decade. That is a testimony to
our success.

Pakistan fully supports international efforts to
counter the financing of terrorism and has therefore
criminalized terrorist financing in accordance with
the International Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism. One of the most important
elements of our national action plan is countering the
financing of terrorism. Being a largely cash-based
economy, my country initially faced significant
challenges in implementing it. However, over the past
decade we have overcome those obstacles by, first,
enacting laws to eliminate terrorism-financing risks and
implementing our international obligations, including
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) recommendations
and the obligations of the sanctions regime of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities; secondly, strengthening financial institutions,
including our Central Bank, the Securities and Exchange
Commission of Pakistan and the Financial Monitoring
Unit; and thirdly, building the capacities of financial
regulatory institutions and law-enforcement agencies.

While we have fully aligned Pakistan's
anti-terrorism-financing regime with FATF
recommendations, we are paying particular attention to
monitoring non-profit organizations. My Government
has issued specific guidelines and enacted procedures
for auditing the accounts of non-profit organizations
to ensure that no funds collected by any charitable
organization are at risk of being used for terrorist
financing. Through such efforts to combat terrorist
financing, we have managed to achieve a sevenfold
increase in the number of arrests, cases registered and
persons convicted on charges of terrorism financing
over the past year alone.

As we reaffirm the international consensus on
countering the financing of terrorism today, it is
important to identify and plug the gaps that remain. In
that regard, it is important that current structures such
as the FATF and the 1267 sanctions regimes are not
used by anyone as political tools to advance geopolitical
objectives. There is also a need to make those
institutions more inclusive of the wider membership in
their decision-making roles.

Pakistan has always advocated that international
efforts should be geared to fighting the root causes of
terrorism, notjust the symptoms. Let me point out three
specific gaps in the current approach.

First, the international community should still
focus attention on foreign intervention, foreign
occupation and the continuing denial of the right to
self-determination to people living under foreign
occupation, as well as violations of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations. Such obvious
causative factors are usually ignored or cast aside.
The international community agrees that continued
and persistent violations of human rights contribute to
violent extremism, yet killings continue in occupied
Jammu and Kashmir and occupied Palestine. The
brutalization and oppression of people struggling for
the legitimate right to self-determination constitutes
State terrorism.

Secondly, as we all know, conflicts undermine
development, break down governance, create a sense of
injustice and fuel violence. Prolonged and unresolved
conflicts therefore continue to do that for generations.
Yet in the context of preventing violent extremism,
the international community continues to ignore long-
standing situations of conflict and injustice.

Thirdly, while there is international consensus that
terrorism cannot be associated with any religion, we
see extreme right-wing groups and white supremacists
in some Western countries seeking to reap political
dividends by fanning Islamophobia. Action must also
be taken against that deliberate hate-mongering, which
often leads to violence.

Let me conclude by re-emphasizing the importance
of a holistic approach to combating and defeating
terrorism and the need for international collaboration
to achieve our shared objective.

