Ms. Rice (United States of America): I would
like to thank the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Assistance (OCHA) for its briefing this
afternoon.

We have all just heard a truly troubling report: a
depiction of a crisis created by one man that threatens
the lives more than one and a half million men, women
and children. The United States strongly condemns the
Government of Sudan's expulsion of 13 international
aid organizations and its closure of three Sudanese aid
groups. By expelling aid groups, the Sudanese
Government is denying water, food, health care and
sanitation to people it drove out of their homes in the
first place, thereby exacerbating an already dire
humanitarian crisis in Darfur. Let me be clear: this is
not a made-up crisis, as the representative of Sudan
would have the Council believe. On the contrary, this is
a very real and urgent crisis of his Government's own
making. President Al-Bashir and his Government are
responsible, and must be held accountable, for each
and every death caused by these callous and calculated
actions. The Sudanese Government made this decision
and owns its consequences, which will not only cost
lives but leave the Government locked deeper in an
isolation of its own making.

Surely, no person of conscience can remain
unmoved by the untold misery and death that this cut-
off of desperately needed food, water and medicine
will inevitably inflict upon millions of innocents
already huddled in the camps of Darfur. Surely, we all
believe that this body must act on their behalf. And
surely, we all believe that we should speak with one
voice in the face of such suffering.

We urge the international community to press the
Government of Sudan to reverse its expulsion edict and
to ensure it does nothing to worsen an already grave
situation. President Al-Bashir created this crisis, and he
should rectify it immediately. The United States, for its
part, is working urgently, closely and intensively with
United Nations institutions and other Member States to

try to reverse the Government of Sudan's expulsion
order. But today the Council heard the Sudanese
representative say that his Government would never
reverse this order.

The United States believes that Member States
and the Council must never stand by idly while over a
million people are at imminent risk of death. Time is of
the essence. The United Nations has already reported
that it has become significantly more difficult to
provide food to already malnourished Sudanese
children.

We also believe that the new shortfalls in water
have made meningitis more widespread in the Jebel
Marra area and in the Kalma camp. On top of that, the
lack of health care is preventing meningitis patients
from receiving proper treatment. When treated, the
death rate for those with meningitis can be one in ten
or lower. Left untreated, the death rate jumps to one in
two. We remain deeply concerned that meningitis and
other infectious diseases will continue to spread inside
camps and other areas that now lack reliable access to
water, food and basic medical services.

We are also facing a growing humanitarian crisis
in the Zam Zam camp, in north Darfur. Resources there
have already been stretched to the limit, and now the
camp is struggling to house more than 36,000
internally displaced people fleeing the recent fighting
in south Darfur between rebels and the Government.
We urge the Sudanese Government, in close
consultation with the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations, to address water,
housing and other problems at Zam Zam and the other
camps across Darfur, before an already dire situation
deteriorates any further.

The United States supports the urgent efforts by
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), the World Food Programme and
others to provide relief now, including desperately
needed clean water. But make no mistake: these efforts
cannot even begin to fill the gap left by the expelled
aid groups.

With every passing day, President Al-Bashir has
used increasingly menacing rhetoric to further escalate
the crisis. By doing so, he has jeopardized the safety of
the remaining brave men and women from all across
the world who provide urgently needed aid to the
Sudanese people, and he has further jeopardized the
lives of innocent civilians in the camps, who depend on
that aid.

Meanwhile, UNAMID continues to operate under
dangerous conditions. The 17 March ambush of
UNAMID peacekeepers in South Darfur, which left
one of them dead, only underscores the risks they
continue to run in Darfur. We offer our deepest
condolences to the peacekeeper's family and to the
men and women of UNAMID. We reaffirm the
commitment of the United States to support them as
UNAMID implements its important mandate.

The United States will continue to work closely
with the United Nations, humanitarian aid groups and
others to relieve the suffering of the people of Darfur.
Since 2004, we have provided nearly $4 billion for
humanitarian programmes in Sudan and eastern Chad.
During fiscal year 2008 and thus far in fiscal year
2009, we have provided nearly $1.25 billion for the
people of Sudan.

We continue to be proud of the efforts of the
United States Agency for International Development
(USAID), which has provided more than $720 million
in humanitarian aid in Darfur in fiscal year 2008 and
thus far in 2009. But, at a stroke, the expulsions
eliminated some 54 per cent of USAID's non-food
programmes in Darfur, cutting off life-saving efforts to
provide health, water and sanitation. The expulsions
also eliminated an estimated 40 per cent of the delivery
capacity of USAID's main partner in providing food
aid in Darfur, the World Food Programme.

We sincerely hope that this body will finally
come together as one to protect the people of Darfur.
The United States is determined to pursue long-term
peace in the Darfur region, ensure that humanitarian
aid is delivered and spare innocent civilians from
further harm. We urge other members of the Council to
join us in this urgent work. There are things upon
which we can, and will, disagree. But, surely, saving
the lives of desperate and innocent civilians being
deliberately deprived of water, food and medicine is
not among them. The Government of Sudan created
this crisis. It now must act to end it.

