The President: I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Argentina, Azerbaijan Australia, China, France,
Guatemala, Luxembourg, Morocco, Pakistan,
Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Togo, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America
Abstaining;
Russian Federation

The President: There were 14 votes in favour, none
against and one abstention. The draft resolution has
been adopted as resolution 2117 (2013).

I shall now make a statement in my a capacity as
the Foreign Minister of Australia.

I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
report (S/2013/503), which have laid the foundation for
today's discussion. I also thank the Vice-President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross for her
briefing and for the invaluable work her organization
is undertaking.

Australia's region, the Indo-Pacific has experienced
the devastating effects of the illicit transfer of small
arms and light weapons. Thirteen years ago, our friends
in Solomon Islands faced the very real prospect of
becoming a failed State after long-simmering tensions
boiled over into ethnic conflict. Militants raided
police armouries, high-powered firearms - coupled
with other weapons that flowed across porous
borders - exacerbated the conflict. The results were
devastating - a coup, widespread killings, breakdown
in governance, law and order, and years of economic
contraction.

Australia led the Regional Assistance Mission
to Solomon Islands (RAMSI) with fellow Pacific
Islands Forum members, at Solomon Islands' request,
to restore law and order. That meant getting guns
out of the community quickly. During a three-week
amnesty, more than 4,000 firearms were surrendered or
confiscated by RAMSI. This early and decisive action
underpinned the peace that was built and maintained
over the next 10 years.

Small arms and light weapons have had similar
effects elsewhere in our region - in Timor-Leste and
in Bougainville, Papua New Guinea. As a member of
the Council, we are reminded all too frequently of the
threat that the proliferation and misuse of these weapons
can pose to civilians, to States and to international
peace and security, including in Mali and the Sahel, in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic. These weapons pose a grave threat
to civilians, to peacekeepers, to humanitarian workers
and to civil society organizations. Their proliferation
and misuse can undermine the rule of law and human
rights, and destroy efforts to rebuild broken societies.

We have all learned valuable lessons on how this
threat can be overcome. While States have the primary
responsibility to prevent the illicit transfer and misuse
of these weapons, many will need support to do so.
Peacekeeping and political missions can play a key
role, as we saw in Solomon Islands. This has also been
the experience in Cote d'Ivoire, where a small but
dedicated arms-embargo monitoring unit in the United
Nations mission has made a real impact in supporting
the government to combat illicit arms flows.

Assistance to States in managing their own
weapons - those held by their security forces - will
often be the starting point. For States emerging from
conflict, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes for former combatants must be carefully
designed and implemented, and weapons accounted
for. Security sector reform must include effective
weapons management. Such transition processes must
be inclusive, with women's participation being crucial.
Existing controls, including national regulations and
arms embargoes, must be fully implemented. Regional
organizations will often be able to play a pivotal role.

The international community has demonstrated
renewed resolve to combat the threat posed by small
arms and light weapons. The adoption of the Arms
Trade Treaty this year was a landmark achievement
that will help stop destabilizing arms flows to conflict
regions and to illicit users. It will prevent human rights
abusers and those who violate the laws of war from
being supplied with arms.

The Council, by adopting resolution 2117 (2013)
today, is demonstrating that it has an important role to
play in addressing these challenges. The resolution will
strengthen the implementation of the Council's arms
embargoes. It supports peacekeepers' efforts to limit
the impact of these weapons on post-conflict societies.
Most importantly, the resolution demonstrates the
fundamental importance that the Council places on
protecting civilians and of full respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights.

This international momentum must be maintained.
The Council has taken too long to adopt its first resolution
on small arms. And I should note that Australia has built
on the earlier work of others - including Argentina
some years ago - to get to this point. The Council
should consider these issues more systematically, return
to this subject with greater frequency, and ensure that
our commitments today are not forgotten tomorrow.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the members of the Council.


