Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): First, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his public briefing
yesterday and for his proposals. We are studying his
proposals urgently. I should like also to thank
Mr. Nambiar for his briefing on his very important
mission, and also Mr. Egeland for his briefing on the
United Nations efforts to deliver much-needed
humanitarian relief.

The United Kingdom fully subscribes to the
statement that will be delivered shortly by the
representative of Finland on behalf of the European
Union.

The United Kingdom is gravely concerned by the
escalating crisis in the Middle East. It threatens the
wider security of the region and is causing huge harm
to the civilian population, with civilian casualties
mounting, particularly in Lebanon. We fully echo the
Secretary-General's call yesterday. Hostilities must
stop.

I will focus first of all on the situation in
Lebanon. We offer our condolences to the
Governments of Lebanon and of Israel for the losses of
civilian life and to the families of all those affected. We
were also very concerned to hear from the Secretary-
General that two United Nations personnel are still
missing in south Lebanon.

The United Kingdom appreciates the pressure
that both the Israeli and Lebanese Governments are
under at this very difficult time. Both have a
responsibility to help to end the crisis. In that respect,
we welcome the Lebanese representative's statement
today of Lebanon's desire to extend its authority over
all of its territory.

It is important to remember that this crisis was
precipitated by Hizbollah. Its militants crossed into
Israel and killed eight Israeli soldiers and kidnapped
two more. This is a calculated attempt by Hizbollah to
further destabilize the region, without the slightest
regard for the potential impact of its actions on the
people of Lebanon, the Lebanese Government and the
wider region.

The quickest and the easiest way to end the
current crisis would be for the soldiers to be freed. We
reiterate our call for their immediate and unconditional
release.

Hizbollah does not act alone. As other speakers
have said, behind it, lending support and giving
direction, are Syria and Iran. Syria provides material
support to Hizbollah and facilitates the transfer of
weapons, including thousands of missiles, which
appear to be supplied by Iran to Hizbollah.

Ultimately, long-term stability will be possible
only if Syria and Iran end their interference in
Lebanese internal affairs, in accordance with
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006). I should like
to take the opportunity of this statement to urge Iran
and Syria to use their influence to rein Hizbollah in.

Against this difficult and dangerous background,
the focus of the international community must be on
what action can be taken to bring about a durable
ceasefire and help the Lebanese people. The United
Kingdom is seriously concerned by the number of
deaths, casualties and displaced persons that have
resulted from this conflict. We have repeatedly and
forcefully made clear to Israel that it must act with
restraint - the utmost restraint. Israel has every right
to defend itself against these terrible acts of
provocation, but we call on it to make greater efforts to
avoid civilian casualties.

We welcome the United Nations efforts to deliver
humanitarian relief, as outlined to us by Jan Egeland.
The European Union is also ready to play a key role, as
the situation on the ground allows. The United
Kingdom has agreed to provide £2 million in
immediate humanitarian assistance to Lebanon. We are
also arranging for two humanitarian advisers and
construction advisers to be sent to the region as soon as
possible to assess what more we can do to help.

It is clear from aid agencies in Lebanon that they
need immediate access to the displaced and the

wounded. They need that access to be safe and secure,
not under threat of attack, in order to bring relief to
those who need it most. We fully support the Secretary-
General's call for the immediate establishment of
humanitarian corridors. We welcome what the Israeli
representative has said today about evacuation and
what other people have said about getting these
humanitarian corridors in place. But it is crucial that
everyone on the ground cooperate in putting in place
not only evacuation facilities but also ways of ensuring
that humanitarian assistance gets to the Lebanese
civilians on the ground.

We all agree that the hostilities must end, but, as
we have heard from the Secretary-General's team,
there are serious obstacles to reaching a ceasefire or
even to reducing the violence quickly. That
underscores the need to create the conditions necessary
for a ceasefire which is both credible and durable. We
welcome the proposals put forward by the Secretary-
General, in particular to the effect that the Israeli
soldiers must be released immediately and that
Hizbollah must end its attacks on Israel. We must also
help the Government of Lebanon have complete
control over all Lebanese territory.

In that context, the United Kingdom is working
with key partners, including the United Nations, on
ideas for an international force to support the
Government of Lebanon in implementing resolution
1559 (2004) in order to ensure security in southern
Lebanon.

Beyond the immediate crisis, as the Secretary-
General said, we need a political framework for
Lebanon's future. The United Kingdom is committed to
working with him to give effect to this as quickly as
possible.

We heard also from Mr. Nambiar and
Mr. Egeland about the situation in the occupied
territories. The United Kingdom also has deep
concerns about the situation in Gaza. The escalation in
violence since the 25 June attack at the Kerem Shalom
crossing has caused great suffering on both sides and
mounting casualties. We offer our condolences to both
sides for their civilian losses. We reiterate our call for
the immediate and unconditional release of Corporal
Shalit. We also condemn the continued rocket attacks
from Gaza on Israeli towns. We have called on the
Palestinian Authority to prevent all terrorist attacks,
including the rocket attacks, and to work for the release
of Corporal Shalit. We very much welcome the work
President Abbas is doing to achieve that.

The United Kingdom continues to have serious
concerns regarding the humanitarian situation in Gaza.
I repeat - we recognize Israel's right to defend itself,
but we insist that its actions must be proportionate and
in accordance with international law.

We need an urgent end to the current crisis, as
many speakers today have said eloquently. At the same
time, and as Mr. Nambiar heard from many
interlocutors in the region, real peace can come only
through a lasting settlement. Our priority must be to
create the conditions for an early resumption of
negotiations. The events that we have witnessed around
Israel's borders in recent days have reaffirmed the
great urgency of constructing a lasting settlement and
the perils of assuming that there is somehow a military
solution to this conflict.

We believe that negotiation is the only viable way
to move the peace process forward. Our goal remains a
negotiated two-State solution achieved through the
road map. There is no alternative to this, and it is
incumbent on all of us to work together to find a way
through the current crisis to get back onto that track.

