Mr. Mlynar (Slovakia): Let me begin by adding
our voice to those expressing their solidarity and
condolences to the Government and the people of Nigeria
in relation to the recent senseless terrorist attack. Like
others, we have been extremely worried about those
developments, and we need to continue our joint efforts
to address the issue of international terrorism.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European Union,
and we would like to share a few additional points in
our national capacity.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General, the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the Special Rapporteur
on trafficking in persons, especially women and
children, for their briefings. I would also like to extend
a special word of thanks to the Italian presidency for
convening this important open debate focusing on
today's very critical issue. Last but not least, I would also
like to thank Council members for adopting resolution
2388 (2017), which helps to sustain the momentum and
attention on this important agenda.

Trafficking in persons is one of the worst crimes
among the violations of human rights. It violates a
person's dignity and undermines his or her basic
humanity. That heinous phenomenon has spread
worldwide and is present in some form in almost every
country in the world - in other words, no one can say
that they are immune to that particular scourge.

Human trafficking counts millions of victims
and provides enormous profits. Its victims would, in
fact, constitute one of the most populous countries in
the world, with a population of more than 40 million
people. Its revenues are comparable to those of the top
20 companies in the world at $150 billion annually.
Those figures clearly show that we are dealing with a
phenomenon of massive proportions that really requires
concerted efforts from the international community
as a whole. Research estimates that we would need
to spend only 15 per cent of the profits from modern
slavery to completely eradicate that evil practice, a
task that could potentially take us two decades. But
what we need most are political will and determination
translated into concrete action on the ground, as well as
further enhanced international cooperation, as I have
already mentioned.

Slovakia remains deeply committed to combating
human trafficking. After ratifying all of the major
international treaties and having implemented the
relevant European Union legislation, we have also
strengthened our national laws in order to increase
the protection of victims. Our State Secretary of the
Ministry of the Interior is the national anti-trafficking
coordinator, who covers the national referral mechanism
in Slovakia and chairs the expert group on combating
trafficking in human beings. We are pursuing the
objectives and steps contained in the national action
plan for combating human trafficking, which covers the
period 2015-2018.

Less than two months ago, we agreed here at the
United Nations on the political declaration on the
implementation of the United Nations Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons (General Assembly resolution 72/1). We emphasized the need
to address the factors that increase vulnerability to
trafficking, particularly poverty, unemployment,
inequality and conflicts. In that connection we
must focus our efforts on prevention rather than on
response. When needed, the protection of victims and
prosecution of perpetrators must be timely, accurate
and comprehensive.

Raising awareness about the existence of human
trafficking reduces the risk of becoming a victim of
that scourge. Education, awareness-raising campaigns,
events focusing on human trafficking and informing
specific groups are but a few of the means of prevention.
We have to improve the protection of victims by
providing them with special assistance and aprofessional
approach, but we have to work also on their ability to
self-identify as victims. Our action against perpetrators
must be resolute, coordinated and effective. We have to
improve the knowledge of procedures and the methods
and forms of detection and prosecution on the national
level and enhance international cooperation and joint
investigations of transnational organized criminal
networks and illicit financial flows.

In conclusion, human trafficking is, as I stated
earlier, present in almost every country in the world, and
every country in the world must, therefore, do its part
to tackle it. It is our view that working individually, but
at the same time in a coordinated manner and in close
cooperation, is the only way in which we will be able
to start referring to human trafficking in the past tense.

