Ms. Shalev (Israel): This year marks the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999)
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Since
then there has been considerable progress in addressing
this vital issue. Israel welcomes the latest joint study
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
particularly the case studies regarding United Nations
missions in the Sudan, cote d'Ivoire, Darfur and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. As we move
forward, clarity of mandates, accurately understanding
the threat to civilians, and providing genuine guidance
and planning will allow the Council and the forces it
employs to serve in an even more effective capacity.

We understand that many unresolved issues
regarding the protection of civilians in armed conflict
remain before us. Asymmetric warfare, a new, complex
phenomenon that the international community has yet
to address effectively, takes a heavy toll on civilians on
both sides of any armed conflict. Today's debate,
therefore, must not ignore the reality of terrorism. It is
a reality in which terrorists intentionally draw civilians
into armed conflict. It is a reality in which terrorists
use civilians as shields while they store weapons in and
launch attacks from densely populated areas, from
schools, mosques, civilian structures and homes. It is a
reality in which terrorists build military infrastructure
in civilian villages as they harass and threaten United
Nations peacekeeping forces.

It is a reality in which, only one week ago, the
terrorist Hamas entity that rules the Gaza Strip fired a
rocket with a 60-kilometre range, thus threatening
Israel's major population centres. It is a reality in
which Iran, the region's greatest sponsor of terrorism,
stands in manifest violation of this Council's
resolutions. Only last week the cargo ship F rancop was
found to be illegally carrying hundreds of tons of
Iranian weapons likely to be used against Israeli
civilians. In light of this threatening reality, Israel, as a
democratic State and in full conformity with its
international obligations, seeks to protect civilians
while it pursues terrorists who hide among them.

During Operation Cast Lead, while Hamas
intentionally launched attacks on civilians from within
civilian areas, Israel took extraordinary measures in its
response to protect all civilians. This included placing
more than 165,000 phone calls to warn civilians of
pending attacks so that they could find refuge
elsewhere. It included dropping nearly two and-a-half
million leaflets asking civilians to avoid particular
areas and buildings used by Hamas terrorists.

Those actions reflect only part of Israel's
extensive efforts to protect civilians in armed conflict.
They, among other measures, are discussed in great
detail in a publication by the Israeli Government.
Published some months ago, this report addresses the
difficult realities that Israel faced during Operation
Cast Lead. It describes, in a comprehensive manner,
the context of the operation, Hamas actions and the
response of the Israeli Defence Force (IDF), as well as
subsequent investigations into the operation. As the
report shows, given the complex environment of urban
warfare, Israel's actions during Operation Cast Lead
reflected those of an army committed to the principle
of the protection of civilians.

Colonel Richard Kemp, the former Commander
of British Forces in Afghanistan and a recognized
expert in the field of warfare in conditions similar to
those in Gaza, stated unequivocally that the IDF did
more to safeguard the rights of civilians in a combat
zone than any other army in the history of warfare.

As today's debate discusses the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, the international
community must be aware of the grave reality of
modern warfare, namely, terrorism. Terrorism turns
civilians in armed conflict into targets, shields and
weapons. We must not let terrorism turn civilians into
victims.

