At the outset, I would like to thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Under- Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their informative briefings on the political and humanitarian situations in Syria. I would also thank all United Nations personnel and humanitarian workers for their hard work on the ground at this very challenging time. I welcome the representatives of Syria and Turkey to our meeting today. Millions of Syrian people are still suffering ona daily basis. Their predicaments will not lessen without breakthroughs on the political and humanitarian fronts. The situation can worsen with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) spreading, the economic crisis deepening and winter coming. My delegation would like to reiterate our grave concern over the continued impact of instability on civilians in various parts of Syria, causing death and injury to nearly 300 civilians during August and September. We strongly condemn targeted attacks against civilians, humanitarian workers and civilian objects. In addition, the further deterioration of the socioeconomic and humanitarian situation is alarming, especially when the insurmountable impact of the pandemic continues to worsen as 92 per cent of cases are untraceable and the health care system is increasingly desperate. At today's meeting, please allow me to emphasize the two greatest needs of the Syrian people. First, they need a viable political settlement of the decade-long crisis. The only way to do that is through a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned process, facilitated by the United Nations, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), in full conformity with international law and the Charter of the United Nations, and with full respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference in the internal affairs of Syria. My delegation welcomes the resumption of meetings within the framework of the Syrian-owned and Syrian-led Constitutional Committee in late August. In order to find a sustained solution and ensure long-lasting stability, we look forward to further and more frequent discussions among Syrian stakeholders in a most constructive manner. We fully support the facilitating role of the United Nations and the Special Envoy, as well as all viable diplomatic engagement in this regard. To facilitate the political process, a calm situation on the ground is pivotal. We therefore urge all parties to the conflicts to exercise restraint and refrain from violence, as well as continue efforts to counter terrorism in line with their obligations under international law, including humanitarian law. Secondly, while the search fora political solution is under way, the humanitarian situation needs to be improved with a view to alleviating the misery of the Syrian people. Two vital factors that are of great importance are: first, to ensure timely, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access; and, secondly, to facilitate humanitarian response in all parts of Syria. Given the remaining logistical and administrative difficulties, my delegation takes note of the efforts made by the United Nations and various parties to ensure the continuation of humanitarian assistance for people in need. These efforts include cross-border operations throughout the north-west and cross-line deliveries to the north-east. We call for stepped-up efforts to address gaps in this regard.We urge all parties in Syria to create the most favourable conditions for effective humanitarian operations and call on the international community to continue its support during this critical moment. Assistance should be strengthened to increase COVID-19 response capability, fight food insecurity and provide adequate winter supplies. In the light of the COVID-19 impact, we also call on concerned parties to address the reported issues regarding the situation in various camps of internally displaced persons, water shortages in Al-Bab city and so forth.
