Ms. Gahonzire: I am talking about promoting
dialogue based on sustaining peace, which is being
done throughout all phases of the mission. It is
understood that the involvement of all actors in this
regard is essential.

For the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA) to do this, we had to involve
everyone, particularly women and children, in the
understanding that, when it comes to violence, they
are the ones who suffer most. We mobilized everyone
across different segments of society, including women,
children, youth and traditional and religious leaders.
It is through this full participation of society that,
along with the community protection committees, we
were able to engage everyone in crime prevention and
reduction campaigns.

However, the problem remains that we do not have a
host police force. Without a host police force, we cannot
do much. The United Nations police has mobilized
and strengthened community protection committees,
in which we currently have 600 participants, 89 of
whom are women, as well as crucial partners and even
schoolchildren. However, there is no host police force.

The other point is that, alongside our duties that are
well prescribed in the initial mandate, we have to carry
out reform and restructuring. In 2017, the reform and
restructuring document was completed. In line with
resolution 2445 (2018), we were supposed to meet the
parties and conduct a joint integrated planning exercise.
So far, the parties have been invited four times with
a response from the Sudan only. We have mobilized
the community, but there are decreasing numbers of
individual police officers to mentor and advise them.
Alongside that, we are witnessing increased levels of
criminality and disorder.

In 2017, the reconfiguration of UNISFA was headed
by General Agwai, who is now retired. The findings
were that the mandate did not match the situation on the
ground. That was the reason for the reconfiguration.

Through the adoption of resolution 2445 (2018),
the Council increased the number of police personnel
by 640, including three formed police units and 148
individual police officers. To date, none of them has
been deployed. At same time, the number ofindividual
police officers is decreasing. The situation warrants
more law enforcement, but the United Nations police has
done a lot, and I am glad to report that the communities
appreciate and are demanding a greater United Nations
police presence.

Similarly, I wish to respond to question asked by
the representative of Indonesia concerning the most
pressing problem at the moment. We realize that the
United Nations police is a system-wide provider and
is the force's face for the community. We are there.
Crime is on the increase. It is as if we were walking on
a tight rope. In 2011, the Security Council established
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
with a personnel ceiling of 50. Later, the situation
demanded more. To date, there is insufficient force to
respond to the increasing level of criminality. While
Abyei is a contested area, we lack a host country police
force. Overall, those are the challenges facing us as
police officers.

