Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I have
the honour of speaking on behalf of the European
Union. The Central and Eastern European countries
associated with the European Union - Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - and the
associated countries Cyprus and Malta, as well as the
European Free Trade Association country member of
the European Economic Area - Norway - align
themselves with this statement.

The briefing we have just heard from Mr. Jean-
Marie Guehenno reaffirms that the general elections
that were held on 11 November in Bosnia and
Herzegovina proceeded smoothly, without significant
incident. This represents noticeable progress as
compared to the 1996 and 1998 elections. These
developments reflect a better acceptance by the voters
ofthe rules ofthe democratic game.

In this respect, the High Representative, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH), by carrying out substantive
action for several years now to promote
democratization and respect for human rights in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, have significantly contributed to this
process. We should be gratified by this and
congratulate them.

We would like also to thank the OSCE in
particular for effectively organizing the voting. The
OSCE's Election Appeals Subcommission is
continuing its efforts to determine what took place in
the polling stations in which localized problems have
been identified.

Regarding the results, it is clear that at this stage
we can speak only on the basis of partial and
preliminary data. That data shows the dominance by
the nationalist parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which we deem regrettable. On the territory of the
Federation, it would seem that the multi-ethnic parties
did not achieve the hoped for gains. In Republika
Srpska, the Serb Democratic Party (SDS) will probably
be the major victor in those elections.

Moreover, it should be recalled that the so-called
referendum organized by Croat nationalists in certain
sectors of Bosnia and Herzegovina was declared illegal
by the OSCE. That referendum, which put forward the
creation of new institutional structures based on
ethnicity that would benefit only the members of one
community, has no legal validity. Fortunately, the
majority ofthe voters wisely rejected it.

As the Peace Implementation Council emphasized
in Brussels last May 23 and 24, the promotion ofjoint
operational and responsible democratic institutions is
among the highest priorities of the international
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Members of
the Security Council had an opportunity to show their
support for this objective on 26 October, in the
presence of Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch.

In these conditions, it is essential that the elected
authorities from both entities contribute, in a spirit of
cooperation, to the formation of an effective central
executive body. In a general manner, the Bosnian
political officials bear responsibility for working to
strengthen joint institutions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to promote good governance there in all
of its aspects, and to fully implement the Dayton
Agreements. This will be the key to reconciliation and
economic development.

Continued efforts to change mindsets are also
needed in order for voters to stop making decisions on
the basis of ethnic criteria. Bosnian political officials
have an essential role to play in this respect, as does
the international community, in order to promote the
long-awaited changes.

