Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to express my appreciation
and gratitude to you, Mr. President, for holding this open
debate on the role of the Security Council in the prevention
of armed conflicts. Allow me also to express our thanks to
the Secretary-General for the role he has played in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Although we are living at a historic time, on the eve
of the third millennium, certain problems remain unresolved
and the challenges facing humankind continue to grow.
They result from the pursuit of armed conflicts, both civil
and regional, as well as from instances of occupation and
the effect that occupation has on regional and international
peace and security. This means that the international
community, and in particular the Security Council, which
is responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security, must act transparently, methodically and with
no double standards whatsoever in order to resolve these
problems peacefully and in accordance with Security
Council resolutions, the principles of the United Nations
Charter and international law.

While we support proposals aimed at further
coordination and cooperation between the Security Council,
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council,
the International Court of Justice and international regional
and subregional organizations so that peacekeeping and
preventive forces can be swiftly deployed with the aim of
resolving existing crises or preventing others from erupting,
we also reaffirm the need to further develop the role of the
Security Council in post-conflict peace-building. That role
should involve joint and neutral programmes to disarm,
demobilize and rehabilitate ex-combatants as well as to
ensure the return of refugees and provide development aid
to meet the growing needs of the countries affected.
Support must also be provided for the human, economic
and social development of the peoples in those countries.

In the judicial sphere, it is essential to ensure
regional and international cooperation for pursuing and
sentencing those responsible for crimes of genocide
during armed conflicts so that we can eradicate that
dangerous phenomenon, which is in violation of the
provisions of international humanitarian law and all
human rights conventions on the treatment of civilians in
time of war. That is why we reaffirm the responsibility of
the international community to support national, regional
and international mechanisms to deal with this dangerous
phenomenon, in particular crimes of genocide and the
taking of United Nations personnel and humanitarian aid
workers as hostages.

The United Arab Emirates has noted the
humanitarian assistance provided in the regions affected
by conflicts. However, we believe that this should not be
an alternative to resolving such conflicts and violations of
human rights, but rather an integral part of peacekeeping
operations and programmes and initiatives for national
reconciliation. We reaffirm the need for neutrality and
transparency in the activities of the Security Council and
other parties involved so as to limit the suffering of
civilians in armed conflicts. This should be carried out
with full respect for the sovereignty of States, their
territorial integrity and political unity and in accordance
with the principle of non-interference in the internal
affairs of States, which is stipulated in international law.
We reaffirm the need to respect the security and safety of
United Nations staff as well as those of other international
missions in such territory. In this regard, we call for
appropriate training for those working to provide
humanitarian assistance during armed conflict.

Finally, we reaffirm the need to respect all
international efforts aimed at furthering the role of the
Security Council in the peaceful settlement of armed
conflict and the protection of civilians in time of war,
recognizing that this role should not violate the principles
enshrined in the Charter and the provisions of
international law. We reiterate the need to strengthen the
consultations between the Council and interested States,
in particular in coordinating joint efforts, in information
exchange and in the dissemination of the culture of peace
so as to ensure a better international understanding of
human rights, thereby enabling humankind to live in
prosperity and peace.

