The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity as Permanent
Representative of Uruguay.

I thank the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his
detailed briefing.

As we have indicated on previous occasions,
Uruguay adheres to strict respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States. In that spirit, we
reaffirm once again our support for the unity, territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Our country attaches the utmost importance to
the rule of law and the authority of the institutions
arising from the General Framework Agreement for
Peace of 1995. Respect for them is part of the path
towards stability and harmonious coexistence. We
believe that the rulings of the Constitutional Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina should be complied
with in full. As a general rule, we also believe that
politicians must act responsibly and constructively in
order to achieve national objectives that benefit the
entire country, such as economic development and the
reforms needed for stabilization. Along those lines, the
international community must continue to support the
implementation of the 1995 Comprehensive Framework
Agreement for Peace as a way to settle differences
among the three communities.

The stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina is an
asset, not just for the country but for the region as a
whole. Equality of rights, duties and guarantees is
a fundamental assumption of societies. Respect for
each community and the harmonious integration of
minorities, as well as their adequate representation,
lead to a stable and positive political environment.
We condemn ethnocentric discourse, divisive
and belligerent rhetoric and acts that offend other
communities or the victims of war. We must continue
to work to leave behind the bitterness that is the product
of a conflict that was an affront to humankind and
represented one of the darkest chapters in the history of
the region and the world.

Bosnia and Herzegovina should focus on the goals
shared by all communities. We note with interest the
progress made towards the country's integration in
the European Union and in improving its regional
relations. In that context, the resolution ofissues related
to defence and State property, fiscal sustainability and
the strengthening of the rule of law are of particular
relevance. We also appreciate the work being carried out
on the ground by the Office of the High Representative
for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina and by Operation Althea of
the European Union-led peacekeeping force in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which represents a guarantee for
political and social stability in the country.

Finally, I would like to reiterate Uruguay's desire and
commitment to ensuring that Bosnia and Herzegovina
becomes stable and sovereign, with inclusion for all of
its citizens and a focus on the common good.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

