Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): I thank High
Representative Inzko for his briefing.

Since the Council last discussed the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (see S/PV.7555), it has taken
the significant step of lodging an application for
membership in the European Union (EU). We wish
Bosnia and Herzegovina well as it pursues an ambitious
reform agenda, with a view to closer integration with
the EU. The reform process will undoubtedly encounter
challenges and give rise to difficult choices. But it
is clear that this programme of modernization will
enable all citizens to reap the benefit of economic
growth and strengthened institutions. The reforms
also aim to increase employment opportunities, which
is particularly important for youth, who are looking
to contribute to a vibrant and prosperous society. We
encourage the international community, especially
neighbours in the region and the EU, to support Bosnia
and Herzegovina in its reform process. With a reform
agenda laying out a path forward, it is time for all
political actors to look for ways to deliver it, and not to
step backwards into divisive politics that have impeded
socioeconomic progress for all of its citizens.

It is now over 20 years since the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina
brought an end to the bitter conflict in the region.
But, as we have seen in the Security Council over the
past year, the wounds of the past are yet to fully heal.
We urge renewed commitment by the parties and the
international community to engage on the issues left
unresolved by the Dayton Peace Agreement as they
continue the process of national reconciliation.

Divisive rhetoric and talk of referendims challenge
Bosnia and Herzegovina's sovereignty and territorial
integrity, as well as the Dayton Peace Agreement. That
does nothing to move the country forward, and instead
detracts from the reform agenda and undermines
reconciliation efforts. The reconciliation process
requires due consideration of past events and, where
appropriate, holding individuals to account. We hope
that everyone can learn to respect the conclusions
of independent judicial processes, whatever their
outcome. When court decisions are used as justification
for inflammatory language and provocative actions,
it simply sets reconciliation backwards. The process
of administering justice should instead be used as an
opportunity to move forward together. Not only should
judicial decisions be respected, the judiciary itself
should be able to operate freely with independence. We
reiterate the High Representative's call for the judiciary
to be left to prosecute and rule on cases free from
political pressure, but fully in line with principles of
professionalism and accountability.

As we have heard today, in the reporting period
only limited progress was made on the objectives and
conditions necessary for the closure of the Office of
the High Representative. We hope that progress on that
track can accelerate. We welcome the ongoing work of
the EU-led multinational stabilization force in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which continues to play an important
role in supporting the local authorities in maintaining
a safe and secure environment. While the future of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is, as it should be, in the hands
of its citizens, the international community, including
the Council, has a responsibility to encourage and
support it.

