Mr. Amorim (Brazil): The Security Council is
meeting today to consider the extension of the mandate and
concept of operations of the United Nations Civilian Police
Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH) for another period of one
year on the basis of the clear assessment of the current
situation in Haiti contained in the latest report of the
Secretary-General.

As my colleague from Costa Rica has already
mentioned - and as all other countries in the Group of
Latin American and Caribbean States expressed in the letter
from the Ambassador of Ecuador - Brazil expects a
positive response today from the Security Council to the
recent appeal addressed by President Preval to the
Secretary-General for the continued cooperation of the
United Nations with Haiti in order to strengthen its National
Police and to assist the Government in establishing a fully
effective judicial system.

As expressed in the report of the Secretary-General,
despite important progress made by MIPONUH since its
establishment one year ago, the consolidation of peace in
Haiti cannot yet be taken for granted. Indeed, the Haitian
police force is not yet self-sustainable and faces new
security challenges. Moreover, judicial reform, which is
crucial to the consolidation of democracy, has been
suffering from regrettable delays. A political stalemate that
dates back to June 1997 continues to undermine national
institutions and to hinder the implementation of reforms
aimed at solving the serious economic and social problems
facing that country. In this regard, we see the extension of
MIPONUH's mandate as part of a preventive strategy that
has to include other aspects, especially economic assistance
for the reconstruction and development of Haiti.

I would like to note with satisfaction that substantive
activities have been undertaken in Haiti by a number of
agencies of the United Nations system. The renewed
mandate of MIPON UH can provide an opportunity for the
gradual transfer of this Mission to other bodies. Such
transitions have been successfully accomplished before, as
was the case with the United Nations Verification Mission
in Guatemala.

In this connection, I wish to highlight that paragraph
8 of the draft resolution before the Council invites United
Nations bodies and agencies, especially the Economic and
Social Council, to contribute to the design of a long-term
programme of support for the economic rehabilitation and
reconstruction of Haiti. This is a small - but in a certain
sense innovative - step by the Council to revive Article
65 of the Charter, a provision that the Secretary-General
has described as dormant and to which he referred in his
report on the work of the Organization in the part
concerning the prevention of conflicts.

Haiti, but also the system as a whole, can benefit
from that new stress on the role of the Economic and
Social Council. I think that it can actually apply to other
areas as well, but especially to what we call here post-
conflict peace-building. We are sure that the Economic
and Social Council will be up to the challenge contained
in this invitation for the benefit of Haiti and other
countries in future.

