Mr. Soemirat (Indonesia): Indonesia would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Special Envoy Pedersen for their briefings. We commend their strong and tireless efforts in executing their respective mandates. My delegation underlined our position on the humanitarian situation in north-west Syria and on the Constitutional Committee at the two meetings on Syrian humanitarian and political issues held last week on the same day (see S/PV.8707 and S/PV.8708). Before I continue, I would like to underscore that, while we value every meeting of the Security Council, we would prefer all Council meetings to be conducted appropriately and as necessary, without creating further divergence among Council members. It is our strong belief that the most important approach and priority for the Council at this particular time is to be united in addressing the Syrian dossier. I wish to re-emphasize the importance of three main points. First, there must be an immediate cessation of hostilities in north-west Syria. It is a matter of the utmost urgency that all parties on the ground respect their obligations to protect civilians under international humanitarian law. In that regard, we would like to highlight something important yet disturbing mentioned by Special Envoy Pedersen, namely, "[w]e appear to have lost sight of the principle of proportionality." I think that is a very basic, yet extremely important, issue. In that context, let me reiterate our position that attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure are unacceptable. Secondly, immediate humanitarian assistance is needed by civilians. As Under-Secretary-General Lowcock mentioned, about 580,000 people in north- west Syria have left their homes in the past two months in order to escape the hostilities and seek safety. Most of those individuals have been displaced multiple times. They are vulnerable and need urgent humanitarian support. Thirdly, we would urge the Syrian parties to pursue concrete efforts in order to be able to advance the work of the Constitutional Committee. We appreciate all the efforts of the various parties to de-escalate the conflict in the north-west, particularly those that have led to ceasefire agreements. However, such agreements need to be firmly respected and implemented. Indonesia supports the engagement of the United Nations with all the relevant parties to end the violence. Again, my delegation urges all parties on the ground to cease their military activities. We must avoid armed confrontations, which will only increase the number of displaced people and exacerbate the suffering of civilians. Before I conclude, let me highlight the importance of thinking beyond the agenda of the Constitutional Committee. Indonesia sincerely hopes that an agreement on the agenda can soon be reached so that Committee members can begin their substantive work, which is the crucial part of the process. Trust and confidence among the Syrian parties are also key.
