Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Mr. President, allow me at the outset to
congratulate you on your assumption of the important
functions of President of the Security Council and to
wish you every success in your work.

We welcome Baroness Catherine Ashton, High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
of the European Union (EU) and thank her for her
briefing today.

We also listened with great interest to the
statements made by the Foreign Minister of Austria and
by our colleagues representing members of the
European Union. My Turkish colleague, Ambassador
Apakan, reminded me of the Russian proverb:
"Repetition is the mother of learning".

The Russian Federation has consistently
championed the multilateral development and
improvement of United Nations and Security Council
cooperation with regional and subregional
mechanisms. Such cooperation should be based on the
solid foundation of the United Nations Charter,
including its Chapter VIII. As a regional mechanism,
the European Union has established close and fruitful
cooperation with the United Nations in a whole range
of key areas, from conflict prevention, crisis settlement
and humanitarian assistance to peacebuilding and
promoting sustainable development.

The Russian Federation also has positive
experience in bilateral cooperation with the European
Union. We actively cooperated in a peacekeeping
operation that began under EU auspices and is now
being conducted under the aegis of the United Nations
in Chad and the Central African Republic. Together, we
are fighting piracy off the coast of Somalia and
cooperating constructively within the framework of the
Quartet of mediators for a Middle East settlement and
on resolving a broad range of other topical
international problems.

We reaffirm our interest in pursuing dialogue
with the European Union on promoting the initiative of
Russian President Dmitry Medvedev on the elaboration
of a comprehensive, legally binding treaty for
European security, which would provide for the
creation of a single security area for all Euro-Atlantic
States. We hope that, with the creation of a single EU
diplomatic service, new momentum will infuse that
dialogue.

We support the further development of mutually
beneficial cooperation between the United Nations and
the European Union. The entry into force of the Lisbon
Treaty will require fine-tuning EU cooperation formats
with external partners, including the United Nations. In
that regard, there is a need to establish a process of
transparent consultations with all Member States and
regional organizations in the framework of the United
Nations.

In conclusion, we stress that, despite the growing
need for an effective division of labour between the
United Nations and regional entities, including the EU,
the leading role of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security, as
enshrined in the United Nations Charter, remains
unchanged.

