The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Gbowee for her briefing.

The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today's meeting. I thank Council members for their
valuable contributions to the statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members
of the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Security Council agree to the statement, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/PRST/2015/3.

It is so decided.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
President of Chile.

Allow me to extend a very warm welcome to
participants and to thank them for being here in this
forum for shared reflection about ways towards
inclusion and security for our nations. This reflection
is taking place in a different reality. Today we do not
see on the international stage the large-scale inter-State
warlike confrontations that were common in the
twentieth century. However, that does not mean that
we are living in a peaceful and safe world. Those who
spoke before us have clearly referred to that.

The so-called "traditional threats to security" have
largely been replaced by "new threats" ofa non-State and
non-military nature. In other words, by intra-national
wars and transnational dangers such as terrorism,
organized crime, drug trafficking, money laundering,
the arms trade, trafficking in persons, natural disasters,
the spread of disease and the deterioration of the
environment. In order to understand and tackle those
new challenges, we must adopt a multidimensional
approach that explains the causes underlying those
threats. Those include socioeconomic, gender, ethnic,
tribal, religious and ideological tensions that may have
local, regional or global effects. That is the only way
by which we can effectively contribute to conflict
prevention and peacebuilding in the world. Those are
the founding goals of this organ of the United Nations.

We therefore believe that the debate on inclusive
development and peace should be held in this forum,
because we understand that peace is a prerequisite for
the promotion and protection of fundamental rights and
that, in turn, social inclusion and inclusive development
are the conditions for peace. In that connection, I
highlight and share the opinion of the Secretary-
General, who said last September that:

"Over the longer term, the biggest threat to
terrorists is not the power of missiles. It is the
politics of inclusion [...]. It is education, jobs and
real opportunity." (S/PV. 7272, p. 3)

Those are also effective tools for preventing other
forms of conflict, for building peace, for consolidating
democracy and the rule of law, for safeguarding
individual freedoms and, ultimately, for building fairer
societies. We are fully aware of this, which is why we
in Chile are making great efforts to narrow social gaps
and prevent segments of the population from being
left behind. We believe that closing gaps in income
and position in the social structure is as important as
promoting equal opportunities. It is not only a moral
imperative, but also a requirement for medium-term
and long-term development, for political stability and
for peace. We have made progress in that direction, but
we still have a long way to go.

Unfortunately, in many countries of the world, the
distance between the reality and the ideal of inclusion
andjustice is huge, and it does not appear to be lessening
over time. This situation is particularly worrying in
multinational, multi-ethnic and multicultural States
in which the rights of minorities are not respected
and in those where powerful minorities oppress weak
and scattered majorities. In both cases, frustation and
rancor create propitious conditions for radicalization
and armed violence that, when it occurs, usually causes
incalculable suffering that crosses national frontiers
and can even destabilize entire regions.

Recent events in the Middle East and Africa provide
examples, such as Iraq, Syria, Yemen and Somalia. But
these are not the only areas of the planet affected by
violence and insecurity. Latin America, which is the
region of the world with the most inequality, is also the
region with the highest homicide rate and one of the
regions most affected by drug trafficking and organized
crime. This does not seem to be mere coincidence.
And in Western Europe, terrorist Violence, which we
emphatically condemn, arises in a context of growing
malaise in which the most pessimistic speak ofa failure
of the model of multicultural coexistence and where
intolerance and phobias of all kinds are on the increase.
That is why, as emphasized in resolution 1325 (2000) and
as we have pointed out on other occasions, we maintain
that conflict prevention, peacebuilding, construction
of democratic institutions and development require the
participation of all stakeholders.

Allow me to make special mention of the
contribution of women. We are called on to play a
leading role in the creation of better living conditions
for this planet. When it occurs, the exclusion of such
a significant part of the population makes it not only
difficult but often actually impossible to achieve these
goals.

The example of Liberia shows, in contrast, as
Leymah has told us, that when processes are inclusive,
they are more likely to be successful. National
reconciliation and peacebuilding were achieved
through the creation of mechanisms for inclusion of all
concerned sectors, in which women - and particularly
the work of Leymah Gbowee, who is honouring us
with her presence - played an outstanding role. In
recognition of her work, Laymah Gbowee, together with
the current President of Liberia, Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf,
and the Yemeni activist Tawakkul Karman, received
the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize.

Experience shows that the debate which we are
proposing on inclusive development is of utmost
importance, especially if we bear in mind that what
we are seeking is to contribute substantively to the
building of a more peaceful, safe and fair world for
all. I therefore invite participants to discuss and share
experiences and views with these objectives in mind.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.

