Mr. Cornado (Italy): Thank you, Mr. President,
for taking the initiative of convening this debate. Let
me also express my appreciation to Under-Secretary-
General Holmes for his thorough briefing on the
progress achieved and on ongoing concerns regarding
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We
endorse the five core challenges approach referred to in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2009/277).

Italy fully associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Czech Republic
on behalf of the European Union. I will touch on points
of particular interest to my Government, keeping in
mind my country's recent experience as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council.

Italy is proud to have been one of the sponsors of
resolution 1820 (2008), to whose drafting we actively
contributed. Sexual violence as a tactic of war has
emerged as one of the foremost threats to the civilian
population in recent conflicts. Women and children
bear the main brunt of that horrific practice. With
resolution 1820 (2008), the Council stated loud and
clear that this is a matter of international peace and
security to which the utmost attention must be paid.
Parties to conflict must immediately and effectively put
an end to sexual violence and take special measures to
protect women and children from it. Impunity must
cease and those responsible must be held accountable.

We look forward to receiving the Secretary-
General's report pursuant to resolution 1820 (2008).
We will read it with attention and will consider its
recommendations, and we hope very much that the
Council will act upon them to make further progress in
protecting women and children.

Whenever a peacekeeping operation is in place,
civilians expect to be protected by United Nations
forces. When that task is not fulfilled, the
Organization's credibility is at stake. Failure to prevent
civilian casualties and to ensure the safe return of
refugees and the protection of children could engender
mistrust and disappointment, and could ultimately put
peacekeeping missions at risk. That is another reason
why the protection of civilians should continue to be
part of peacekeeping mandates and why peacekeepers
should be properly trained and equipped.

The ongoing review of the peacekeeping doctrine
is taking those developments into account. The concept
of robust peacekeeping is now spreading through
international seminars, the Secretariat's assessments
and Security Council debates. Yet, as the Secretary-
General's report highlights, the protection of civilians
is not only a military task; it is a more inclusive
challenge. Every component of a peacekeeping
mission - military, police, civil, gender, human rights
and child protection - has to contribute to achieving
the protection goals.

During Italy's recent term as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, we supported the
inclusion of civilian protection clauses in peacekeeping
mandates. We did not stop there. Together with the
United Nations, the Italian Government hosted a
symposium on child protection in armed conflict in
Rome three days ago. As the Italian Foreign Minister
stated on that occasion, the ultimate goal is to spread
awareness among the international community on the
impact of armed conflict on civilians, especially
children. As a concrete result of the event, joint
training initiatives in this field are being considered by
the Italian Government and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.

Just as peacekeeping operations require
instruments that are not only military in nature,
international criminal jurisdiction should be viewed
increasingly as a complementary instrument in the
suppression of international crimes. It is States that, by
adapting their laws and jurisdictions, should be the first
to respond to serious breaches of law, such as war
crimes and crimes against humanity, committed in their
territories. At the same time, it is up to States -
through collaboration with the International Committee
of the Red Cross and other institutions competent in
the field - to raise awareness of the basic principles
and the importance of international humanitarian law,
especially in the armed forces.

We are convinced that the protection of civilians
requires further efforts to prevent the destabilizing
accumulation of conventional weapons and to
minimize their humanitarian impact as much as
possible. Italy is therefore at the forefront of the fight
against the illicit trafficking of small arms and light
weapons and is actively engaged in the United Nations
process towards a legally binding arms trade treaty
establishing international standards - including the
respect for international humanitarian law and human
rights - for transfers of conventional weapons.

Italy also strongly supports universal adherence
to and full implementation of the Ottawa Convention
on the prohibition of anti-personnel mines and the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons - in
particular its Protocol V, on explosive remnants of
war- as well as the early entry into force of the
Convention banning the cluster munitions that cause
unacceptable harm to civilians.

I would like to conclude on a more general note
by recalling the reaffirmation by resolution 1674
(2006) of the principle of the responsibility to protect,
a cardinal achievement of the United Nations. That
principle implies that sovereignty brings special
responsibilities. Governments must protect their own
populations, and the best way for them to do so is to
promote human rights, the rule of law and democratic
governance. Only when a Government is unable or
unwilling to do so should the international community
intervene. The responsibility to protect should not be
perceived in a confrontational manner; it should be
seen instead as an instrument available to the
international community to overcome crises, provided
that the conditions referred to in paragraphs 138 and
139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1) are met.

Within that framework, the debate on the report
of the Secretary-General will be a timely opportunity
to build on the consensus achieved at the 2005 World
Summit and concretely implement the responsibility to
protect. Italy intends to actively participate in that
debate.

