The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Singapore.

First, I wish to join others in thanking Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs Prendergast for
his comprehensive briefing on the latest situation in
Afghanistan.

In the lead-up to the convening of the emergency
loya jirga next month, there are clearly short-term but
critical challenges in Afghanistan that the international
community must respond to immediately. The success
of both the process as well as the outcome of the loya
jirga will be critical in laying the foundation to deal
with the longer-term challenges in Afghanistan.

The United Nations, including the Security
Council, has played and continues to play a pivotal
role. We hope that Sir Kieran will convey our full
support to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, as well as the staff of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), who have carried out their tasks in
extremely difficult circumstances with ingenuity and
aplomb. In particular, we welcome the unified and
integrated structure of UNAMA, which represents a
new model of coordination and collaboration within the
United Nations system.

The convening of the emergency loya jirga is the
next important milestone in the political process laid
down by the Bonn Agreement since the inauguration of
the Afghan Interim Administration on 22 December
last year. The emergency loya jirga, to be opened by
the former king, Mohammad Zahir Shah, will decide
on critical questions relating to the form and structure
of the new transitional authority, which will replace the
Afghan Interim Administration. As a uniquely Afghan
process, the emergency loya jirga will increase Afghan
ownership of the political future, where it rightly
belongs.

We hope that the former king Zahir Shah's
homecoming to Afghanistan will encourage more
returns by the Afghan diaspora. With a long and proud
history, Afghanistan has a rich and varied diaspora,
which should be fully tapped. In general, progress on
the preparation for the emergency loya jirga has been
remarkable and encouraging despite the constraints of
time, logistics and resources faced by the Independent
Commission.

At the same, we should be constantly mindful of
potential obstacles. For example, we are disturbed by
reports of the killing of a loya jirga candidate hours
after he had been selected by the local district shura to
be one of the members of the electoral college from
that district for the loya jirga. There is a real danger
that opponents of the Bonn process and other spoilers
could step up their activities to disrupt the emergency
loya jirga.

We should remain vigilant even after the
conclusion of the emergency loya jirga. As in any
political process, there will be winners and losers.
Together with the Afghan population, who are tired of
decades of war and yearn for peace and stability, the
international community must step up its support for a
smooth convening of the emergency loya jirga and for
its results. In this context, we urge all Afghan parties,
especially Afghan leaders, to help foster a cohesive
national Afghan identity, which, over time, should take
precedence over ethnic or regional affiliations.

The successful convening of the emergency loya
jirga will not, on its own, guarantee the long-term
stability of Afghanistan. Much more needs to be done
in areas relating to humanitarian relief, recovery and
reconstruction, as well as to the security situation
throughout Afghanistan. As Singapore has consistently
maintained, progress on the political, humanitarian,
reconstruction and security tracks is mutually
reinforcing.

Adopting a comprehensive and coherent approach
in managing the situation in Afghanistan is the best
way to discourage disruptive forces and to promote
sustainable peace. While the worst of the humanitarian
crisis in Afghanistan has been avoided, it is now
crucial for the donor community to step up its support
for the repatriation and resettlement of internally
displaced persons and refugees. The higher than
anticipated rate of return of internationally displaced
persons and refugees is an important sign of the
confidence of the Afghan people. Insufficient funding
should not be allowed to reverse the process.
Mammoth efforts and resources are also needed to
transform the former war and drug economy into an
economy of peace.

More than any international gathering of global
leaders, Afghanistan acutely demonstrated the
interlinkages and effects of a globalized world. We
should learn the lesson of Afghanistan and step in
when it matters most.

In terms of security, we are gratified that the
coalition of the willing that constitutes the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) has
made a clear commitment to extending its presence in
Afghanistan for a period of six months. We also
commend Turkey for its offer to take over the
leadership of ISAF from the United Kingdom, which
also deserves our praise for its exemplary work in
establishing ISAF.

The adoption of the resolution later today to

extend the mandate of ISAF, almost a month before the
expiry of its current mandate, is a clear signal of strong
and continued international commitment to providing a
cornerstone for security in Kabul. The international
community, through the series of security-related
meetings in Geneva, is carefully examining and
implementing the various alternatives to help maintain
security in other parts of Afghanistan. In this regard,
we welcome the commitment and efforts made by those
with influence on the ground, including the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, to help
resolve local conflicts.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Canada. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

