We thank Mr. Valentin Inzko for his report (S/2020/1052, annex). We would like to start by congratulating the Central Election Commission, which, despite the constraints imposed by the pandemic, has been successful in preparing for the upcoming elections. In that regard, we welcome the fact that, on 20 December, local elections will be allowed to take place in Mostar for the first time in 12 years. However, we are concerned that the results of the 2018 general elections have not yet been fully implemented and that, due to a lack of political consensus, the appointment of a new Government for the Federation and two other cantons is still pending, while the appointment of the judges who will complete the Federation Constitutional Court team continues to be blocked. We consider it necessary to resume talks to finalize the outstanding issues and to make progress on the agenda of five objectives and two conditions for the closure of the Office of the High Representative. As a gesture of political goodwill, the pending decisions to be implemented, which were issued some time ago by the European Court of Human Rights and the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the recommendations of the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Group of States against Corruption, should be considered as a matter of urgency. We welcome the information that Bosnia and Herzegovina may benefit from the 2020 enlargement and investment package in the Western Balkans of the European Union (EU). In that regard, we echo the High Representative's call for political leaders to promote the enactment of reforms that will pave the way for progress towards EU accession. The Dominican Republic takes this opportunity to join the commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the signing of the General Framework Agreement for Peace and we call on the political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in both its entities - the Republika Srpska and the Federation - and at all levels of society, to reflect on the challenges, achievements and goals to be met after two and a half decades of changing the bleak landscape of a conflict into the promising paths of peace and coexistence as a nation. It is time to leave behind the divisive rhetoric. These 25 years of transition towards the consolidation of peace are being celebrated in an environment of a global health crisis that demands flexibility and unity in political leadership and requires the promotion of tolerance, institutionalism and respect for the Constitution. In this, our last intervention on this important topic as members of the Council, we invite the political leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina to seize this opportunity to build together a strategic alliance in support of its public institutions and in support of the consolidation of a strong rule of law. We propose that they become one force and focus on overcoming the obstacles that prevent them from achieving full stability and sustainable development. In order to do so, they must be governed by inclusion, unity in ethnic and religious diversity, accountability, access to justice, youth and women's empowerment, citizen security and the fight for poverty reduction. We reiterate our recognition of the unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina while welcoming the unanimous adoption of resolution 2549 (2020), extending the mandate of the European Union-led peacekeeping force, Operation Althea. In conclusion, we reiterate our call for support to the Office of the High Representative and to build a Bosnia and Herzegovina that is the product of consensus and democratic maturity with the sole objective of meeting the expectations for the well-being of a people who are celebrating 25 years of commitment to peace with hope.
