Mr. Toure (Mali) (spoke in French): I, too, would
like to thank the Under-Secretary-General, Mr.
Guehenno, for the exhaustive update he has given us on
the situation in Kosovo and on the activities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). During our public meeting on 19
December, I had the opportunity to mention the
remarkable way in which the municipal elections of 28
October in Kosovo were organized, and I welcomed the
close cooperation with the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
which enabled UNMIK to attain notable political,
security, administrative and judicial results, In addition
to organizing municipal elections, UNMIK's
achievements in the field have focused primarily on the
gradual integration of the populations and of local
administrations, as well as the consolidation of the
administrative structures. That is why my delegation
supports UNMIK in its efforts to expand the Kosovo
Transitional Council, taking into account the political,
ethnic and religious diversity of the province.

The integration of minorities into the
administrative, legislative and judicial structures is an
important step in the creation of a pluri-ethnic State.
My delegation welcomes the progress that has been
achieved in setting up municipal assemblies, and
expresses its support for the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in appointing minority
community representatives to the assemblies in the
areas where they live.

My delegation also supports the efforts being
made by UNMIK to reform the central bodies so as to
lead to substantial autonomy. We are certain that the
drafting of regulations will continue as planned.

From a security point of view, my delegation is
concerned about the wave of violence taking place over
the last two months in the demilitarized area of
southern Serbia, in the Presevo Valley, where clashes
have intensified between Serb security forces and
extremist groups of Albanian origin. The threats and
acts of intimidation and violence against minorities in
Kosovo are another cause for concern for my
delegation. All of these illegal actions are unacceptable
to my delegation, because they could destabilize the
entire region and undermine the huge sacrifices made
by the international community to build a pluri-ethnic
and democratic Kosovo. We welcome the special
measures taken by the international security presence,
KFOR, to deal with that problem by strengthening
border surveillance, confiscating weapons and stopping
illegal activities within Kosovo close to the eastern
administrative border. We believe that it is high time
the people of Kosovo ended the violence characterizing
their society and worked to restore the damaged fabric
of Kosovo society after years of repression and
conflict; its development and international aid depend
on this.

My delegation regrets the fact that minorities are
the target of threats, acts of intimidation and violence
in Kosovo, necessitating the special security measures
taken by the Kosovo Force against such illegal activity.

On the economic level, the re-organization of the
local economy and the establishment of legal and trade
organs that are indispensable for attracting foreign
investment are principal concerns of my delegation. We
welcome the measures already taken in the provision of
banking and housing services, as well as regulations
applying to businesses, foreign investment and
contracts. My delegation encourages and welcomes the
policy to rebuild housing for vulnerable families whose
homes were damaged or destroyed in the conflict.

On the humanitarian level, the return of displaced
Serbs to the province is a major challenge which the
international community, UNMIK and the Belgrade
authorities must take up. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees must have
adequate means to meet the needs of those who decide
to return home, in particular the most vulnerable
among them. The fundamental matter of the
approximately 3,500 missing persons is a major
concern for my delegation. We welcome the efforts that
have been made thus far and urge the Belgrade
authorities to step up investigations in order to inform
the international community on the fate of the missing.

With respect to health, my delegation is
concerned by the effects of the use of depleted uranium
on civilian populations during the conflict in the
Balkans in 1999. In this respect, we welcome the
establishment by Mr. Kouchner, the outgoing head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, of a joint Albanian-Serb group entrusted with
investigating the medical effects of depleted uranium.

My delegation wholeheartedly supports the full
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) and believes
that the constructive commitment of the democratic
Government in Belgrade allows us to view the future
with optimism.

In conclusion, my delegation must pay a well-
deserved tribute to Bernard Kouchner, who left his post
on 15 January, for his outstanding achievements and
his efforts in favour of democratization and respect for
human rights in Kosovo. We wish him the greatest
success in the future and assure his successor, Mr. Hans
Haekkerup, of our full support.

