Mr. Brammertz: I would like to extend thanks
for this new opportunity to brief the Council on the
progress made by the International Independent
Investigation Commission (IIIC). This latest report
covers activities since July 2007.

Over the past four months, the Commission has
continued to pursue the investigation into the
assassination of former Prime Minister Raffia Hariri
and 22 others on 14 February 2005. The Commission
has also continued to assist the Lebanese authorities in
their investigations of 18 other cases of bombings and
targeted assassinations in Lebanon since October 2004.
This growing list of cases includes the assassination of
Member of Parliament Antoine Ghana, killed on
19 September by a vehicle-borne improvised explosive
device (IED) in eastern Beirut. Mr. Ghana is the sixth
member of parliament killed in Lebanon since 2005.

Although the investigation is still at an early
stage, initial findings indicate that the perpetrators
were able to conduct surveillance and mobilize a
vehicle-borne IED within a very short window of time.
This and preliminary results in other cases suggest that
the perpetrators had, and most likely still have,
operational capabilities available in Beirut.

In the past four months, the Commission has
focused on the implementation of detailed action plans
in each area of the Hariri case. Since my last briefing
of the Council, the Commission has conducted more
than 70 interviews in Lebanon and in a number of other
countries. These interviews and other investigative
actions, particularly in the field of forensics and
communications analysis, have allowed the
Commission to further refine its understanding of the
events surrounding the crime.

Progress was made in several areas in particular.
These include, for example, the facts surrounding the
two males who bought the Mitsubishi van used in the
attack; the specific area where the suicide bomber
might be from, and how and when he might have
entered Lebanon; the person who disappeared with
Ahmed Abu Admass and his possible links to extremist
groups; and a deeper analysis of the de jure and de
facto structures, means, capacities, information flows
and reporting lines of certain organizations of
relevance to the investigation.
07-62683
In addition, the Commission has continued to
extend its technical assistance to the Lebanese
authorities in their investigations into the 18 other
attacks, including the Ghana case. In connection with
these cases, over 40 interviews were conducted by the
Commission in this reporting period. The Commission
has also provided the Lebanese authorities with a
number of important results from forensic
examinations on these cases.

In the next reporting period, the Commission will
continue to implement its action plans and will pursue
all open lines of inquiry.

Since my first report to the Council, I have
emphasized the importance of striking a balance
between the need for transparency regarding the
Commission's activities, on the one hand, and the
Commission's duty to protect the confidentiality of its
investigation on the other hand. In this context,
managing the expectations has been - and remains -
an important challenge.

Over the past few months, as investigative tracks
have advanced, the scope of the investigation has
narrowed. As this happens, the Commission is being
increasingly cautious in managing information linked
to the investigations. This approach is taken in full
agreement with the Lebanese judicial authorities in
order to protect the security of people who cooperate,
or wish to cooperate, with the Commission; to protect
the rights of potential suspects; and, not least, to ensure
the security of the Commission's staff. This heightened
emphasis on confidentiality is also taken in the light of
the foreseen transition to the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon in order not to compromise any possible
future legal process.

Well aware of the high expectations that were
placed on the Commission from the outset, the
Commission's staff and I have worked to the best of
our ability to fulfil the Commission's mandate. When I
arrived in Beirut almost two years ago, I inherited a
very small team of six investigators. We immediately
started the long process of building a more robust
investigation division, particularly by adding capacities
in the area of criminal and legal analysis and forensic
support. Today the division consists of 47 international
staff and is supported by the Commission's
administrative, language and security sections.

At the outset, we started by conducting a review
of the evidence collected and by designing an
07-62683

investigative strategy in line with international legal
standards. Over the following months, the Commission
launched 24 concurrent investigative projects in
different areas and 66 forensic projects, the majority of
which have been concluded. The objective was to
address three central questions: How was the attack of
14 February 2005 planned and executed? Who
prepared and carried out the attack? And why was
Rafik Hariri killed?

In a first phase, new emphasis was placed on
crime scene investigations using advanced forensic
techniques. Over several weeks, the Commission's
experts returned to the crime scene to review the
evidence and started to systematically categorize and
archive all the physical and biological exhibits.
Databases containing those exhibits, DNA profiles,
sketches and other information related to the
investigation were created and are still being
populated. These are important investigative tools and
I expect that they will be an important legacy of the
Commission.

The Commission was able to draw together the
different findings regarding the container of the IED,
the exact position of the IED, the trigger mechanism
used, the composition of the explosives used and
several other fundamental aspects of the crime in order
to establish a unifying theory regarding the explosion
of 14 February 2005.

Specific projects were launched to identify the
physical perpetrators of the crime. These projects were
designed to identify the persons conducting active
surveillance on Rafik Hariri in the period leading up to
the attack and to understand what role was played by
the holders of the six SIM. cards in this surveillance.
Who bought and prepared the Mitsubishi Canter van?
Who is the suicide bomber? Who is Ahmed Abu Adass
and what is his involvement in this crime?

Based on hundreds of interviews and
examinations, the Commission has been able to
answer- or significantly narrow down its
investigations into - many of these questions, as
detailed in the Commission's reports to the Council
over the past two years. At the same time, the
Commission concentrated on the possible motives for
the crime. The Commission started by examining or
re-evaluating the timeline and significance of Rafik
Hariri's activities in the period prior to his death,
including his private, business and political
3
relationships both within Lebanon and internationally,
as well as the threats, warnings and assurances he may
have received regarding his own security.

Working by elimination, the Commission was
able to progressively narrow down the list of possible
motives mainly to those linked to Rafik Hariri's
political activities in the months before his death, but
not excluding the possibility that the motive for the
crime may have arisen from a combination of factors.
Throughout its investigations into all aspects of the
crime, the Commission's focus has been to review, in
an objective and methodical manner, the evidence
collected in order to establish links - based on
evidence - between the crime scene, the physical
perpetrators and the remote perpetrators.

As I noted in my last briefing to the Council, the
progress made in the past few months has allowed the
Commission to identify a number of persons of interest
who may have been involved in some aspect of the
preparation and execution of the crime or who may
have known that a plan to carry out this attack was
being prepared.

In addition to the Hariri investigation, the
Commission's mandate was expanded in December
2005 to include technical assistance to the Lebanese
authorities in 14 - now 18 - other cases. In spite of
the limited resources available, the Commission has
sought to provide the best possible support to the
Lebanese authorities investigating these cases.

In addition to its technical assistance role, the
Commission has also focused on identifying links
among these cases, and between these cases and the
Hariri case. In previous reports, drawing mainly from
analytical work, the Commission noted the existence of
possible commonalities between the nature of the
attacks, the modus operandi, the profiles of the Victims
and possible motives. The Commission's recent
findings appear to indicate that some operational links
may exist between some of the perpetrators of these
attacks. Confirming these operational links will be one
of the Commission's highest priorities in the months to
come.

In my first report to the Council, I noted the
challenges that the Lebanese law enforcement
community faced in investigating crimes of this nature.
These challenges were due in part to a lack of specific
expertise. Recognizing the work being done by the
Lebanese authorities in a difficult environment, I note
that limited progress has been achieved in this regard,
particularly in the area of crime scene investigations
and cooperation between law enforcement agencies.
Increased international support will be needed if these
shortcomings are to be remedied.

As in the past, the Commission continues to
recognize that few of these results could have been
achieved without the productive cooperation which
exists between the Commission and the Lebanese
judicial authorities. The Commission holds almost
daily meetings with the Prosecutor General and his
staff, and additional meetings have been held over the
past four months with the investigating judges in each
of the targeted attacks. These exchanges are held in an
atmosphere of mutual support, recognizing that
achieving results in this investigation is, and will
continue to be, the result of this partnership.

The Commission has also renewed its efforts to
provide the Lebanese authorities with all the
information they need to make an independent
assessment of the evidence available and to act in
accordance with that assessment.

Based on an understanding reached between the
Commission and the Syrian authorities in January
2006, cooperation has improved considerably. With
that understanding in place, the Commission was able
to interview a number of Syrian officials, including at
the highest echelon of the State, access archives and
successfully conduct numerous missions to Syria. The
Commission continues to note that this cooperation
remains essential to the successful completion of the
Commission's mandate.

Cooperation with other States has, since the
beginning of the Commission's mandate, been of
paramount importance. The Commission continues to
rely on all States to provide information, make
individuals available for interview and provide
technical support as requested. I once again urge all
States to continue to cooperate with the Commission in
a full and timely manner.

I am often asked if I can predict when the
investigation will be complete. Unfortunately, I cannot.
Conducting an investigation is never an exact science.
The completion of the investigation will depend on the
final results of several still ongoing projects and on the
cooperation of all States. Equally important will be the
Commission's capacity - and in the next phase, the
07-62683
ability of the Office of the Prosecutor - to encourage
additional witnesses to come forward.

When I am asked if I am satisfied with the
progress made so far, my answer is absolutely yes.
Important results have been achieved in many areas of
the investigation despite the numerous challenges the
Commission has faced. Based on the progress made in
recent months, I am more confident and optimistic than
ever that the investigation can be concluded
successfully. But in order to achieve these results, it is
of paramount importance that the Commission
continue to receive the administrative support it needs,
particularly in the area of recruitment and staff
retention.

While the Commission remains focused on
continuing the investigation, it is also working to
ensure that everything is in place for an easy transition
to the Office of the Prosecutor of the Special Tribunal
for Lebanon when the latter begins functioning.

The Commission's consolidated reports are being
kept up to date and are being supplemented with a
number of other analytical products. These are being
prepared to allow the Office of the Prosecutor of the
Special Tribunal to evaluate the Commission's
holdings and findings and to determine the next steps
in the investigation.

The Commission is also developing several
projects related to the management, storage and
eventual handover of its sizable amounts of data,
documents, exhibits and other information. In addition,
the Commission has worked with the team set up to
oversee the transition on the important issue of witness
protection.

As this is my last briefing to the Council as
Commissioner of the International Independent
Investigation Commission, allow me to conclude by
thanking the Lebanese judicial authorities, the
Prosecutor-General, his team and the investigating
judges, with whom I have had the privilege to work for
the past two years. Given the acute and ongoing
political tension in Lebanon, I am also grateful for the
unfailing support provided by the Lebanese Army and
the Internal Security Forces in protecting the
Commission's staff and premises.

I would like to thank the Commission's staff,
whose dedication and commitment have been
exemplary during my tenure at the helm of the

Commission. Working and living in a restrictive
environment, they have provided remarkable service to
the Commission and to the United Nations. I wish my
successor, Mr. Daniel Bellemare, the best of success.

I would also like to thank the Security Council
and the Secretariat for the continued support provided
to the Commission since its creation. It has been an
honour for me to serve the United Nations and the
cause ofjustice in this capacity, and for that privilege I
sincerely thank the Council.

