Mr. Mazimpaka (Rwanda): It is my honour to
congratulate you, Sir, as others who have spoken
before me have done, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August. In addition, allow me, through you, to extend
our recognition to your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, for the way in
which he conducted the affairs of the Council last
month.

We have come to the Council today, at its
invitation, to present what we believe is an
unprecedented step towards the resolution of the
conflict that has afflicted Rwanda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in the main, and the Great
Lakes Region as a whole, since the signing of the
Lusaka Agreement for a ceasefire in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in 1999. The Pretoria
Agreement provides solutions for what up to now have
been intractable problems in the implementation of the
Lusaka Agreement.

The problem of the forces that carried out
genocide and then relocated to bases in Zaire, later the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, has preoccupied
the Council and the signatories for a long time, without
their having found a clear solution. Throughout, the
Council continued to urge Rwanda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to work together to resolve the
root causes of the conflict, that is, to find how to
dissuade the former Rwandan Army (ex-FAR) and
Interahamwe forces from carrying out attacks on
Rwanda from bases in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Today we firmly believe that our plan, worked
out with the help of the President of the Republic of
South Africa and with the encouragement and support
of the Secretary-General, has a chance to succeed. We
appeal to the Council to do its utmost to assist us along
this path.

At the signing ceremony in Pretoria, South
Africa, of what is now known as the Pretoria
Agreement or the Peace Agreement between the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Republic of Rwanda, President Paul Kagame
characterized the Agreement as very important. He said
that because the Agreement addresses two core issues
that underlie the conflict: first, how to resolve the
problem of the ex-FAR and Interahamwe and,
secondly, the withdrawal of all former forces from the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. By
addressing those two issues, the Agreement paves the
way for peace and stability, which have eluded our
respective countries for a long time.

Those familiar with the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, including the Council, know that we have
been painfully aware of the poor record of our
performance in the area of the disarmament,
demobilization and repatriation of the armed groups.
As crucial as that part of the Lusaka Agreement may
be, the parties have so far failed to make any headway
in effecting any meaningful disarmament and, hence, in
reducing the security threat to affected countries,
principally Rwanda. What the Pretoria Agreement
brings to the process is a solemn commitment by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to track, assemble and disarm ex-FAR and
Interahamwe, in collaboration with the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), the Joint Military Commission
(JMC) and the third party. Rwanda, in turn, undertook
to withdraw its troops from the Democratic Republic of
the Congo as soon as this process gets under way and is
judged to be irreversible.

Let me recall here that Rwanda's commitment to
the repatriation and reintegration of combatants has
withstood the test of time, numbers and adverse
conditions. Since 1994, a large number of members of
the former Armed Forces of Rwanda have rejoined the
military service in our country or been demobilized
like any members of the national forces. The militias
who accompanied these forces in the wars in the Congo
have also come home in large numbers and have been
resettled into normal civilian life. The now-well-
documented 2,000 captives of the 2001 war in the
north-west of Rwanda have by now been settled, and
some of them have actually formed a group to carry out
sensitization work among those who are still in Congo,
using the themes of national unity and reconciliation,
which they have witnessed in the country. Recently,
this group accompanied MONUC to Benin to help in
confidence-building among the small group of
combatants who had indicated that they wanted to go
home. Unfortunately, for that particular operation, the
heavy presence of detractors of this process made it
impossible for the group to go home, although they had
been waiting for two months to be repatriated. We hope
that in the future such groups will not be exposed to
so-called political leaders and other agents who
interfere with their wish to return home.

Through the work of MONUC and the JMC we
are all aware, or will have an idea, about where the
ex-Far and Interahamwe are operating from in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and how they are
organized. Indeed, it is on that basis that assembly
areas were planned. Those plans were approved by the
signatories to the Lusaka Agreement. We need
MONUC's assistance to make the assembly areas
operational and secure. The repatriation exercise will
require more resources, particularly for transport and
resettlement. The Government of Rwanda will continue
to do its part in ensuring that this process is successful.

Rwanda is grateful for all the assistance the
United Nations has provided in our trying times. We
hope that the Council will see the resolution of the
conflict in the region as a shared challenge. Rwanda is
grateful to President Thabo Mbeki and the rest of the
leadership of the Republic of South Africa for their
commitment to peace in our region. Equally, we
warmly welcome the commitment of President Mbeki
as Chairman of the African Union (AU), as well as that
of the Secretaries-General of the AU and of the United
Nations, to see the Agreement implemented as signed.
We appeal for continued support for all the parties
involved in the conflict, as this effort alone cannot
resolve all the outstanding problems - such as the
need to work out an all-inclusive agreement and to
achieve the withdrawal of all other foreign forces.

On this occasion, Rwanda fully recognizes the
problems caused by the presence and activities of our
nationals in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
That is why we salute and welcome the decision of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to negotiate this Agreement, as well as the leadership
demonstrated by President Joseph Kabila in signing the
Pretoria Agreement. In this spirit, we believe that all
the other outstanding issues should find solutions
through a sincere and pragmatic exchange among the
countries of our region.

Allow me to conclude my remarks by reiterating
the commitment President Paul Kagame made on
behalf of the people of Rwanda on the occasion of the
signing of the Peace Agreement in Pretoria at the end
of last month.

"Rwanda is ready to fulfil its part of the
obligations as agreed in this Memorandum of
Understanding. We are going to sign. We stand
ready to work with you, our African brothers and
sisters, and to work with the rest of the
international community so as to bring about
peace and security, which are very important to
the people to Rwanda, the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the whole
people of Africa."
