Mr. Dah (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation wishes, like other speakers, to thank Mr. Jan
Kubis, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI), for his high-quality briefing on the
situation in Iraq.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the proclamation by the
Iraqi Government of its army's victory over the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant after several years of fierce
combat. We further welcome the decisive support of
the international coalition for the Iraqi army, which
made it possible to overcome the Da'esh terrorist group,
which posed a genuine threat to international peace
and security.

My country hopes that the international mobilization
that made possible the rout of the Islamic State in
Iraq will continue so as to support reconstruction and
rebuilding efforts in the country. In this regard, Cote
d'Ivoire welcomes the holding from 12 to 14 February
of an international conference for the reconstruction
of Iraq and expresses its gratitude to the Kuwaiti
authorities for this laudable initiative.

We further welcome the momentum gained
as well as the considerable pledges announced by
States, development funds and other international
non-governmental organizations for the rebuilding and
recovery of Iraq. We applaud in particular the launch
during the conference by the Secretary-General,
Mr. Antonio Guterres, of the United Nations recovery
and resilience programme for Iraq and expresses its
support for the nine key areas of action set forth in
the programme.

The time has come for the Iraqi Government, with
the assistance of the international community, to seek
to bring about a lasting peace in the country through
credible democratic institutions and an inclusive
national reconciliation process. My country also is of
the view that everything possible needs to be done to
facilitate the voluntary, safe and dignified return of
displaced persons. This requires expedited efforts to
rebuild in conflict-affected areas and the establishment
of basic administrative and social services.

My delegation is of the view that all stakeholders
in Iraq must, in an atmosphere of calm, set the stage
for the peaceful conduct of inclusive, democratic
legislative elections on 12 May. We welcome the
deployment in Iraq of an electoral needs assessment
mission to assist in priority areas of action where the
United Nations can provide support. We also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
his good offices vis-a-vis women's representation and
participation in political and electoral processes and in
the reconciliation efforts under way.

My delegation remains troubled at the security
level by the sporadic asymmetrical attacks staged by
the Da'esh terrorist group, which retains a considerable
capacity to do harm. It exhorts the international
community to support the Iraqi Government so as to
do away with this residual terrorism and provide the
Iraqi people with the conditions for lasting stability
and security.

Cote d'Ivoire also encourages the Iraqi authorities
to launch the security-sector reform programme to
ensure that there are professional security forces who
will respect the rule of law and human rights.

Finally, my delegation calls upon the Iraqi authorities
to duly consider the UNAMI-supported draft law on the
creation of a specialized court for international crimes
committed in Iraq. We also commend the Mission and
encourage the Special Representative to persevere in
his efforts to win support for the reconstruction of Iraq
and the strengthening of its institutions.

