Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): We are delighted to
see you, Mr. President, directing the proceedings of the
Council on issues relating to our West African
subregion. I would like to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation to you and your delegation for
your outstanding contribution to the work of the
Council during your term in this body. At the same
time, please allow me to extend our thanks to your
predecessor, Ambassador Durrant of Jamaica, our sister
Commonwealth State, not only for presiding over the
Council's deliberations during the month of November,
but also for her distinctive contribution during the past
two years in the Council. In my delegation's View,
throughout Jamaica's term, Ambassador Durrant
should be credited with, among other things,
accentuating the human aspects of the Council's effort
to maintain international peace and security.

It is seven months since the Security Council
discussed the report of the inter-agency mission to
West Africa, led by Assistant Secretary-General
Ibrahima Fall. We share his conclusion that we
desperately need an integrated regional approach to the
current crisis in the West African subregion.

A lot has happened since the report was
published. For instance, in Sierra Leone today, the
prospects for peace and security have never been
brighter. The disarmament and demobilization of ex-
combatants is almost complete, and the process of
reintegration is gradually taking shape. The Secretary-
General observes in his latest report on the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL),
document S/2001/1195 of 13 December, that a secure
environment with increased freedom of movement,
gradual return of refugees and a resurgence of
economic activity is emerging. The Government, with
the support of its newly restructured military and
UNAMSIL, has done an extraordinary job in
establishing authority in the entire country. The
decision of the Government to announce the dates for
presidential and parliamentary elections next May is a
clear indication of the progress that we have achieved
in the peace process. We need the continued support
and encouragement of the international community to
at least maintain the current momentum.

Over the past several months, we have also
witnessed important developments within the Mano
River Union. The meetings of the Joint Security
Committee of the Mano River Union countries, as well
as those of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs, have
facilitated efforts to rebuild confidence and strengthen
the determination of the three countries to restore peace
and stability.

Sierra Leone believes that conciliation and
tolerance among the leadership of the Mano River
Union countries constitute one of the most effective
means of achieving peace and stability in the three
countries, which should contribute immensely to peace
in the subregion as a whole. This is why my head of
State, President Kabbah, is actively pursuing efforts
initiated a few months ago for a Mano River Union
summit meeting early next year. Meanwhile, we hope
that nothing will be done in the form of words or
threats of action to increase tension across the borders
of our respective countries. The relative calm must be
maintained by all means. We cannot afford to either
diminish or erase the progress that we have achieved so
far.

Peace in Sierra Leone is peace not only for Sierra
Leoneans, but also for Liberians, Guineans and other
West Africans.

Let me turn briefly to the recommendations of the
report of the inter-agency mission. The problems and
priority needs of the West African subregion have been
identified. We know the nature and complexity of these
problems. We also know the interrelationships between
them. What we need is a new strategy of
implementation - a strategy that will focus on
concrete measures involving the participation and
contribution of the various national, regional and
international components of human development. The
principle of partnership must be translated into reality.

My delegation would like to stress that most of
the recommendations of the inter-agency mission could
be implemented speedily and effectively, because we
already have the relevant mechanisms and institutions
within the subregion to effect such implementation.
They already exist. We should use them to their full
potential. The two main areas are economic
cooperation and integration, and conflict prevention
and management. We have the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and its various
institutions for improving the lives and livelihood of
the peoples of the subregion, as well as the Mano River
Union. We therefore strongly endorse the
recommendation that the United Nations system and
the international community strengthen the ECOWAS
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management,
Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security. The idea of
enhancing cooperation with the United Nations system
to develop an ECOWAS early warning system should
be pursued as a matter of priority. In this connection,
we welcome the establishment of the new United
Nations Office for West Africa in Dakar.

Since the roots of conflict, insecurity and political
instability are embedded in economic and social
inequities, we also endorse the recommendation of the
inter-agency mission that the United Nations agencies
should make a concerted effort to assist our
Governments in focusing on area-development
programmes covering basic social services, such as
health, nutrition, water and sanitation. In short, what
we are emphasizing is that we cannot speak about
peace and security in West Africa unless there is a
drastic reduction of the level of poverty in our
respective countries.

Let me conclude with one particular area of
concern that some speakers have already alluded to,
especially the Nigerian representative, relating not only
to the situation in Sierra Leone, but also to those
countries of the subregion that are emerging from
armed conflict. This is the reintegration of ex-
combatants, especially the youth, into society. Our
countries could revert to cycles of conflict unless we
urgently confront this particular challenge: the status
and condition of youth, former combatants as well as
non-combatants, in our subregion. Serious
consideration should be given to the recommendation
of the inter-agency mission that socio-economic
programmes geared towards alleviating youth
unemployment be implemented. We would also like to
stress the urgent need to address the problem of
education and training for this special population
group. To a large extent, the future of peace and
stability in our subregion lies in their hands.

