Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, and the Senegalese presidency for
this fresh opportunity for dialogue with police officials
as part of the annual week for United Nations police
in New York - a week that is always, and perhaps
even more so this year, an opportunity to discuss all
the challenges our police forces face and what must
be done to improve our tools. This meeting comes two
years after the very important adoption of resolution
2185 (2014), which was the first ofits kind in the history
of the Security Council, as it was the first time that the
Council recognized the central role of Blue Helmets in
peacekeeping operations.

Today, we have chosen what we have found
useful in the current context in our various theatres of
operations - four aspects represented by the presence
of four of our Police Commissioners on the ground:
the protection of civilians; the integration of a gender
perspective; building police capacities; and personnel
security, behaviour and discipline. I will therefore be
very brief, since the Council is here to listen to them
rather than me.

First, with regard to the protection of civilians, it
is clear that we are dealing with enormous challenges
on the ground. We see it every day in South Sudan,
and Commissioner Munyambo will be discussing that.
I would like to remind the Council, as I have done
before, that the protection of civilians we have been
managing in South Sudan is not something we should
be cutting back on, since the 200,000 displaced persons
in the camps owe the fact that they are still alive to
the United Nations, and to the United Nations police
in particular. Were it not for that, many of them would
not be here. At the same time, however, that creates
an enormous organization problem when it comes to
running the camps in South Sudan's current chaotic
environment. Regardless, that compels us to consider
how to improve the situation on the protection front
and what tools, techniques and talents we need in order
to optimize the joint functioning of the civilian and
military components.

Secondly, we have the issue of ensuring full
gender integration. That is extremely important to us,
and Commissioner Makotose will be discussing it,
for the reasons we are well aware of- first, because
women, like children, are particularly at risk in most
of the situations on the ground, and we have to take
that into account - and also because we need to have
more women in posts. We have in fact reached a level
where 20 per cent of our individual police officers are
women, in accordance with the goal established by the
Secretary-General, but we have to do better, just as
we have to do much better with female formed police
units. I have seen them on the ground in Liberia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Haiti, and that is
responding to a genuine need, but women make up only
7 per cent of formed police units. That is not enough,
because we need them not only for conducting dialogue
but also for sharing information on the ground, which
women are especially equipped to do.

Thirdly, capacity-building is crucial to enabling us
to support political processes, redeployment and the
re-establishment of the Government on the ground.
Those who have heard this before will have to forgive
me for quoting myself yet again, but, as we say in
French, in many situations good behaviour starts with
a healthy fear of the police. When the people see police
out there, they say there you are, the Government is
back and functioning. And that is all about the rule of
law. We will be hearing from Commissioner Monchotte,
who sees that routinely in Haiti. By the way, the Office
of Internal Oversight Services recently carried out an
assessment that recommended making efforts to better
align the goals mandated for our police officers and to
improve the level of resources available to them. I think
that is the case in Haiti, where there is no question that
we need to create a post for a deputy chief of police,
among other things. We have to monitor things carefully
in order to ensure that all these demands are properly
aligned within a realistic time frame.

Fourthly, there is the security of our personnel,
especially in areas where that is an issue, such as in
Mali, about which Commissioner Yacouba will be
sharing his experiences of operating in an area where
the threats come on a daily basis. We are unfortunately
seeing victims of this all too often, and the human costs
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali are far too high. That is
all because we are dealing there on the ground with a
terrible combination of criminal networks, extremist
groups and political stakeholders who are not always
very transparent about what they are doing. Those
are four illustrations of what we have to deal with,
and while they are to some extent dictated by current
events, any issue can be tackled within the framework
they represent.

I would like to take a moment to emphasize the
importance of taking better account of the constraints
that our police are dealing with on the ground in terms
of their welfare. We continue to see considerable
disparities between the working conditions of various
types of personnel, even when they are doing pretty
much the same jobs. Some are treated very differently
from others, and that cannot help having an impact on
morale and therefore to some extent on performance,
particularly for those serving in very problematic areas,
such as Libya and Somalia. We therefore have to revisit
our approach to mission subsistence allowances and
allowances for service in dangerous conditions. That
is a real issue; we are working on it, and the Secretary-
General has been made aware of it.

I have one last comment on conduct and discipline.
As the Council knows, our police officers spare no
effort to implement resolution 2272 (2016), which
the Council adopted in March, and all the measures
discussed in the Secretary-General's report on sexual
conduct (A/70/729), an area where the police have a
specific role to play regarding punishment as well as
prevention and, especially, assistance to victims.

In conclusion, the Secretary-General will shortly
be issuing his second report on United Nations policing,
and in that context, we will be relying the support of
the Security Council more than ever to enable us to
implement the report's recommendations as effectively
and efficiently as possible. I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank and pay tribute to our policemen
and -women for their untiring efforts in the field to save
lives and contribute to stability - sadly, work that is
not without considerable risk but which they do with
commendable courage and determination.

