Ms. Amos: Seven months have passed since the
adoption of resolution 2139 (2014) and two months
since the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014) on the
humanitarian situation in Syria. The resolutions
aim to stop the relentless violence and violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law being
committed against Syria's people. They also seek
to improve access to those in need. But the violence
continues unabated throughout Syria, including in
areas previously not as affected, and people are being
subjected on a daily basis to further displacement and
deprivation.

In the last few weeks, international attention has
been focused on the need to halt the progression of the
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) across Syria
and Iraq. ISIL is accused ofbeheadings, ofmass murder
and of sexually enslaving women and girls in areas
under its control. There are extremely worrying reports
of children being recruited into ISIL forces. Over the
past two weeks, ISIL forces have advanced in northern
Aleppo and over 160,000 people - mostly women and
children - fled into Turkey in just a few days. Their
fear was so great that many people crossed heavily
mined fields to seek refuge. There is a possibility that

tens of thousands more people could be forced out of
Syria ifISIL forces continue to gain ground.
The other parties to the conflict also continue to
Show an utter disregard for international humanitarian
and human rights law. Violence, including the use of
barrel bombs, car bombs and mortars, continues to
cause civilian deaths and injuries. All parties continue
to fire indiscriminately on populated areas, and on
markets and bakeries. Murder, execution, torture,
hostage taking and other violations of international law
continue with total impunity.

The Government has continued its aerial attacks,
including the use of barrel bombs. The Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
has received information that dozens of civilians were
killed in Aleppo from such attacks, including women
and children. Government forces also continued
their heavy shelling of the Joubar neighbourhood of
Damascus, reportedly killing civilians. In its latest
report, the commission of inquiry on Syria states
that civilians and civilian infrastructure have been
systematically targeted. Nine medical facilities were
reportedly attacked in August alone, including three
that were hit by barrel bombs.

Armed opposition groups have fired on
Government-controlled territory. Extensive shelling
of the Al-Khalideah residential and commercial area
of Aleppo city in early September killed at least eight
civilians, including women and children. Nine days
ago, mortars fired into Government-controlled areas
landed near two schools and a playground. Four people
were killed and 33 injured.

I have in the past reported to the Security Council
on the devastating consequences of this cycle of
violence and destruction on Syria's people. Those who
can, flee. More than 3 million Syrians have registered
in neighbouring countries as refugees. The numbers
who have left is far higher than that. Lebanon, Jordan
and Turkey are hosting millions of refugees and the
displaced, stretching the resources oftheir communities
and their national economies to the limit.

Those who cannot flee, remain. The whole population
is affected by the loss of essential infrastructure and
degradation of basic services. Millions are short of
food and medicines, and almost 3 million children are
not in school. Eleven million vulnerable people inside
Syria require urgent humanitarian assistance and of
those 6.4 million people are internally displaced. Many
have been displaced several times. Sustained access to
provide the most basic assistance to some 4.7 million
people who have been hard to reach for months, some
for years, continues to be a major challenge. And a
further 241,000 people are deliberately besieged, mostly
by Government forces, and are denied assistance. Each
month that passes sees more people denied their basic
human rights.

Intense fighting and shifting conflict lines continue
to make the delivery of aid difficult and dangerous.
The parties to the conflict continue to put obstacles
in the way of the sustained access that humanitarian
organizations require. Nearly 600,000 people in the
two governorates of Deir ez-Zor and Raqqa could not
be reached by the World Food Programme (WFP) last
month due to ongoing violence and the presence of
armed groups. It is the third month in a row that WFP
could not reach people in need in Deir ez-Zor.

Parties to the conflict also continue to block aid
deliveries to areas outside oftheir control. This includes
armed opposition groups in Aleppo governorate, which
have prevented aid from being delivered to areas under
the control of ISIL.

The Government continues to use administrative
procedures to hinder the rapid and sustained delivery of
aid. While the changes introduced by the Government
on loading plans and imports from official entry
points are welcome, the process for deliveries to hard-
to-reach areas remains far too cumbersome, and the
centralization of approval for deliveries continues to
hamper our operations, as does the need to negotiate
delivery routes once approval has been received.

Aid workers trying to get lifesaving assistance to
people continue to face grave danger. David Haines
was the sixty-third humanitarian aid worker to be
killed since the start of the war. Despite the dangers,
the United Nations and partners continue to reach
millions of people in need. Last month, the World Food
Programme and partners delivered food to more than
4.1 million people. A total of 16.5 million people were
provided with access to clean water by UNICEF and
partners. Over 400,000 people received core relief
items.

With the support of the Governments of Turkey
and Jordan, the implementation of resolution 2165
(2014) has helped us to deliver food for 144,500
people, health support for 151,000 and other basic
assistance for 315,000 people through additional cross-
border operations, complementing the work of the
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that have been
operating across borders not controlled by the Syrian
Government for many years. The opening today of the
Nusaybin-Qamishly crossing will allow the transfer of
further assistance for another 225,000 people.

The humanitarian community has developed an
integrated plan, initially for four governorates - Dara'a,
Quneitra, Aleppo and Idlib - that covers food, health,
shelter, and water and sanitation needs and coordinates
the work of all humanitarian actors - United Nations
agencies and NGOs. We continue to seek to reach the
maximum number of people by the most direct and
effective routes, across conflict lines, cross-border or
through regular aid deliveries. This approach ensures
complementarity of effort and builds upon current
operations. Despite the modest progress, sustained
pressure on all parties to ensure that they respect and
implement resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014) is
crucial.

We also need the financial support of members. I
welcome the more than $1 billion pledged last week
for our response efforts in Syria and neighbouring
countries, as the United Nations and partners have
already been forced to cut back on critical aid. Without
additional funds, the World Food Programme will be
forced to end its operations completely within two
months. Rations have already been cut in order to
continue to reach as many people as possible. Winter
is fast approaching, and vital supplies are needed to
protect people from the cold. Neighbouring countries
also need urgent support so that they can continue to
shelter millions of refugees.

But most critical of all, the violence that has already
killed over 190,000 people must stop.

