Ms. Matar: It is an honour for me to brief the Security Council today. The Special Envoy is in Damascus, where he is seeking to de-escalate the situation in the north-west and to renew progress in the United Nations-facilitated political process. Let me update the Council on where we currently stand. First, on the political track, the Special Envoy continues to engage the Syrian parties and key international stakeholders to unblock progress on the difficult path out of the Syrian conflict and towards the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). One aspect of that effort is the Constitutional Committee, which has been established and has been convened twice in Geneva. It comprises representatives nominated by the Government of Syria, representatives nominated by the Syrian Negotiations Commission and a middle third of civil society. As per the Special Envoy's briefing to the Council last month (see S/PV. 8696), disputes between the co-Chairs over the agenda prevented the meeting of the small body during the second round. The Special Envoy and the Syrian Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Al-Moualem, agreed in Damascus today on the importance of strict observance of the agreed terms of reference and rules of procedure. They also discussed all issues related to the overall political process. After communications with the co-Chair nominated by the Syrian Negotiations Commission in late December and talks today in Damascus with the co-Chair nominatedby the Government of Syria, the Special Envoy is working to narrow the differences and hopes to be in a position to convene the Constitutional Committee shortly. He hopes that the Constitutional Committee's sessions will continue with a steady rhythm in the months ahead. There is a need to build trust and confidence, which can contribute to opening the door to a broader political process. Meanwhile, I am pleased to officially inform the Security Council that, for the first time, the working group on the release of detainees/abductees, the handover of bodies and the identification of missing persons - made up of Iran, Russia, Turkey and the United Nations - will convene, as part of an ongoing rotation, in Geneva later in February. We realize that progress on that file is not easy, but it would be of enormous significance to many Syrians to see the pace and scale of releases increase. Special Envoy Pedersen underlined the importance of that issue in his consultations today with the Government of Syria. Let us recall, however, that there is a grave, and in many ways worsening, situation on the ground. The alarming scale of military operations in the north-west has resulted in devastating humanitarian consequences for the 3 million people in the Idlib area, including hundreds of thousands of displaced persons, reported airstrikes, including on civilian infrastructure, mutual shelling and civilian deaths in and around the north- west. We reiterate the Secretary-General's call for an immediate ceasefire and continue to press all parties for a sustained de-escalation in the entire north-west, along with all other areas of Syria, as well as reminding all parties of their obligations to protect civilians. Countering Security Council-listed terrorist groups is imperative. It is true that Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and other proscribed groups, including foreign fighters, are a major force in Idlib. As the Special Envoy has stressed, countering such groups must be done through an approach that ensures the protection of civilians and fully respects international humanitarian law and human rights law, and it is likely to be effective only with genuine cooperation among the relevant players. In the north-east, the various ceasefires and understandings that were reached continue to provide relative calm. However, the situation remains turbulent, with some impact on civilians. In recent weeks, armed activity has continued, as have other tensions, including between international actors. A sustainable arrangement inclusive of all actors that respects Syria's sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial integrity remains imperative. Protracted tensions in southern Syria also remain a source of concern. The de-escalation of violence leading to a cessation of hostilities across all of Syria is more critical than ever, and the presence of five foreign armies operating in the country is a reminder of the continuing dangers the crisis presents to international peace and security and of the challenges to the restoration of Syria's sovereignty. The Council is aware of the serious humanitarian challenges in Syria. Let me also stress that the economic situation of all Syrians, in all areas, has continued to sharply decline, with a number of factors combining to increase the economic hardship facing the population. That was impressed upon us by the Syrian Women's Advisory Board, which convened in Geneva last month. They shared frustrations and first-hand experiences of the daily suffering of Syrians living with severe shortages of basic commodities. The Syrian Women's Advisory Board spoke of the suffering of Syrian women in that context, many of whom are now primary breadwinners and face hate and risks of violence and exploitation. We believe a broader process must deliver in that regard too. In all his international engagement this month, including valuable consultations with senior European, United States, Arab and Turkish officials in Rome and in Davos and recent wide-ranging positive talks in Moscow with the foreign and defence ministers of Russia, the Special Envoy has continued to stress the importance of their working together to support a broader process. Indeed, it is apparent from all his consultations that the Constitutional Committee is not sufficient to address the real concerns of all parties. There is a need for a broader process that builds trust and confidence step by step. It could develop with reciprocal and mutually reinforcing actions by Syrians and outsiders alike, delivering tangible improvements for Syrians with a view to establishing a safe, calm and neutral environment. Such an environment would also help give confidence to refugees about the possibility of a safe, voluntary and dignified return and to those who wish to support the reconstruction of the war- torn country. The Special Envoy believes that there are modest openings to further pursue that work, and he will be doing so with deliberation and care. Nevertheless, it still requires genuine dialogue among key international players to deepen.We continue to prioritize accommodating the full range of Syrian voices in the process. Last week, we had the honour to welcome Syrians from inside and outside Syria to consultations of the Syrian Civil Society Support Room in Geneva. They raised humanitarian, socioeconomic and political concerns and stressed the need for maximum transparency and inclusivity in the political process. For our part, as the United Nations, we will continue to consult widely and build bridges wherever we can. The Special Envoy will continue to press for an end to the violence and work towards a resumption of the Constitutional Committee and further detainee releases. He will also continue to seek to unlock the kind of comprehensive political process that would result in a lasting political settlement that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people and respects and restores Syria's sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and independence in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
