Mr. Skoog (Sweden): In accordance with paragraph
24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011) of 26 February 2011, I
have the honour to report to the Security Council on
the work of the Committee established by the same
resolution. The report covers the period from 20 April
to 7 June, during which time the Committee met once
in informal consultations and conducted additional
work via the silence procedure.

During the informal consultations held on 19 May,
the Committee heard a presentation by the Panel of
Experts on its final report under resolution 2278 (2016)
and discussed the recommendations contained therein.
I will not summarize the report, as it will be published
shortly under document symbol number S/20l7/466. As

per practice, Libya was invited to read the report after
discussion in the Committee and prior to publication, in
the offices of the Secretariat.

While the report received mixed reactions,
Committee members expressed their support and
appreciation for the work of the Panel of Experts. The
main issues raised by Committee members during
the discussion of the final report included violations
of the arms embargo, human trafficking and migrant
smuggling, issues related to oil and oil products from
Libya, control over Libya's public financial institutions,
the implementation of the assets freeze and the Panel's
limited access to Libya. The Committee is in the process
of concluding its consideration of the recommendations.

With respect to the arms embargo, during the period
under review, the Committee approved three requests
for exemption for temporary export to Libya, submitted
under paragraph 9 (c) of resolution 1970 (2011). Those
requests came from Austria, the Netherlands and
Germany. The Committee also received a post-delivery
notification from Austria and a notice of cancellation of
temporary export from the Netherlands. Furthermore,
the Committee responded to a request from the Republic
of Serbia for guidance on the scope and implementation
of the arms embargo. The Commimttec also dispatched
a letter to Libya on the same subject. In connection with
a previous request for guidance received from Greece,
following the receipt of certain information from
Libya, the Committee wrote to both Greece and Libya
again on the matter. The Committee also received an
initial written report, submitted pursuant to paragraph
10 of resolution 2292 (2016), by the European Union
Operation Sophia, of a vessel inspection undertaken on
the high seas off the coast of Libya. Arms and related
materiel were found on board that vessel, which was
flying the flag of Libya. According to the ship master,
the ports of origin and destination were Misrata and
Benghazi, respectively. The Committee notified Libya
of the inspection.

Also in the context of the arms embargo, the
Committee received the name of its new focal point
pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 2278 (2016),
namely, His Excellency Mr. Mohamed T.H. Siala,
Minister for Foreign Affairs. Mr. Siala recently provided
written briefings to the Committee with respect to the
Libyan coast guard, explosive ordnance disposal units,
and the presidential guard.

Concerning the assets freeze, the Committee
approved a request for exemption, submitted by
Switzerland in accordance with paragraph 19 (b)
of resolution 1970 (2011 in relation to the assets of the Libya Africa Investment Portfolio. Following
the receipt of additional details from Canada, on an
exemption request pertaining to an asset owned by a
listed individual, the Committee's consideration of the
matter is ongoing.

With regard to the travel ban, during the period
under review, the Committee approved an exemption
under paragraph 16 (a) of resolution 1970 (2011),
received through the Committee secretariat as "the
relevant UN office" pursuant to section 9 (b) of
the provisional guidelines of the Committee, from
Ms. Safia Farkash Al-Barassi, a listed individual who
was authorized to travel between Egypt and Oman on
the grounds of humanitarian need.

Lastly, the Committee continued its consideration
of the previously reported two letters received from
Malta concerning the activities of two vessels that,
reportedly, were illicitly attempting to export petroleum
products and fuel from Libya to other destinations.

That concludes my report. I would like to voice
my appreciation for the work of the Panel of Experts,
under the Committee and other committees. We
know that at times the Panel works under very
challenging circumstances.

