Mr. Celem (Turkey): The Turkish Government is
seriously concerned about the latest decision of the Israeli
Government to approve a housing construction project in
the Jabal Abu Ghneim region of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, in
defiance of the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions. Although it is sugar-coated with the
simultaneous approval of scattered housing construction
projects for the Arab population of Al-Quds, everyone is
aware that the Israeli Government views this project as a
method to preempt the outcome of the negotiations on the
final status, particularly on the future of the Holy City --
equally holy for all three monotheistic religions.

The tragic events of last September, following another
decision of the Israeli Government regarding a holy site _
again in AI-Quds -- are still vivid in our minds. The chain
of reactions provoked by that decision to open an
archaeological tunnel passing under the Al-Aqsa Mosque
complex should have taught a lesson to all the parties
involved on what not to do at this critical point in time.

Unilateral actions that may adversely affect the peace
process must be avoided at all costs. So far, much has been
achieved in peacemaking between the Arabs and the
Israelis, leading very recently to the protocol on Al-Khalil
and finally clearing the way for the final-status talks, which
will also include the negotiations on the future of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif. At a time when the commitment demonstrated by
the Israeli Government to the established parametres of the
peace process was rekindling our hopes for the future of the
Middle East, the decision to allow construction in Jabal
Abu Ghneim has once again caused deep worries about the
success of the process. Any decision that could affect the

outcome of the final-status talks should not even be
considered until the successful conclusion of the talks.

How long can such vacillations continue before the
process is dealt a blow from which it cannot recover? The
future not only of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, but of the entire
Middle East peace process, hangs in the balance. In this
vein, I wish to reiterate Turkey's unwavering support for
and belief in the Middle East peace process, which we
deem the only rational path leading to a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the region. To achieve
this goal, we expect the parties to contribute positively to
the process on the'basis of Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

Therefore, my Government urges the Government of
Israel to reconsider and reverse its policy of resuming
such settlement activities in Jabal Abu Ghneim and other
occupied areas.

