Mr. Dembassa Worogagoi (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): I should like on behalf of
the Central African people to thank the Council for its
special attention to our country in its current difficult
situation. As we say at home, it is in difficult times that
one recognizes true friends. The report ofthe Secretary-
General (S/2013/677), the latest developments on the
ground, and the French and American positions all
warn of genocide if nothing is done.

The Central African Republic therefore expresses
its gratitude to each of the 15 members of the Council in
general and in particular to all bilateral and multilateral
partners, including the Economic Community of
Central African States, its Mission for the Consolidation
of Peace in the Central African Republic, the African
Union, the European Union, the International
Organization of la Francophonie, the United Nations,
France, the United States and the United Kingdom,
which have to date assumed the heavy responsibility of
managing this crisis.

The transition leading to the holding of free,
transparent and credible elections within l8 months
of 18 August is threatened by severe instability in
the country. Despite the efforts of the transitional
authorities to restore security in the country through
the dissolution of the Se'leka, to canton former rebels
in localized sites and to undertake other tasks, the
security situation remains precarious. That is why the
support of the United Nations remains crucial to saving
the country from its multiple ills.

The stability of the Central African Republic
depends on success in helping the transition to
implement resolution 2121 (2013), and in particular to
respect the road map established by the International
Contact Group until the elections are held. In that
context, the highest authorities of the transition have
written to the Secretary-General and the members of
the Security Council to inform them of and seek their
agreement to their request that France provide military
assistance in support of the African-led International
Support Mission for the Central African Republic
(MISCA).

The Central African nation aspires only to peace
and security. The African-led MISCA is being deployed
in the field. We should like to see it supported and
equipped by the United Nations, with the logistical
support of France, so as to assist it in fully securing
Bangui, restoring peace to the interior of the country,
and restructuring the Central African army. It must have
a strong mandate under Chapter VII of the Charter that
will help it in its heavy but noble mission in the service
of peace and stability in the Central African Republic.
That is the appeal of the Central African people to the
Security Council so that they may one day dare to hope
in the future of their country.

