Mr. Naidu (Fiji): Allow me to warmly
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your election to the
Council and your assumption of the presidency during
the first month of your membership. I would also like
to take this opportunity to warmly congratulate
Colombia, Ireland, Mauritius and Norway on their
election to the Council.

The Government of Fiji takes heart from this
open debate as the event that may consolidate past
reflections and initiatives on how to rejuvenate United
Nations peacekeeping operations 23 years after their
inception. Belying its smallness and modest resources,
Fiji has been a troop contributor throughout this
period - in military and civilian police operations in
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation
Mission (UNIKOM), the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH), the United Nations Mission of Observers
in Tajikistan (UNMOT) and, most recently, in the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET). Fiji has also served in other non-
United Nations missions, including in the Sinai, in
Bougainville and in Rhodesia. The total strength of Fiji
contingents serving in all these missions numbers close
to 900 at the present time. Fiji's broad-based
experience, as I have listed, includes personnel serving
at all levels in peacekeeping activities- field and
force commanders, as well as soldiers and officers.

The initiative of the Singapore Mission in
bringing about this debate during its term of presidency
on the Security Council enables my Government to
participate and share its concerns and thoughts on this
vital United Nations responsibility and obligation for
global peace and security.

Fiji also acknowledges and endorses the various
initiatives taken in Security Council presidential
statements 1994/62 and 1996/13, the far-reaching
findings of the Brahimi Panel report and Security
Council resolution 1327 (2000).

Fiji specifically commends the Secretary-
General's personal role in and attendance at the recent
signing of the memorandum of understanding between
Ethiopia and Eritrea. That defining event signals a
welcome attitudinal and institutional change in the
modus operandi of peacekeeping operations.

On the other hand, Fiji's experience in UNIFIL
was quite different, as, indeed, were other missions in
which Fiji was not involved; they were fraught with
danger and frustrations for all troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) due to the lack of a formal peace
agreement between the warring parties. The evident
lack of political will to prevail upon all parties
concerned to honour the terms of the UNIFIL mandate
precipitated that situation. Inevitably, some contingents
withdrew. The security zone in southern Lebanon
endured protracted occupation until June 2000, and
UNIFIL's ability to function effectively in its area of
operations was severely undermined. Regrettably for
TCCs, throughout such difficulties there is no available
mechanism through which to air and channel
misgivings or concerns.

We do not wish to belabour the issue in detail at
this stage, but would simply like to seize this
opportunity, as a small developing TCC, to call for
improved cooperation and greater consultation between
the Security Council, the Secretariat and the troop-
contributing countries, with a view to strengthening
peacekeeping operations. In our genuine desire to be
team players, we are fully confident that our
peacekeeping experiences, losses and gains can
legitimately inform us in this process.

Fiji has frequently noted its heavy human losses
in peacekeeping operations, now numbering 37.
UNIFIL alone has consumed at least 250 lives of
service personnel in its 23 years of operation. This is
an unacceptable casualty figure in peacekeeping terms.
In whatever mission, it remains important that warring
parties are held accountable for such casualties.

Through the United Nations Tribunals and
internationally recognized courts, including the new
International Criminal Court when it is formally
instituted, Fiji is confident that the loss of lives in all
peacekeeping missions can be minimized and those
responsible properly brought to justice. This will give
credibility to the international mechanisms that are put
in place for these specific objectives to strengthen
peacekeeping operations and deter would-be violators
of operations mandated by the Security Council.

Strengthened peacekeeping also presupposes the
legal obligation of a host country, on whose invitation
United Nations intervention was provided, to resolve or
manage conflict, to assist the United Nations
peacekeeping operation and to honour such a
commitment for the continuation of the operation in its
territory. A lapse in this commitment should
automatically lead to the non-renewal of the force
mandate or to the withdrawal of a mission.

My Government has also pondered seriously the
reimbursement procedures, which weigh heavily
against us in causing severe budgetary constraints.
Analysing the disadvantages of the present procedure
and finding constructive remedies thereto are critical
steps to strengthening peacekeeping operations. We
endure counter-productive lags under this
reimbursement system. The system diminishes the
ability of Governments such as my own to commit
their finances towards areas of greater need for
effective discharge of these operations.

For Fiji, acquisition of appropriate armoury to
adequately equip our troops for the missions is a strain.
A more viable option is for the United Nations to
procure armoury through the tendering and bulk
purchasing scheme at a more reasonable cost than that
which individual troop contributing countries (TCCs)
like my own presently endure. This would considerably
ease the responsibilities of TCCs while standardizing
the required equipment levels at each mission.

Strengthened peacekeeping demands that we go
beyond closer consultations between TCCs, the
Security Council and the Secretariat. Consultations
must be in good time. Meetings must also of necessity
be interactive and productive, with the capacity to
regularly monitor and review reports on various
missions for Security Council members, non-members
and TCCs alike. It is important to institutionalize this
consultation mechanism.

To achieve this objective, we must realize the
challenge of the Brahimi recommendation for the
convening of a Security Council special sub-committee
to take up some of the professional and detail points
with which technocrats and strategists can best equip
us. Only then can a decision be taken whether to
deploy, renew or withdraw a mission or merely to
amend the relevant mandate. All linkages can thus be
maintained and overhauled to adopt a realistic process
that is based on an objective assessment of the actual
situations on the ground.

