Mr. Amil (Pakistan): First, we would like to
thank Ambassador Ripert, Ambassador Lacroix and the
French delegation for convening this debate during
France's presidency of the Council. We would also like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Holmes for his
briefing.

It has been almost a decade since the United
Nations began to systematically approach the issue of
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Pakistan has
been an avid supporter of these efforts. We have always
espoused the calls for a comprehensive approach and
system-wide coherence in effectively addressing the
challenges related to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. This approach starts with prevention,
and in that regard we have always emphasized the need
to fully utilize and put into practice the Charter's
provisions and mechanisms for the pacific settlement
of disputes.

We believe that just, peaceful and durable
settlements of conflicts require above all addressing
their root causes. Where conflicts have erupted,
Pakistan has also contributed in tangible terms to the
international community's efforts to contain and
resolve those conflicts. As the leading contributor of
military and police personnel to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, Pakistan has played its role
in restoring peace and stability and creating the overall
conditions in which civilian lives can best be protected.
We shall continue our contribution in that regard.

There exist internationally agreed mechanisms,
including international laws, rules and regulations, as
well as responsibilities and obligations with regard to
the question of protection of civilians in armed
conflict. The issue at hand is not the lack of clarity or
understanding, but the inability to implement these
agreed mechanisms. This is the main focus of our
intervention today.

As we take the floor one after another, restating
or rehashing known positions or offering new ideas on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, I am sure
we all realize that the world is watching us. As Gaza
burns, the world is watching us. The world is watching
this Council in particular with disappointment. For
while this Council spends a day debating high-
sounding moral principles and respect for international
law, it has failed to carry out its own primary
responsibility under the Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

For a debate of the Council on this issue, these
are no ordinary circumstances. The 1.5 million
Palestinians imprisoned in Gaza, collectively punished,
callously persecuted, strangulated and blockaded for
years by Israel, the occupying Power, have been
subjected to a new deliberate campaign of terror, death
and destruction, which continues for the nineteenth day
as the entire world watches in horror and disbelief. The
besieged people of Gaza, we must not forget, are
mostly the Palestinians who were originally
dispossessed and driven from their homes by the Israeli
occupation. Under the blockade in Gaza, the choice
given to them has been either to starve or to submit.

Over the years, stark and disturbing evidence has
made it clear that civilians, particularly vulnerable
groups such as women and children, continue to bear
the brunt of armed conflict and remain the prime
victims in such situations. This is also the case in Gaza.

Less than a month ago, we celebrated the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
international community reaffirmed its pledge to
uphold the value of the Declaration. Yet one month
after reiterating that "we will not shy away" from the
magnitude of the challenges of promoting and
protecting human rights, the Security Council appears
unable to enforce compliance with resolution 1860
(2009) or to protect the innocent people caught in the
ongoing conflict in Gaza.

Resolution 1860 (2009) also condemns all
violence and hostilities directed against civilians and
all acts of terrorism. Since the adoption of the
resolution, the number of Palestinians killed in the
Israeli aggression has increased to around 1,000;
almost 40 per cent of the killed and the nearly 5,000
wounded Palestinians are women and children.

Empirical evidence throughout history shows that
systematic and consistent violations of the rights of
civilians are most frequent and pervasive in situations
of foreign occupation and suppression of the
inalienable right of peoples to self-determination. This
holds particularly true for the people of Palestine and
of Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir.

The challenges of addressing gross violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law are
exacerbated by the problem of inequity in the
international response. While in some situations there
is a quick and even a robust response, in others, such
as Gaza, the perpetrators enjoy virtual impunity. The
record of the Security Council itself in this context is
not without blemish. In these circumstances, effective
and swift application of the concept of protection of
civilians in Gaza is a litmus test for this Council's
future actions on this agenda item.

The Fourth Geneva Convention prohibits
collective penalties and collective punishment of the
civilian population. The responsibility of Israel, as the
occupying Power, is clear in that regard. In the context
of protecting civilians in Gaza, the international
community must live up to its responsibilities, and in
particular the Security Council should lead the efforts
to implement its own resolution 1860 (2009). We
strongly feel that deliberate violence against
humanitarian and United Nations personnel helping to
protect civilians is unacceptable in any situation.
We call for renewed determination to provide
protection to all innocent civilians caught in armed
conflicts and under foreign occupation, including those
we see dying by the minute in Gaza as we speak.

