Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): Today we have
reached another very important and significant
milestone in the long process of seeking independence
for East Timor, one which in a sense began with the
Agreement of May 1999.

We have seen again, as we saw during the
Popular Consultation, in 1999, the appetite of the East
Timorese people for democracy and for freedom of
choice. We welcome very sincerely the outcome of the
elections, which Under-Secretary-General Guehenno
has described to us today.

Mr. Ben Bradshaw, the Minister of State at the
Foreign and Commonwealth Office, was able to see for
himself - during a visit to East Timor during the
polling - the commendable way in which the elections
were organized and the commendable way in which the
East Timorese participated. We applaud the spirit with
which the East Timorese approached the elections,
which has laid down the right foundations for inclusive
democracy for the future. We call on all the Timorese
political parties to respect the outcome of the elections
and to work together to draft the constitution and to
prepare East Timor for independence.

Jean-Marie Guehenno quite rightly congratulated
the Timorese people on the conduct of the elections.
But congratulations are also due to the United
Nations - to the Secretary-General, to the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and to Special
Representative Sergio Vieira de Mello - for the
impressive arrangements that were made for the
elections and for the way in which they were organized
to allow them to go off both peacefully and in a way
that is more like, as Mr. Guehenno also said, elections
in a normally democratic country than in a country that
is currently hosting a peacekeeping operation.

I think this is a proud moment in the history of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. It is a proud
moment not only because of the success that I have just
described, but because, in a sense, the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
is something very new, very complex and very
challenging for the United Nations. The Organization
has carried it off extremely well.

It is clearly important that the international
community remains engaged in East Timor. The
statement that you, Mr. President, will read at the end
of this meeting will reiterate the importance that the
Council attaches to a substantial international presence
in East Timor post-independence. It is very important
that the planning for that is done properly, done
inclusively and done in the spirit of the Brahimi report,
involving the whole United Nations system, because all
the various constituent parts of our Organization, our
system, our agencies will need to be involved in
helping East Timor through that initial, difficult period
immediately after independence.

We very much look forward to receiving the
Secretary-General's report next month, outlining the
proposed arrangements for the successor mission to
UNTAET. We, and I am sure other members of the
Council, will be looking at it very carefully - but also
very sympathetically and with an eye to making sure
that the United Nations can keep up the excellent
record it has already begun with UNTAET.

