The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2009/651, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations. I wish to draw the attention of
Council members to document S/2009/597, which
contains the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by a Show ofhands.
2
In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam

The President (spoke in French): There were
fifteen votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1899 (2009).

In connection with the resolution just adopted on
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, I have been authorized
to make the following complementary statement on
behalf of the Security Council.

"As is known, the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force (8/2009/597) states in paragraph 11:

'... the situation in the Middle East is tense
and is likely to remain so, unless and until a
comprehensive settlement covering all
aspects of the Middle East problem can be
reached".

That statement of the Secretary-General reflects
the View of the Security Council."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2009/34.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.25 am.
09-65258

