Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Mr. Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing. China welcomes to
today's meeting His Excellency Mr. Ivica Daeic', First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia, and thanks him for his statement. I have also
listened attentively to the remarks of Ms. Vlora Citaku.

China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia, and we understand Serbia's legitimate
concerns with regard to the question of Kosovo. In
our view, resolution 1244 (1999) is the principal
legal basis for resolving that question. It is Vital that
in doing so we adhere to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and engage in
dialogue and negotiations within the framework of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, in order to reach
a compromise settlement that is acceptable to all the
parties.

The recent security situation has remained generally
stable, but Kosovo is still dealing with complexities
and uncertainties. China commends the efforts by
the Government of Serbia to find a political solution
to this issue, and welcomes the fact that the high-level
political dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina has
achieved progress and that existing agreements are
being implemented. We support the ongoing efforts by
both parties to maintain a pragmatic and constructive
dialogue, effectively protect the legitimate rights of
all of Kosovo's ethnic groups and promote national
reconciliation. We hope that the parties will refrain
from any actions that might escalate or complicate the
situation and that they continue to search for a lasting
solution to the question of Kosovo in order to maintain
security and stability in the Balkans and in Europe as
a whole.

China commends the work being done by UNMIK
under the leadership of Special Representative Tanin.
We support its continued efforts to carry out the
Security Council's mandate, and we hope that the
international presence in Kosovo, including UNMIK,
the European Rule of Law Mission and the Kosovo
Force, will improve their coordination with a View to
playing a positive and constructive role in achieving an
appropriate settlement of the Kosovo issue.

