Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Let
me begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
and Under-Secretary-General Malcorra for their
briefings. I would also like to thank Ambassador Duale
for his statement and to recognize the presence among
us of the Permanent Observer of the African Union.

Once again the Council is meeting to review the
situation in Somalia. The present situation calls for
action by the international community to back up
decisions already taken to support a Government that is
arduously working to build a Viable State in Somalia.
The cost of inaction would be anarchy imposed by
those who lack any defined political agenda and who

09-3985]
are prepared to attack regional stability and jeopardize
international peace and security.

The Government of Somalia requires cooperation
from all parties of Somali society who are committed
to national reconciliation, along with the support of the
international community, so that it can be the natural
partner in inclusive negotiations within the Djibouti
peace process. In particular, we recognize the decisive
work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, who is committed
to making progress in this political process.

The strategy to overcome the crisis in Somalia
must be led by the Somalis themselves. National
ownership of the process is in this case an absolute
imperative. The role of the international community is
to support and strengthen the capacity of the
Government to demonstrate the advantages of peace
and to take advantage of secure spaces in order to lay
the foundation for sustainable reconstruction and
development.

Costa Rica reaffirms its support for the Secretary-
General's political strategy for Somalia, as well as his
three-phase approach to meet the security challenges of
the country. We are pleased to note the decision to
make move forward in this area, in particular the
announcement that, in the very near future, we may see
an initial United Nations presence in Mogadishu. It is
now a question of strengthening the Somali security
institutions as well as AMISOM. These are critical
elements for the achievement of stability in Somalia.

In this regard, we call for prompt fulfilment of
the commitments made at the Brussels donors
conference and of other pledges to the United Nations
trust fund. With regard to transparency and the
achievement of objectives, we welcome the progress
reported on the memorandum of understanding
requested in resolution 1863 (2009).

Costa Rica also recognizes the contributions to
AMISOM. made by the Governments of Burundi and
Uganda and welcomes the recent decision of the
African Union to raise the military and police
components of the Mission to the troop levels provided
for in its mandate.

The worsening humanitarian situation in Somalia
is a matter of concern to Costa Rica. We condemn the
attacks against the civilian population and obstacles to
free access for humanitarian assistance. In this regard,

the fight against piracy has yielded praiseworthy
benefits in terms of access for such humanitarian
assistance.

I would conclude by reminding all parties of their
obligation to respect international humanitarian law
and by stressing that combating impunity is a priority
for peace and reconciliation in Somalia.

