Mr. Seruhere (United Republic of Tanzania): At
the outset, Mr. President, let me congratulate you on
having convened this meeting on the subject of
strengthening collective security through general

regulation and reduction of armaments. The meeting
could not have come at a better or more opportune
moment: this is a time when a conventional arms build-
up is taking place in some regions, including in some
conflict areas in Africa. Your decision, Sir, is highly
commendable.

As we speak, small arms and light weapons are
playing havoc in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Hundreds of thousands of
innocent civilians who have escaped death have been
displaced and are faced with imminent danger and a
risk of war-related death from disease or hunger. The
international humanitarian response leaves a lot to be
desired.

Tanzania is committed, along with the African
Union, to resolving the conflict in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo in collaboration
with the United Nations. In that regard, we commend
the efforts undertaken by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, the former President of Nigeria,
General Olusegun Obasanjo. We encourage the
Security Council to step up support for the Secretary-
General's initiatives, including by approving the
proposal that has been submitted on increasing the
number of peacekeeping troops for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Through Security Council resolution 1653 (2006)
of January 2006, Tanzania and the United Nations
expressed concern and urged the disarmament of rebel
groups and negative elements in the Great Lakes
region. To date, armed conflict continues unabated; this
conflict has its recent origins in the conflict of 1990s in
the Great Lakes region of Africa and continues despite
a series of meetings and agreements between the
belligerents. Equally important, the Council called
upon countries of the region to agree on confidence-
building measures. Confidence-building measures are
essential to conflict resolution, and ending conflicts
will inevitably curtail the excess demand for weapons.
In the Great Lakes region, that would mean a
significant reduction in the circulation and
proliferation of small arms and light weapons.

We commend the efforts made by the United
Nations in keeping the peace and maintaining security,
insofar as the conflict has not spilled beyond the
borders of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. But
together we can do a lot more by beefing up the
peacekeeping force and enabling it to be more robust in
its rules of engagement. We must enable Governments
in the region and the affected civilian population to
have more confidence in the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Conflict exacerbation in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo is occasioned by the armament
of rebels and negative elements, among other things.
We need not point fingers at possible sources, but we
should curtail inflows of arms and ammunition to the
rebels and negative elements, in addition to addressing
their concerns as the situation may demand. We urge
the relevant arms monitoring committees of the
Security Council to intensify oversight on arms
trafficking in the region.

Besides negotiations to end conflict, it is
important to have an international instrument on arms
production and distribution that would limit that
business to State actors. A combination of legal
instruments, political will and disarmament tools and
procedures, through the work of the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations, could go a
long way in ensuring the regulation and reduction of
armaments. In that regard, we call upon Member States
and all people of goodwill to support United Nations
endeavours to agree on a comprehensive arms trade
treaty which will specifically address the menace of
small arms and light weapons.

