Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me, first of all, to thank Mr. Michel
Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Burundi, and Ambassador Jiirg Lauber, Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their briefings.

Uruguay reiterates its concern about the political,
humanitarian and human rights situation in Burundi,
whose people are suffering from the devastating
consequences of the crisis. We note the report of
Special Envoy Kafando on the results of his recent
visit to Burundi, which sought to help to relaunch
inter-Burundian dialogue process. We also note
his report on his meeting with the facilitator of the
inter-Burundian dialogue, former President Benjamin
William Mkapa. We reiterate our full support for his
handling of the situation and encourage him in carrying
out his work to continue to involve a broader range
of interlocutors from both the Government and the
opposition, as well as civil society.
In addition, we once again acknowlegde the
tireless efforts of the regional and subregional bodies
to overcome the stalemate in the political process
in Burundi. At their most recent summits, both the
African Union and the East African Community
reaffirmed their full commitment to a peaceful solution
to the crisis and underscored that dialogue was the only
possible way forward.

It is also worth recalling the road map that was
presented by facilitator Mkapa, which includes a series
of specific steps to relaunch the political process and to
generate conditions conducive to transparent, inclusive
and peaceful elections in 2020.

In that regard, Uruguay particularly encourages the
countries of the region to support Burundi in a unified
and coordinated way. We also call on all Burundian
parties to commit in good faith to the next stages of the
dialogue process, expected in the coming weeks.

At the same time, we demand that all actors refrain
from taking any step that could exacerbate the political
and social tension in the country, thereby jeopardizing
peace and stability and undermining the correct way
forward for the dialogue process.

Uruguay cannot but reiterate its concern about the
human rights situation in Burundi. In that regard, we
strongly condemn each and every abuse and violation
of human rights, whoever commits them, including
cases of extrajudicial executions, sexual Violence in
the context of the political crisis, arrests and arbitrary
detentions, and the harassment and intimidation of
civil society organizations and journalists, as well as
restrictions on fundamental freedoms.

In the light of that situation, we regret that
the Government of Burundi has not resumed its
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (UNHCR)
since that cooperation was suspended in mid-October
2016. We reiterate our call for the swift onclusion of a
memorandum of understanding for the resumption of
the Office's activities in Burundi.

Turning to the humanitarian aspect, we support the
call made a few minutes ago by Ambassador Lauber
with regard to his contact with the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, UNHCR and
the Burundian authorities. We also underscore the fact
that the human rights situation was discussed at the
Human Rights Council in Geneva in September, with
that body adopting two key resolutions on the issue.
Full respect for the human rights of all Burundians
is a necessary condition for holding an inclusive and
credible political dialogue and for establishing an
environment conducive to the organizing and holding
of peaceful and democratic elections in 2020.

