Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region, Mr. Said Djinnit, for their very informative
briefings and their commitment.

We have just presented our report on the Security
Council mission to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. 1 will not dwell on that except to once again
pay tribute to the work of Ms. Zerrougui and her teams,
stress the historic opportunity represented by the
elections of 23 December, and call on all Congolese
actors to seize that opportunity and overcome their
differences through dialogue in order to reach the
widest possible consensus on the technical and political
conditions for the organization of those elections. The
entire Congolese population expects its leaders to hold
credible, free and transparent elections in a peaceful
climate. We hope that their calls will heeded.

The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of Congo and the Region
was designed in 2013 to ensure peace and stability in the
Great Lakes region, which hadjust experienced a series
of conflicts. The framework agreement is specifically
designed to address the common challenges facing the
Great Lakes region and is an essential instrument for
building confidence among the countries of the region.
The inclusive agrement makes it possible to combine
the efforts of a large number of actors, the countries of
the region, relevant regional institutions and external
partners towards the same purpose. It carries a long-
term vision that encompasses all possible avenues
to ensure the human and economic development of
the region.

The agreement should work as a catalyst for action,
but in our view it is not yet working optimally. There are
several reasons for that. The region remains confronted
by unresolved challenges, such as fragile electoral
processes, massive population displacements caused by

uncontrolled armed groups, incomplete reconciliation
processes and the slow pace ofjustice. New threats have
emerged, such as Ebola epidemics, the radicalization of
youth and environmental damage related to the illegal
exploitation of natural resources. The appropriate
means to collectively address those challenges are not
yet truly in place. I am thinking in particular of the
lack of adequate regional legal and technical capacity
in the field of police and judicial cooperation in the
fight against trafficking and impunity. Finally, we are
aware of the extent to which the lack of trust is both
harmful and prejudicial. Rebuilding trust is therefore at
the heart of our shared priorities.
France commends the outstanding work of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, Said Djinnit, who spares no effort in
seeking all possible ways and means to overcome the
challenges. Elections in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are on the horizon. We havejust spoken about their
importance to regional stability. The elections are also
a historic opportunity for the entire region. They must
offer an opportunity to the region, once the elections
are over, to come together on a renewed regional road
map that can identify new modes of interaction among
neighbouring countries and contribute to overcoming
the many challenges that remain.

France will remain faithful to the commitment
made in 2013, in solidarity with the region. We have a
common goal to help forge long-term regional stability.
We stand ready to work closely with all countries of
the region to serve that purpose and overcome the
current challenges.

