Mr. Shaanika (Namibia): I am honoured to
participate in today's open debate on the situation in
the Middle East, including the question of Palestine.
I would like to express our appreciation to Pakistan
for convening the debate, and to Mr. Robert Serry, the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his insightful and comprehensive briefing on the
prevailing situation.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, but I would also like to add
some comments that reflect our national position. Due
to the time constraints, I will limit my comments to the
situation in Palestine.

There is not a shred of doubt that the situation in
the Middle East, particularly in the occupied territory
of Palestine, continues to face numerous challenges and
the test of time. This is due to a combination of many
factors, such as the absence of any political will for
pursuing the peace process and to continuing acts of
provocation by the occupying Power. Namibia believes
that for a negotiation process to succeed, it requires
an impartial peace broker and committed and willing
partners to carry it through to its logical conclusion.
Currently, those factors appear to be entirely absent,
and that vacuum is filled by negative activities.

Last year, on 29 November, the General Assembly
voted overwhelmingly to accord Palestine non-member
observer State status in the United Nations. My
delegation supported and voted in favour of resolution
67/19 because we did not see it as an obstacle to the
peace process; we thought it would enhance it and
send a clear message that international patience was
gradually wearing thin. That important gesture by the
international community was greeted with peaceful
celebrations in the occupied territories and with
punishment for the people of Palestine by Israel, the
occupying Power.

My delegation noted that following that important
vote, Israel, with total disregard for international
opinion, announced its intentions to proceed with
plans for the settlement construction of more than
3,000 housing units in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, and, most alarmingly, indicatedthat planning
would proceed on several thousand housing units in the
E-l area of East Jerusalem. The construction of illegal
settlements and the apartheid wall of annexation will
not enhance Israel's security, and they mutilate the State
of Palestine, thus contributing to a hostile environment
that will make the prospect of a two-State solution
impossible to achieve. Such activities are also contrary
to the International Court of Justice's advisory opinion
of July 2004 and constitute grave breaches under the
Fourth Geneva Convention.

Similarly, we deplore the action of the Israeli
Government in withholding Palestinian tax revenue as
a punishment for Palestine's admission to the United
Nations as a non-member observer State. The upgrading
ofPalestine's status by the General Assembly is a matter
of legitimate aspiration for the people of Palestine and
the decision of Member States in the exercise of their
sovereign rights and free will.

Namibia shares the conviction that achieving a just,
lasting and comprehensive settlement of the question
of Palestine, the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict, is
imperative for the attainment of peace and stability in
the Middle East. There is no substitute for negotiations
to that end, but the process of negotiation cannot
become open-ended. While we express our support for
the resumption of the peace process, we caution that
it should not be turned into a perpetual orbit with no
destination. The overwhelming vote of the General
Assembly last year underscored the urgent need to
resume meaningful talks.

Genuine peace can come about only when parties to
the conflict take bold steps to heal the bleeding wounds
and usher in an era of hope and optimism. We have
therefore come here today to express our support for the
revival of the Middle East peace process, based on the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid terms
of reference, including the principle of land for peace,
the Quartet road map, the Arab Peace Initiative, and the
existing agreements between the Israeli and Palestinian
sides. Similarly, my delegation reaffirms the legitimate
right and aspiration of the people of Palestine to their
own independent State, and we hope that one day the
Council will recommend its full membership of the
United Nations.

My delegation wants to make one thing clear. Our
position is not biased against Israel, but merely opposed
to its actions. We have repeatedly acknowledged that
Israel, like any other country on Earth, is duly entitled
to adequate security. That ought to be recognized and
acknowledged. However, the pursuit of security should
not be a blatant excuse to violate the human rights of
the people of Palestine. It is our firmly held conviction
that the only way that Israel can guarantee its security
is through the creation of a viable and contiguous
Palestinian State that would exist side by side with
Israel, inside internationally recognized borders. It is
only then that the leopard will be able to lie with the
lamb and the calf will graze together with the lion cub.

