I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the current 10 elected members (E-10) of the Security Council: Belgium, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, Germany, Indonesia, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia and Viet Nam. At the outset, we would like to express our appreciation to the Estonian presidency for convening this timely and important open video-teleconference (VTC) on the working methods of the Security Council. We thank Ambassador Inga Rhonda King, Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Chair of the Security Council's Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions; Ms. Karin Landgren, Executive Director of Security Council Report; and Professor Edward C. Luck, Arnold A. Saltzman Professor of Professional Practice in International and Public Affairs at Columbia University, for their insightful briefings. Reviewing and improving the working methods of the Security Council has always been of great interest to both Council and non-Council members. To that end, a number of ideas have been put forth, and several have been adopted. The E-10 strongly believes that this open VTC is yet another extremely important opportunity to take stock of what we have thus far achieved and, most important, to discuss ways and means by which we can further this process. Although the wider United Nations membership is able to join today's meeting only through the submission of written statements owing to technicalities during the time of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the interest shown by States Members of the United Nations over the past years clearly demonstrates the importance that all Member States attach to the improvement of the Security Council's working methods. This second joint statement by the E-10, which shares this view, is a testament to our continued determination to take concrete steps towards improving the functioning of the Council. The E-10 is of the view that, in order to do so, we have to address the issues of the transparency, efficiency and effectiveness of the Council's work, as well as that of its inclusiveness, in a balanced and practical manner, paying due attention to agility when the situation demands it. It is the responsibility of all Council members to ensure that the Council is able to perform its United Nations Charter- mandated duties, including in terms of prevention. This is an increasingly pressing issue, particularly as the Council, along with other international organizations, is faced with mounting challenges to multilateralism and a growing number of global issues, both traditional and non-traditional. The sweeping, unprecedented impact of the COVID-19 pandemic not only requires adjustments in the work of the Security Council but also lays bare the need for the Council to be more responsive, effective and agile to ensure continuous functioning, as mandated by the Charter. Regarding what has been achieved, it is highly encouraging that in recent years the Council has agreed on a number of specific measures with regard to working methods, particularly in implementing the provisional rules of procedure and presidential note S/2017/507. Transparency is high on the agenda. Public meetings have been held on almost all the items on the Council's agenda, especially in the past few months. Council presidencies, including those held by E-10 members, continue to closely engage with the wider United Nations membership, civil-society representatives, the press and other stakeholders through various opportunities, including briefings on the monthly programmes of work and wrap-up sessions. Equally important, we have seen a significant increase in the number of resolutions, press statements and press elements that are initiated by E-10 members. The E-10 also shares the view that there is an increasing need for inclusiveness. We have been continuing to promote closer coordination and greater experience- sharing among elected members through various mechanisms in order to better prepare and make full use of their two-year term. The increasing cooperation among the outgoing, current and incoming elected members has one goal: to enable them better to serve on the Council in the pursuit of the maintenance of international peace and security. Monthly meetings, workshops, coordination meetings, bilateral consultations and many other innovative platforms are among the various tools at our disposal. The E-10 has also been trying its best to engage among the 15 members of the Council, with the wider United Nations membership, representatives of States on the agenda of the Council, troop- and police-contributing countries, civil society and others to facilitate broader consultations on the work of the Council and to ensure that the Council has the best possible information on the situation on the ground. During this unprecedented time of the COVID-19 pandemic, the efficiency, effectiveness and agility of the Council have been maintained. Although it has been impossible to continue normal functioning at United Nations Headquarters, the Council has been able to conduct its business by virtual means, including video- teleconferences. The Council has gradually improved its performance in discharging its mandate with a new set of procedures for meetings and making decisions. In this process, efforts aimed at ensuring transparency also have yielded specific results, including the webcast of the entirety of open VTCs and the introduction of an informal plan of VTCs or an informal programme of work. The E-10 would like to take this opportunity to commend our fellow Council members China, the Dominican Republic and Estonia, as the Presidents in March, April and May, for their leadership during this challenging time. The achievements made so far are also a testament to the dynamism of Council members. The E-10 welcomes the adoption of eight notes by the President in December 2019 developed within the framework of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions under the chairmanship of the State of Kuwait. They are now an integral part of the Council's proceedings and practices. They are designed to further enhance the engagement of the Council with the wider membership as well as to address pertinent issues such as an earlier integration of newly elected members in the work of the Council and a fair distribution of work for the selection of the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies. Taken together, they help codify the various creative practices that successive members of the Council have been undertaking to ensure ever-increasing transparency, efficiency and engagement. We welcome the constructive engagement among all Council members in reaching consensus on these notes. We also welcome the efforts made by Ambassador Rhonda King of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines since the beginning of the year to further facilitate the work of the Informal Working Group. The informal retreat on working methods hosted by the current Chair and her predecessor in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines in January this year was an excellent brainstorming session. In rising to current and future challenges, much could and must be done by the Council to better fulfil its mandate and serve the aspirations of wider membership. The E-10 reiterates that there should be greater burden-sharing and a more equal distribution of work among all members of the Council in order to improve the Council's effectiveness. There is a need for further implementation of the agreed note on the selection of the Chairs of subsidiary bodies and renewed discussions on the note on co-penholdership. While being encouraged by the fact that some elected members have assumed penholdership or co-penholdership on a number of issues, we would like to emphasize that this practice should be maintained and further promoted. The Chair of a subsidiary body should also have a reasonable share of the co-penholdership on the respective dossier, should the Chair be in a position to accept that role. Furthermore, such a mechanism might promote greater cooperation and coordination among Council members in relevant matters. Early engagement in the work of the Council is also important for every incoming member, including briefings by the Secretariat conducted earlier in the preparation for membership. We welcome the fact that, based on the recently adopted note by the President, incoming members are now able to receive all communications of the Council for a period of five months before joining the Council, and we urge that, during the observation period, incoming members be able to observe the work of the Council in various settings, including in consultations and negotiations on Council documents. We underline the importance of accountability and transparency within the work of all subsidiary bodies of the Council, including sanctions committees. We also strongly believe in the need to continue to make United Nations targeted sanctions more effective and legitimate by further pursuing efforts to strengthen fair and clear procedures in sanction regimes of the Council in order to respect international due-process standards. In that regard, the E-10 would like to reiterate its belief that this can be achieved through the creation for other sanctions regimes of appropriate, tailored review mechanisms similar to those of the system involving the Office of the Ombudsperson for the sanctions regime of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities. Most fundamentally, it is necessary to ensure the effective implementation of all the notes on working methods as well as to think of further improvements in this regard. As the working methods of the Council are always evolving, deliberations need to continue towards achieving a stronger living set of procedures and practices to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the work of the Council. In addition, during the current extraordinary period, greater efforts should be made to guarantee the Council's ability to continuously conduct its work, including that of subsidiary bodies, in accordance with normal procedures and practices. It is important to keep the international community well informed of the way in which the Council carries out its day-to-day business. It is up to all of us members of the Security Council to enhance the Council's ability to act by agreeing on central issues. It would be remiss of us to highlight the aforementioned significant improvements and some of the challenges we continue to face without underlining the critical and urgent need for a reform of the Security Council aimed at reflecting contemporary global realities, including through addressing imbalances and enhancing the representativeness of the Council. To conclude, the E-10 reiterates its commitment to the shared goals of enhancing the Council's efficiency and effectiveness, bearing in the mind the mandate entrusted to it by the whole membership of the United Nations. We look forward to receiving views and inputs from the wider membership of the United Nations to improve the working methods of the Council so that it can better fulfil its responsibility under Article 24 of the United Nations Charter.
