Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to begin
by expressing our condolences to Tunisia for the death
of the President, but I also wish to join my colleagues
in condemning the recent attacks in Kabul and other
parts of Afghanistan, which are a very sad reminder
of why peace is so essential. Afghanistan has suffered
enough from such attacks, and we send our deepest
condolences and sympathies to the Government and the
families of the victims.

Like others, I think that it is very good that we
are able to have this discussion today. Thank you,
Mr. President, for scheduling it, and I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and
Ms. Afghani, from the Women's International League
for Peace and Freedom. When I was in Afghanistan, I
saw for myself the very good work that the Women's
International League for Peace and Freedom does. It is
good to hear more about it today.

It was also excellent that the Deputy Secretary-
General was able to visit the country, and forgive me
for saying so, but particularly with a broken leg; that
takes a lot of guts and organization, and I thank her very
much for doing that. I think that it not only underscores
the importance of the issue but also the determination
all of us have to help Afghanistan and try to move this
really important agenda forward.

I can confirm that, as the Deputy Secretary-General
said, the European Union and the United Nations will
increase our efforts to fight violence against women in
Afghanistan through the Spotlight Initiative. When I
first arrived in Kabul, it was just after the murder of
Farkhunda Malikzada at the mosque, so it has very
much been on my mind as an issue that deserves
renewed efforts, notwithstanding the excellent work
that has been undertaken so far.

We in the United Kingdom have a Global Special
Envoy for Gender Equality, and she also went to Kabul
early this month to support women's participation in
preliminary discussions and the peace process itself.
As others have mentioned, the recent intra-Afghan
dialogue in Doha, which Germany and Qatar
facilitated, was extremely good news. Nearly 25 per
cent of the non-Taliban participants were women. It is
clear that there is more that can be done, but that was an
encouraging start on which we can build.

We all know that we need a genuine political
process in Afghanistan to give all Afghans - and I
want stress the word "all" - the best chance to decide
the future of their country. We comprehensively support
the ongoing efforts of the Afghan Government and the
United States, and in particular Special Representative
Zalmay Khalilzad, who many of us remember from
when he was the Permanent Representative to the
United Nations.

I hope that the entire region, as well as the
international community, can lend support to inclusive
intra-Afghan peace negotiations, without delay and
with the full involvement of both sides to the conflict,
including, in particular, obviously, the legitimate
Government of Afghanistan. I also hope that whenever
we see attempts to roll back on women's rights we can
speak up and challenge them. Any political settlement
needs to build on the progress made on human rights,
and that includes gender equality over the past 18
years. The Deputy Secretary-General set that point out
very eloquently.

Like many of the speakers this morning we too
have been following the elections. They are crucial for
future political stability and inclusion. In a clear signal
of Afghan ownership, we welcome the Government's
commitment to financing a significant portion of the
election budget. We also urge the Independent Election
Commission, with the support of the relevant Afghan
ministries, to continue its work to deliver timely,
inclusive and credible elections, working with the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, so that
the Afghan people can exercise their right to vote safely.
I know from first-hand experience how important
elections are to the Afghan people, and I hope that we
can give a lot of attention to ensuring the full, effective
and meaningful participation of women, as both voters
and candidates.

Elections are a civilian operation. They should not
be used as a target. Polling takes place in schools and
public places and involves ordinary citizens. An attack
on the elections would be an attack on the Afghan people
as a whole. We therefore hope that all political actors
will behave responsibly and constructively, so that the
elections can be peaceful and inclusive. In this regard,
I might note and welcome the Taliban's commitment
made at the intra-Afghan dialogue in Doha to refraining
from targeting civilians. We hope that they will stand
by this promise to their fellow Afghans.

For the United Kingdom, we remain committed
to supporting inclusive peace in Afghanistan. In June,
the Afghan Ambassador and I announced the launch of
a group of friends of women in Afghanistan, and we
will have a formal launch in autumn. This initiative
is designed to complement the United Kingdom's
regular engagement with women peacebuilders across
Afghanistan. We recently held consultations on what
the women and peace and security agenda means for
them and exploring how best to use the upcoming
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) to achieve their
goals. We are looking forward to taking the findings of
those consultations forward in the coming months, in
the context of the Afghanistan peace process.

To conclude, we remain steadfast in our
commitment to supporting the people and Government
of Afghanistan in achieving a peaceful, inclusive and
prosperous future, with equal rights and participation
as its core.

