The President: I would like to recall that at its
4345th meeting, on 5 July 2001, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1361 (2001), by which it decided
that the election to fill the vacancy in the International
Court of Justice should take place on 12 October 2001
at a meeting of the Security Council and at a meeting
of the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session.

This morning the Security Council and the
General Assembly will proceed independently with the
election, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Statute of the Court, for the purpose of filling the
vacancy which occurred on 30 September 2001 owing
to the resignation of Judge and former President
Mohammed Bedjaoui (Algeria).

The Security Council has before it the following
documents: S/2001/882, which contains the list of
nominations of the candidates by national groups of
States parties to the International Court of Justice
Statute; S/2001/882/Add.l, in which the Secretary-
General notified of the Withdrawal nominated by
national groups; and S/2001/883/C0rr2, which contain
the curricula vitae of the candidates nominated by
national groups of States.

I should also like to inform the Council that, after
the expiration of the deadline for the submission of
nominations, the Secretariat has been informed that the
Italian national group nominated Mr. Nabil Elaraby as
a candidate.

The Security Council also has before it a note by
the Secretary-General, contained in document
S/2001/881, describing the present composition of the
Court and setting out the procedure to be followed in
the conduct of the election.

I should like to remind the Council that, under
article 10, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the
International Court of Justice,

"Those candidates who obtain an absolute
majority of votes in the General Assembly and in
the Security Council shall be considered as
elected."
The required majority in the Security Council is eight
votes.

Article 15 of the Statute of the International
Court of Justice provides that

"A member of the Court elected to replace a
member whose term of office has not expired
shall hold office for the remainder of his
predecessor's term."

Accordingly, the member elected to fill the remainder
of the term left vacant by the resignation of Judge
Mohammed Bedjaoui will serve until 5 February 2006.

The voting will be held by secret ballot. When we
proceed to the vote, members of the Council will
receive a ballot paper containing the names of the
candidates. No withdrawal will be accepted once the
ballot papers have been distributed. However, it would
be possible to withdraw between ballots. Members of
the Council will be requested to place an "X" in the
box next to the name of the candidate for whom they
wish to vote. Votes may be cast only for a candidate
whose name appears on the ballot paper.

I should like to remind members of paragraph 15
of the Secretary-General's memorandum, contained in
document S/2001/881, which specifies that

"Each elector may vote for only one candidate."

Any ballot paper containing votes for more than one
name will be considered invalid. When a candidate has
obtained the required majority of votes, I shall
communicate the result to the President of the General
Assembly, and I shall request the Council to remain in
session pending the receipt from the President of the
General Assembly of the result of the voting in the
Assembly.

The Council will now proceed to draw lots to
select two delegations - excluding Ireland, which is
presiding over the Council during the month of
October - to serve as tellers.

>1<>l<>1<

The President: The names of the delegations of
Colombia and Tunisia have been drawn. I request them
to appoint one of their members to serve as tellers.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. Franco

(Colombia) and Mr. Ben Yoassef(Tunisia) acted

as tellers.


The President: May I take it that the Council is
now ready to proceed with the election of a member of
the International Court of Justice?
It is so decided.

I request the Conference Officer to distribute the
ballot papers.

Members of the Council should place an "X" in
the box next to the name of the candidate for whom
they wish to vote.

>l<>l<>l<


The President: I take it that all the members of
the Council have now voted, and I ask the Conference
Officer to collect the ballot papers.

>l<>l<>l<


The President: All the ballot papers have been
collected. I should like to remind the Council that, as
agreed during our consultations, the ballots will not be
counted until it has been verified that the ballot papers
in the General Assembly have been collected. The
Council will remain in session pending the receipt of
that information.

***


The President: I have now been informed that
the ballot papers have been collected in the General
Assembly.

The counting of the ballots in the Security
Council will now begin. The tellers will now count the
ballots.

As agreed in our consultations, there will be two
independent countings of the ballots, one by each teller.

>1<>l<>l<


The President: I shall communicate the result of
the vote to the President of the General Assembly in
writing.

I request the Council to remain in session while
we wait for the President of the General Assembly to
inform the Council of the result of the voting in the
Assembly.

***


The President: I would now like to inform
members of the Council of the result of the voting:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Nabil Elaraby 13
Mr. Francis Romain Wodie 2

I should now like to inform the members of the
Council that I have just received from the President of
the General Assembly the following letter:

"I have the honour to inform you that at the
24th plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
held today for the purpose of electing one
member of the International Court of Justice, Mr.
Nabil Elaraby obtained an absolute majority of
the votes in the General Assembly."

As both the Security Council and the General
Assembly have agreed on the same candidate, the
distinguished jurist Mr. Nabil Elaraby has been elected
as a member of the International Court of Justice for
the remainder of the term of office of Judge Bedjaoui,
that is, until 5 February 2006.

I should like to congratulate him and wish him
every success in the high office to which he has been
elected.

I should also like to thank the tellers for their
assistance.

The Security Council has thus concluded its
business for this meeting.

The meeting rose at 11.50 am.

