Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We have listened carefully to the statements
by the representatives of the United States and the
United Kingdom on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1483 (2003). We have also listened
carefully to the colleagues who have preceded me in
taking the floor.

Syria has clearly expressed its position vis-a-vis
the Iraq problem before the Council on many
occasions. More than once, we and other States
members of the Security Council have suggested ways
to overcome the tragic situation in Iraq. Syria is not
merely a country that neighbours Iraq; since the dawn
of time history, geography, destiny and common
interests all have bound the peoples of our two
brotherly countries together. In recent weeks, visits to
Damascus by many representatives of the Iraqi people
with various political affiliations - including a large
number of the Iraqi Governing Council - show that
relations between the two peoples and the two
countries are very deeply entrenched.

In order to help our Iraqi brothers to overcome
the daily hardships they face, tons of food supplies, as
well as other items of humanitarian assistance, have
been shipped to Iraq. In addition, the Syrian electricity
grid has been connected to the Iraqi one in some places
in order to help meet the basic daily needs of the Iraqi
people.

On 1 and 2 November 2003, Damascus hosted an
important meeting of foreign ministers of neighbouring
countries, including the Foreign Ministers of Saudi

Arabia, Jordan, Iran, Turkey, Kuwait and Syria, as well
as Egypt. In that meeting current developments in Iraq
were discussed as well as their repercussions both
regionally and internationally. In view of the
importance of the outcome of the meeting, I would like
to outline the major points agreed upon by the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the neighbouring
countries.

There is a need for Iraq's neighbours to show full
solidarity with and sympathy towards Iraq in its current
plight because of the grave deterioration in the security
situation, as well as the general economic and living
situation in the country. Any measure that may lead to
a division of Iraq must be rejected, and Iraq's
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity must
be respected. We stress the right of Iraqis to determine
their own political future and the importance of a
strong, vital role for the United Nations in Iraq,
particularly in supervising the constitutional and
election processes and setting a timetable for the end of
the occupation. There is the speeding up of the transfer
of power to the Iraqis themselves, supporting the
efforts of the Iraqi Governing Council in its transitional
responsibilities towards the election of a representative
Iraqi Government, and reasserting the responsibility of
the Coalition authorities in accordance with relevant
Security Council resolutions and international law.
Terrorist bombings that target civilians and essential
humanitarian institutions, international organizations
and diplomatic missions are condemned, and the need
to find the perpetrators and bring them to justice for
their criminal acts is stressed. Finally, there is a call to
competent Iraqi authorities to cooperate with
neighbouring countries in order to eradicate the threat
of terrorism and to avoid any infiltration through
borders of neighbouring countries by terrorists.

We have considered the declaration by the
Governing Council on the political processes to take
place in the coming period in Iraq. In this regard, and
along with other members of the Security Council, we
await the Governing Council's presentation of a
timeline and programme for drafting a new constitution
and holding democratic elections in accordance with
the terms of paragraph 7 of Security Council resolution
1511 (2003).

Syria believes that any plan to save Iraq from its
current situation must involve all sectors of the Iraqi
population with all various social and political
affiliations. This would ensure the territorial integrity,

Sll'V.4869

 

sovereignty and political independence of Iraq. We
believe that it is necessary for the United Nations to
have a major, effective and vital role in both political
and humanitarian activities in Iraq.

We also stress the major role that neighbouring
countries may undertake in attempting to solve the
various problems now facing Iraq. In that regard, we
need the expertise and capabilities of the United
Nations as the only organization with such abilities and
potentials.

Our brothers in Iraq are now undergoing a most
difficult period in their history because of the
prevailing chaos and the lack of a dignified life. Syria,
a country that is tied to the people of Iraq by history
and geography, cannot but be concerned at
developments taking place in Iraq today. Proceeding
from this, we believe that preserving the fundamental
interests of the Iraqi people, ensuring a life of dignity
for them and restoring the conditions for social and
political stability in the country also serve Syria's
interests.

We would therefore renew our appeal, which is
accepted by most members of the Security Council, to
work to put an end, as soon as possible, to the
occupation of Iraq so as to maintain its territorial
integrity and the unity of its people and to ensure the
election of a national Government that fully and
faithfully represents all segments of Iraqi society and
that would lift the plight currently endured by the Iraqi
people. We look forward to Iraq regaining its
sovereignty and the role that befit its history,
civilization and capabilities.

