Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): As
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, I am
pleased to brief the Council about the work carried out
by the Committee since its last report, in September
2006.

At the outset, I would like to thank the members
of the Security Council for the trust they have placed in
Panama to preside over the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. I assure them that I will devote every
effort to preside over the Committee while upholding
its guiding principles of transparency, impartiality and
uniformity of approach.

During the current period, the Committee adopted
its work programme for coming quarter. Based on that
work programme, the Committee is currently focusing
its activities on three main areas, namely, monitoring
and promoting the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001); providing technical assistance to States in a
dynamic manner on two fronts; and maintaining
dialogue with States on the implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005).

With regard to monitoring and promoting the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), the
Committee, working through its subcommittees, has
been considering the Preliminary Implementation
Assessments of Member States, which have been
prepared by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED). To date, the Executive
Directorate has submitted 171 Preliminary
Implementation Assessments, with 27 of those having
been approved by subcommittees. The Committee
expects that all such assessments will have been
submitted by the end of May 2007, thereby giving the
Committee a comprehensive picture of the status of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

In the process of analysing and approving
Preliminary Implementation Assessments, the
Committee will also be able to ascertain the respective
3
technical assistance needs of States. With the consent
of the countries concerned, those needs will be
conveyed to potential donors. However, I must point
out that, given the fact that the Committee has yet to
agree on a standardized cover letter to accompany
those assessments, the Committee has been unable to
begin to assess the assessments that have been
approved in the subcommittees.

In the coming weeks, the Committee will carry
out an overall evaluation of the status of the
implementation by Member States of the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001). That will be based on a
working document prepared by the Executive
Directorate for that purpose. Among other things, that
document will be based on information included in the
Preliminary Implementation Assessments and will
enable the Committee to develop mechanisms that are
better tailored to the individual needs of countries that
might benefit from special attention as regards Visits
and technical assistance.

Another important tool employed by the
Committee to assess the implementation by States of
resolution 1373 (2001) are the on-site visits aimed at
evaluating the implementation on the ground of
resolution 1373 (2001) and at identifying potential
technical assistance needs. Many of those visits include
the participation of representatives from other
international organizations, as well as representatives
from the Monitoring Team that assists the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999).

The Committee is currently considering the
reports of last year's visits to India and Pakistan. The
Committee recently concluded its visit to Turkey and
will visit Bangladesh in the coming weeks.
Furthermore, Afghanistan, Armenia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Egypt, Georgia, Indonesia, Saudi Arabia,
Uzbekistan and Viet Nam have consented to visits. The
Committee looks forward to receiving the consent of
other countries to be visited. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Governments of Member
States for their valuable cooperation in the preparations
for the Committee's visits, which will certainly
advance our common efforts to end the scourge of
terrorism.

Lastly, with regard to the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), the Committee will continue to
encourage Member States to ratify and implement the 16
international counter-terrorism instruments. Recently, the
Committee considered an analysis prepared by the
Executive Directorate on the progress made by States in
adopting and implementing the relevant international
conventions and protocols related to terrorism.

With regard to facilitating technical assistance to
States, the Committee is considering a technical
assistance action plan for 2007 that has been prepared
by the Executive Directorate. It is expected that that
will bear fruit in the coming months. As it has been put
forward, the action plan sets out a road map for future
work with donors and recipients of assistance aimed at
helping recipients to speed up the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). The Committee has also
approved a new and updated technical assistance
matrix that will serve as a crucial tool in that process.

Making use of its experience in facilitating the
provision of technical assistance to the States of the
Pacific Islands Forum, and working through its
Executive Directorate, the Committee is developing
similar programmes for the Economic Community of
West African States and the Caribbean Community.

The Committee is continuing to strengthen its
relations and is cooperating with international, regional
and subregional organizations. In that regard, the
Committee is working on the arrangements for the
Committee's fifth special meeting with those
organizations, which will take place in Nairobi in
October 2007. The meeting will be held on the themes
of preventing the movement of terrorists and effective
border security. In addition, the Committee recently
adopted an action plan to follow-up its four previous
special meetings with international, regional and
subregional organizations.

Likewise, in the context of strengthening our
relations with international organizations devoted to
combating terrorism, the Committee was briefed by Mr.
Alexey Kuzyura, Chairperson of the Working Group of
the Meeting of Heads of Special Services, Security
Agencies and Law-Enforcement Organizations.

With regard to dialogue with States on the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005), the
Committee, with the support of the Executive
Directorate, will continue to inform the Council about
the implementation by Member States of that
resolution, as well as about the efforts undertaken to
encourage countries that have not yet reported to do so.
07-35274
The Committee is continuing to evaluate the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005). We
acknowledge that it is a complex endeavour and has
diverse legal and constitutional frameworks that
require varying national approaches. The Committee
will also continue to examine the scope and potential
need for the provision of international technical
assistance in that area.

Finally, in addition to the three main areas of
activity identified in the Committee's work
programme, the Committee is carrying out several
functions that are part of its daily work. One of those is
to promote best practices and standards related to the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001). In that regard,
the Committee is working to identify and compile such
practices, with a view to helping Member States to
fully comply with their obligations.

The Committee is also continuing to play its part
in the implementation of United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Consequently, the
Committee, through its Executive Directorate, is
participating actively in the work of the
Implementation Task Force in the areas assigned to it
in the resolution adopted by the General Assembly,
which relate to enhancing the capacity of Member
States to prevent and combat terrorism. The Committee
is also assisting Member States to implement those
provisions of the Strategy that fall within its mandate.

Furthermore, the Counter-Terrorism Committee will
continue to explore ways of improving interaction and
cooperation with the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004), as well as their
expert groups. In that regard, under the common strategy
developed together with the expert groups of the other
two Security Council committees and the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate, the Committee will
continue to pay special attention to those Members that
are late in submitting relevant information on their efforts
to implement resolution 1373 (2001).

Before concluding, I would personally like to
thank Mr. Javier Ruperez and all the staff of the
Executive Directorate for their commitment both to the
fight against terrorism and to the Committee. In
addition, as this will be the last briefing that
Mr. Ruperez will attend in his capacity as Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, I would
also like to wish the Executive Director the best of luck
in his future endeavours.
