Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Security Council has had a very intense month. We
adopted eight resolutions, including ones on combating
terrorism and cross-border criminal organizations,
and issued four presidential statements on the Central
African region and the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA),
among other items. China greatly appreciates Chad's
proactive and effective work at the helm of the Council,
and its successful leadership of our work.

With regard to the Council's work this month,
I would like to focus on three issues. The first is the
situation in the Middle East. China is deeply concerned
about the continuing tension between Palestine and
Israel and the recurring bloodshed that has resulted in
many innocent civilian casualties. We urge Palestine
and Israel to exercise restraint and take steps to ease
tensions, rebuild mutual trust and restart the peace
talks. China has been closely following the peace
process in the Middle East, and has pushed for peace and
negotiations. We firmly support using the good offices
of the international community and the due role of the
Council. We welcome the draft resolution proposed by
Jordan on the question of Palestine and Israel and hope
the Council will act as soon as possible to respond to
the legitimate concerns of the Arab countries.

Secondly, on the question of Africa, the Council
has discussed items on Libya, South Sudan, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the situation in Central Africa and the LRA.
At the initiative of Chad, as President of the Council,
the Council held an open meeting (see S/PV.7343)
and adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2014/27
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU), in which the Council expressed
its wish to establish more effective relations with the
Peace and Security Council of the AU and called on
the international community to increase its efforts
to improve peace and security in Africa. China has
always been a constructive participant in that area, and
is ready to work with the international community to
promote enhanced cooperation with the African Union
in peacekeeping and help Africa achieve its goal of a
conflict-free continent by 2020.

Thirdly, regarding the issue of counter-terrorism,
the recent numerous terrorist attacks have taken a
heavy toll. Terrorism now takes place in broader
geographical areas, and the means that terrorists resort
to are increasingly cruel. That presents a serious threat
to international peace and security. The international
community must adhere to uniform criteria in dealing
with this and abide by the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, respecting countries'
sovereignty, while the United Nations and the Security
Council must play the leading role. We must take
steps to cut off terrorist financing and channels for
recruiting members and obtaining equipment. We
should recognize the importance of the links between
terrorist and criminal organizations, and prevent and
combat terrorist organizations that use the Internet and
information and communications technology in order to
engage in terrorist activities, with a view to maintaining
international and regional peace and stability.

In conclusion, I would like to wish Chile the very
best when it assumes the presidency of the Council in
January.

