Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, Madam President, allow me to say that
we are pleased to see you presiding over this meeting.
We appreciate your personal presence, we appreciate
the delegation of Colombia's having organized this
open debate and we appreciate the excellent concept
paper you have prepared to guide our deliberations
(S/2012/511, annex). We also wish to express our
thanks to the Secretary-General for his statement and
to the secretariat for the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission (S/2012/70), which covers the proceedings
of its fifth session.

Guatemala was a Member State of the Commission
during the period under consideration and even had the
honour of holding one of the Vice-Chairs. We therefore
can relate to the contents of the report, in both its
informational and analytical aspects. We especially
appreciate the detailed information on each of the
countries belonging to specific configurations when it
comes to the main functions ofthe Commission, namely,
political advocacy and support, resource mobilization
and fostering coherence.

We are grateful for the statements made by
Ambassadors Gasana and Momen and by Mr. Von
Amsberg of the World Bank, whom we welcome here
today.

What gave life to the Peacebuilding Commission
in 2005 was a very simple idea, conceptually speaking.
The United Nations had accumulated 60 years of solid
experience in both peacekeeping and development.
The time had come to capitalize on those experiences,
crystallizing them in a specialized entity that would
apply the lessons learned in both areas to countries
emerging from conflict - in other words, in
peacebuilding processes.

A corollary to that idea is reflected in the
institutional aspect, since three of the principal
inter-governmental organs - the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and the Security
Council - addressed different aspects of peacemaking
or peacebuilding. What could be better than creating
a specialized body linked to those three organs that
would foster greater coherence within the United
Nations system in addressing specifically the situation
of countries emerging from conflict?

As will be recalled, the Commission was created
through concurrent resolutions 60/180 of the General
Assembly and 1645 (2005) ofthe Security Council, after
a relatively prolonged negotiation period. Furthermore,
the possibility of modifying the forum was agreed to,
by establishing a five-year review process.

Consequently,in2010threeofourcolleagues-from
South Africa, Mexico and Ireland - provided the
Council with their report (S/2010/393, annex), which
tries to reflect the opposing views within the United
Nations regarding the performance of the Commission.
The main conclusion of the three co-facilitators can
be characterized in a single phrase: the hopes that
accompanied the creation of the Commission "have yet
to be realized". The report contains recommendations
that seek to close the gap between expectations and
results. The General Assembly and the Security Council
so aligned themselves in adopting General Assembly
resolution 65/7 and Security Council resolution 1947
(2010).

In a brief statement it is neither possible nor
appropriate to address the multiple issues raised both
in the co-facilitators' report and in the Commission's
report before us. For that reason we are grateful to the
Colombian presidency for its concept paper, which
ends with three questions that will help us to focus our
remaining remarks. I shall be brief.

First, how can the Commission realize its potential
to provide added value to the web of institutions
dedicated to similar roles? In our judgment, if the
Commission would fully comply with its mandate its
added value would be self-evident, since, contrary to
the question's implication, its role is unique. It does not
need to compete with other forums to gain attention
or space. The way to highlight its role is to improve
its capacity to create partnerships within and outside
of the United Nations. Within the Organization, owing
to the constitution of its membership, it can be said
that the Commission is a product of the three principal
intergovernmental organs I have mentioned, and as such
forms a hinge between them, thereby strengthening the
role of each.
Furthermore, the Commission represents a meeting
point among the Security Council - whose mandate
is limited to maintaining international peace and
security 4 the General Assembly and, above all, the
Economic and Social Council, which have mandates in
the area of development and democratic governance.
Of course, the dividing line between peace-making
and peacebuilding is hazy, but precisely for that reason
a good understanding between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission would enhance
compliance with each organ's mandates, especially in
the field.

However, our perception is that in practice each
forum carries out its activities separately. In other
words, the frequent invocations of coordinated efforts
are more rhetorical than operational. That must end
and give way to genuine alliances. The same can be
said regarding alliances outside of the United Nations,
especially among the international financial institutions.
Some progress has been achieved in that connection,
especially regarding the World Bank and the African
Development Bank. But we believe that there is still a
long way to go.

Secondly, what tools should the Commission utilize
to expand its potential in each of its three main functions
to have a greater impact in the field? In our brief
experience in the Commission, we perceived the greatest
potential at the level of the country configurations,
which have clearly had a positive impact on the ground,
but could be strengthened even more. The leadership
of the configurations plays a critical role, and so the
selection of their Chairs merits special care. Theu do
not necessarily have to be limited to the pool of United
Nations accredited Permanent Representatives; one
could also consider notable persons from outside of the
Organization.

The other instrument that clearly has had an
important impact, with intrinsic value as well as a
catalytic element for the other root functions of the
Commission, is the Peacebuilding Fund. A call should
be made to the entire donor community to replenish the
Fund with fresh resources, since, in our opinion, and
as the Secretary-General indicated this morning, it has
been the most successful element of the United Nations
efforts in the area of peacebuilding.

Thirdly, what can Member States contribute,
individuallyandcollectively,toempowertheCommission
and bring it closer to meeting its core objectives? The
Commission, like any intergovernmental organ, is
the product of the responsible guidance and support
of the Member States and the enlightened support of
its secretariat. Up to now, the demands to expand the
number of country configurations has collided with
the finite capacity of the secretariat to handle a larger
volume of activity. In other words, we must support
the Secretariat and continue to support our active
participation in this forum with the dedication, care
and, I would even say, sacrifice that many countries
have demonstrated over the past five years.

The Peacebuilding Commission has become one
of those cases that we frequently encounter that is
characterized by the "glass half full" syndrome. We
believe that there is the potential to fill the other half of
the proverbial glass and transform the Commission into
what it was expected to be when our Heads of State and
Government adopted the 2005 World Summit Outcome
(resolution 60/1). Both the report of the co-facilitators
of 2010 and the most recent report of the Commission
suggest ways to achieve this goal.

