Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate and for the useful
concept note you have provided (S/2014/238/annex). We
appreciate the leading role of Nigeria in shaping and
promoting a deeper understanding of the critical issue
of security sector reform (SSR). The draft resolution
introduced today is a key element of this process and I
am pleased to say that Italy has co-sponsored it.

I should also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing and for his precious engagement in
this matter, which has produced the report before us
today (S/2013/480). This document gives us a very
clear picture of the state of the art, clearly defines the
challenges we face and suggests priority avenues of
action for the future.

Italy aligns itself with the statement made by
Ambassador Mayr-Harting on behalf of the European
Union, and I should like to make some remarks in my
national capacity.

We attach Vital importance to security sector
reform in countries emerging from conflict. The
malfunctioning or mismanagement of this sector
exposes society to continual fear and danger of violent
death, making civilian life increasingly solitary, poor,
nasty, brutish and short. Max Weber famously defined
the State as any human community that successfully
claims the monopoly of the legitimate use of physical
force within a given territory. In line with this traditional
definition, the security sector is indeed the backbone
of the modern State. We must realize, however, that
the concept of security has long shifted from a State-
and military-centric perspective to an approach that
emphasizes human security and the legitimacy and
effectiveness of the institutions that provide security
and justice.

The establishment of an effective, professional
and accountable security sector is thus of crucial
importance to reducing the potential for internal and
external conflict, enhancing the security of citizens,
and creating the necessary conditions for development.
The existence of a symbiotic, self-enforcing relationship
between security and development has long been
established in the literature on international relations
and in the policies and practices of States.

Helping and supporting national authorities in
their efforts to build an effective, democratically
run security sector is a long-term process. It must be
carried out consistent with the overarching principle
of national ownership. In fact, the countries concerned
have the sovereign right and the primary responsibility
to determine their national approach and to outline
their priorities for security sector reform. At the
same time, the States concerned and the international
community as a whole should enhance their efforts to
promote inclusiveness in the SSR process by bringing
in civil society and vulnerable groups. A particularly
critical element, in Italy's view, is the involvement of
women in the peace and security discussion and their
participation in the national armed and security forces.

Italy is proud of its long-standing support of SSR
processes in South-Eastern Europe, the Middle East,
Asia and Africa at the national level and through
international and intergovernmental organizations such
as NATO, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and the European Union. We are
particularly proud of the internationally recognized
role of the Centre of Excellence for Stability Police
Units (CoESPU), based in Vicenza in northern Italy,
which will soon share its headquarters with the NATO
Stability Policing Centre ofExcellence. CoESPU makes
an outstanding contribution to international efforts to
enhance the effectiveness and professionalism of police
and security agencies worldwide at both the theoretical
and practical levels. The Centre operates as a doctrinal
hub and a training centre. It develops doctrine and
common operational procedures for the employment
of Stability Police Units and the promotion of the
rule of law, and teaches operational planning, rules of
engagement and international and humanitarian law to
personnel from throughout the world.

In closing, I am pleased that the hard lessons
learned by our brave men and women in the field
dovetail with the recommendations put forth in the
Secretary-General's report. Restoring public order
is unfortunately a necessary but elusive condition of
post-conflict situations. In order to avoid a relapse into
conflict, achieve a durable peace and pave the way to
socioeconomic developmentn we must develop and
implement an organic and comprehensive approach
to SSR - an approach inspired by the principles of
inclusiveness, effectiveness, accountability and good
governance, and designed to achieve the ultimate
objectives of increasing the security of the people and
rebuilding the bonds of trust between public authorities
and their citizens.

