Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): First,
Mr. President, I would like to join other delegations in
thanking you and your collaborators for all you have done
to make the adoption of today's resolution possible.

After almost a year of profound disagreements and
arduous negotiations, the Council has at last been able to
find sufficient common ground to begin a new phase in
its policy with respect to Iraq. The Netherlands voted for
the resolution that has just been adopted because it
believes that a new basis for Council action regarding
Iraq is needed and because the advantages of this
resolution outweigh its disadvantages.

Ever since the Netherlands joined the United
Kingdom in submitting a first draft for this resolution, it
has been our fervent desire to see it adopted with the
concurring votes of all Council members. In that light, we
have been prepared to go along with a large number of
concessions in order to accommodate other views. The
current resolution is, in fact, a considerable distance
removed from the British-Dutch draft of April and is
actually much closer to the position of those who had
made counter-proposals. However, over the past few
months - that is, after the permanent five had taken
possession of the drafting process - it became clear that
the price for enabling Russia, China and France to vote
for the resolution was a higher one than my delegation
was prepared to pay. In the end, we had to accept that a
consensus was not possible if we wished to remain
faithful to our objective of establishing a genuine and
credible reinforced ongoing monitoring and verification
system.
 

This morning several delegations also expressed regret
that it was not possible to reach consensus. But we are not
convinced that all delegations were really ready to vote in
favour once their concerns had been met, or that they had
an interest in voting for any resolution unwelcome to
Baghdad. This could explain why the many amendments
incorporated into the text did not lead to a change in the
voting pattern that could already have been predicted
months ago. Rarely have so many concessions gone so
unrewarded.

The current argument for holding out for a consensus
is that only if all Council members vote for the resolution
will Iraq be ready to cooperate and allow the inspectors
back into the country.

We have never found this a very convincing argument.
In the statements made by the Iraqi authorities, we have
found no indication at all that they would be prepared to
cooperate with the Security Council other than on the basis
of an unconditional lifting of the sanctions, and no member
of the Council has shown any readiness to meet that
condition. That is why it does not make a great deal of
difference that our resolution was not adopted by
consensus. Article 27 of the United Nations Charter
describes how Council decisions are made, and Article 25
stipulates that every Member of the United Nations is
obliged to accept and carry out such decisions. Nothing in
the Charter allots a higher degree of legitimacy to a
Security Council resolution that is adopted by consensus.

Accordingly, regardless of the result of the vote, the
new resolution is the law of the land.

Given their well-known position, no one expects the
Iraqi authorities to promise cooperation, let alone welcome
the new resolution. But the new situation is a reality, and
we sincerely hope that Iraq will soon begin to recognize the
promising openings it is being offered by the international
community. For the Netherlands, the primary objective has
always been the implementation of the disarmament
obligations which the Council imposed on Iraq after that
country had attempted to wipe a sovereign State off the
map. Iraq must never again be able to threaten its
neighbours or develop or otherwise acquire weapons of
mass destruction. The previous arms control regime, which
the Security Council established in 1991 and which it
operated through the activities of the United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), was instrumental in
finding and destroying Iraqi weapons of mass destruction.
UNSCOM. and IAEA did an excellent job in the face of
continual Iraqi obstruction and deception. We pay tribute
to the commitment and perseverance of their leaders and
staff members.

The current resolution represents a shift in the
Council's approach to Iraq, from active disarmament to
ongoing monitoring and verification, while retaining the
possibility of addressing unresolved disarmament issues,
known as OMV-plus. However, the concessions referred
to earlier will make it considerably more difficult -
although, we believe, not impossible - to achieve the
Council's objectives. The text contains ambiguities which
must not be allowed to undermine the effectiveness of the
OMV-plus regime. It asks considerably less in the way of
Iraqi performance before a possible suspension of
sanctions than we would have considered desirable. The
complex organizational system envisaged can all too
easily lead to misguided micromanagement and
operational paralysis of the new arms control body, the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC). We can accept the result, but
this is not a text that the Netherlands would have
sponsored in April.

Before the new system can start to become
operational, the Council will be asked to approve various
steps. That will be the opportunity for making sure that
the OMV-plus regime established by this resolution will
be effective. The Netherlands also calls on the newly
elected Council members to be vigilant on that score.

In this Council, a great deal has been said about the
need for Iraq to see light at the end of the tunnel. The
thoughtless use of this phrase almost made it sound as if
the Council had locked Iraq up in a dark cave with no
exit. However, the existing resolutions, in particular
resolution 687 (1991), already clearly illuminate the exit:
sanctions will be lifted once Iraq has complied fully with
the obligations imposed by the Security Council. The
present resolution adds significantly to that by offering
Iraq a possible suspension of sanctions well before full
compliance. This is a completely new element in the
Council's approach to the question of Iraq, and an
important political step. For this suspension to materialize,
Iraq must have cooperated with UNMOVIC and IAEA in
all respects for a period of 120 days, in particular in
fulfilling, in all the aspects referred to in this resolution,
the work programmes to be drawn up by UNMOVIC and
IAEA and to be approved by the Council.

Let me be clear about our understanding of the word
"cooperation": it involves much more than just a

 

constructive attitude on the part of Iraq. To cooperate is to
act together. It is not so much a question of attitude as of
performance. Thus, it will be up to the Government of Iraq
itself to trigger the suspension of the sanctions.

As I mentioned earlier, it is not realistic to expect an
early positive signal from Baghdad. It is precisely for that
reason that I, in my dual capacity as representative of the
Netherlands and Chairman of the sanctions Committee
established pursuant to Security Council resolution 661
(1990), am relieved that the present resolution provides for
a considerable enhancement of the humanitarian
programme, which will be implemented irrespective of
whether or not the Iraqi regime chooses to cooperate with
the Security Council. Since 1991, the Council has made it
clear that sanctions were imposed only to contain and
coerce the Government of Iraq, and it has taken steps to
minimize the adverse effects which they had on the people
of Iraq.

Section C of this resolution forms a significant further
step in shielding the people of Iraq as much as possible
from the consequences of the defiant behaviour of their
Government. A number of steps provided for in section C
will have to be taken by the sanctions Committee. I trust
that all delegations on that Committee, including those
which today have abstained on the present resolution, will
join me in tackling these matters as vigorously as possible.

