Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): May I
first of all welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, Mr. Vuk Jeremie, and the Kosovar Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Skender Hyseni. I also welcome
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Lamberto Zannier.

Since our last debate on Kosovo, last July, the
reality on the ground has continued to evolve, as can be
seen from the report of the Secretary-General. The
Kosovar authorities have taken tangible measures to
consolidate the status of their new State. The
constitution entered into force on 15 June; legislative
activity continued in several important areas, and new
institutions have been established.

These and other measures are described in the
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/692)
and I shall not speak of them at length. The report also
describes in detail the steps taken by the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative to adapt the
United Nations presence to the new reality. As my

08-6204]
delegation said at the last meeting on this subject (see S/PV.5944), this shows realism and a real sense of
responsibility. We therefore believe that these decisions
merit our full support.

Let me briefly stress three points that are of
particular importance to my delegation. First, it is
important that the process of the adaptation and
reconfiguration of the international presence and its
composition continue and even accelerate, in the light
of the reality that the Secretary-General describes in
his report. Such a reconfiguration of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) should be accompanied by an accelerated
deployment of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission (EULEX), which, once it is operational, will
carry out its rule of law functions throughout Kosovo
in the interests of all citizens of Kosovo.

In Belgium's view, the deployment of the
European Mission is of paramount importance, as
evidenced by our contribution and active involvement
in EULEX. Here, Belgium appreciates UNMIK's
cooperation with EULEX, including on technical
modalities, and we encourage UNMIK to further
intensify its cooperation in the coming weeks, to
ensure the full implementation of the EULEX mandate.

My second point relates to the responsibility of
the two parties concerned, whose representatives have
joined us at this table. The international organizations
such as the United Nations and the European Union are
not the only ones who have responsibilities to shoulder.
I note with satisfaction that both parties have agreed to
the deployment of EULEX throughout the territory and
to the reconfiguration of the international presence, as
described in the report of the Secretary-General.

We have heard that, on some points, the positions
of Belgrade and Pristina still differ. But it is reassuring
that on other issues - first and foremost, on
cooperation with the international community - both
parties have demonstrated a certain level of
pragmatism and a sense of responsibility. Compromise
is never easy, but it is sometimes necessary. Belgium
encourages the two parties to continue to develop
productive working relationships that can foster
stability and regional cooperation.

Finally, Belgium hopes that today the Security
Council will be in a position to take note of these
positive developments.

