The President (interpretation from French): As this
is the first meeting of the Security Council for the month
of February, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to Mr. Alain Dejammet,
Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations,
for his service as President of the Security Council for the
month of January. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Security Council in expressing my sincere appreciation to
Ambassador Dejammet for the great diplomatic skill with
which he guided the work of the Council last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic

Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution 1136 (1997) concerning the situation in
the Central African Republic (S/1998/61)

The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 1136 (1997)
concerning the situation in the Central African Republic,
document S/1998/61.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/l998/102, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/1998/86,
letter dated 30 January 1998 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council;
S/1998/88, letter dated 28 January 1998 from the President
of the Central African Republic addressed to the President
of the Security Council; and S/ 1998/97, letter dated 4
February 1998 from the President of the Republic of Gabon
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall first give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.


