Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, for her briefing. We express our
gratitude to the Technical Secretariat, the Declaration
Assessment Team and the Fact-finding Mission in
the Syrian Arab Republic of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for their
professional work and commitment to serving our
common goal of a world free of chemical weapons. Let
me reiterate that Poland takes note of the fact that the
OPCW Technical Secretariat has verified the destruction
of all declared chemical weapons-production facilities.
At the same time, we hope that communication between
the OPCW and Syria will continue so that all existing
gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies with regard to
the Syrian initial declaration can be clarified. We also
thank the Fact-finding Mission for its interim report
on activities related to the incident in Douma. We are
looking forward to the Mission's final report.

We are already discussing the fifty-ninth OPCW
report today, which means that for almost five years
the Security Council and international community have
been unable to mitigate the threat posed by chemical
weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic. It does not
mean, however, that this body is incapable of doing so.
The establishment of the OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism demonstrated that, when the
Council is united around the common goal ofcountering
weapons of mass destruction, it can work effectively.

Poland continues to condemn the use of chemical
weapons anywhere, including in Syria, and is firmly
convinced that those responsible for chemical attacks
must be held accountable. It is crucial to preserving the
integrity of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC).
Therefore, we are looking forward to the development
by the OPCW of arrangements necessary to identify the
perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons in Syria,
in accordance with the decision of the fourth special
session of the Conference of States Parties to the CWC.

