The Secretary-General: This Council has a very
heavy responsibility to promote justice and the rule of
law in its efforts to maintain international peace and
security. This applies both internationally and in
rebuilding shattered societies. It is the latter that I wish
to speak about today.

The United Nations, through many complex
operations, has learned that the rule of law is not a
luxury and that justice is not a side issue. We have seen
people lose faith in a peace process when they do not
feel safe from crime, or secure in returning to their
homes, or able to start rebuilding the elements of a
normal life, or confident that the injustices of the past
will be addressed. We have seen that without credible
machinery to enforce the law and resolve disputes,
people resort to violent or illegal means. And we have
seen that elections held when the rule of law is too
fragile seldom lead to lasting democratic governance.

In addressing these issues, sensitive questions are
involved - questions of sovereignty, tradition and
security, justice and reconciliation. The task is not
simply technically difficult. It is politically delicate. It
requires us to facilitate the national formulation and
implementation of an agenda to address these issues, to
cultivate the political will and leadership for that task
and to build a wide constituency for the process.

Last year, we assembled a Task Force on the Rule
of Law in Peace Operations. Its final report showed the
real breadth of United Nations experience and expertise
in this field. But it also demonstrated that we need to
do much more.

We must take a comprehensive approach to
justice and the rule of law. It should encompass the
entire criminal justice chain - not just police, but
lawyers, prosecutors, judges and prison officers, as
well as many issues beyond the criminal justice system.
We must make better use of the resources we have. We
have taken steps in-house to help all agencies work
together so that we can identify issues of justice and
the rule of law in our reports to this Council. I hope
that will lead to improved decisions by the Council and
better action in the field so that justice and rule of law
components are integral parts of peace operations.

We need more resources, of many kinds. The best
mandates will get us nowhere without early, adequate
and coordinated funding. We also need high-quality
personnel - women as well as men - who can be
deployed quickly. We may have to reach outside the
United Nations system to fill in gaps or make up for
shortfalls in our expertise.

We must base United Nations actions in this area
in the Charter, in United Nations standards for human
rights and the administration of justice and in the
principles of international humanitarian law, human
rights law, refugee law and criminal law.

But a one-size-fits-all approach does not work.
Local actors must be involved from the start - local
justice sector officials and experts from government,
civil society and the private sector. We should,
wherever possible, guide rather than direct, and
reinforce rather than replace. The aim must be to leave
behind strong local institutions when we depart.

Have we taken these lessons to heart? Liberia will
be the test case. The Council has responded to my
recommendations by incorporating important rule of
law components in authorizing the deployment of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). I hope
that rule of law issues will retain their importance
through the budgeting and deployment process, and I
hope that the Council will build on this approach in the
future in addressing other post-conflict situations.

Let me say a few words about the question of
justice for victims of past crimes.

Ending the climate of impunity is vital to
restoring public confidence and building international
support to implement peace agreements. At the same
time, we should remember that the process of
achieving justice for victims may take many years, and
it must not come at the expense of the more immediate
need to establish the rule of law on the ground.

Transitional justice mechanisms need to
concentrate not only on individual responsibility for
serious crimes, but also on the need to achieve national
reconciliation. We need to tailor criminal justice
mechanisms to meet the needs of victims and victim
societies. If necessary, we should supplement courts
with mechanisms such as truth and reconciliation
commissions.

At times, the goals of justice and reconciliation
compete with each other. Each society needs to form a
view about how to strike the right balance between
them. Nevertheless, in striking that balance, certain
international standards must be adhered to. There
should be no amnesties for war crimes, genocide,
crimes against humanity or other serious violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law. The
rights of the accused should be scrupulously protected.

We should know that there cannot be real peace
without justice, yet the relentless pursuit of justice may
sometimes be an obstacle to peace. If we insist, at all
times and in all places, on punishing those who are
guilty of extreme violations of human rights, it may be
difficult or even impossible to stop the bloodshed and
save innocent civilians. If we always and everywhere
insist on uncompromising standards of justice, a
delicate peace may not survive. But equally, if we
ignore the demands of justice simply to secure
agreement, the, foundations of that agreement will be
fragile, and we will set bad precedents.

There are no easy answers to such moral, legal
and philosophical dilemmas. At times, we may need to
accept something less than full or perfect justice or to
devise intermediate solutions such as truth and
reconciliation commissions. We may need to put off the
day when the guilty are brought to trial. At other times,
we may need to accept, in the short-term, a degree of
risk to peace in the hope that in the long-term peace
will be more securely guaranteed.

These are delicate problems for the United
Nations to handle when it is involved in peace
negotiations. Since 1999 I have given my envoys
guidelines to assist them in such negotiations. They
also present difficult dilemmas for this Council. In
each case, the Council must attempt to balance the
demands of peace and justice, conscious that they often
compete and aware that there may be times when they
cannot fully be reconciled.

We have learned that the rule of law delayed is
lasting peace denied and that justice is a handmaiden of
true peace. Implementing these lessons is a tremendous
challenge. I have today offered a few reflections on
how we might meet that challenge. But I would also be
prepared to make a further contribution to the
deliberations of the Council on this issue. Above all, I
hope that today's meeting heralds a new commitment
from the Council to place issues of justice and the rule
of law at the heart of its work in rebuilding war-torn
countries.

