Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to convey some good news to the Security Council and its anti-terrorism subsidiary bodies, as well as to the international community. The Syrian Arab army and its allies have liberated the city of Maarat al-Numan, which is on the road between Idlib and Aleppo. Of course, the liberation of that historic city is of the utmost importance. Now that we have eradicated terrorism from Maarat al-Numan, we must liberate the two nearby small towns Saraqib and Ariha. Only then will we be able to reopen Aleppo airport, and that is the crux of the matter. This is important information. Reopening Aleppo airport would mean that we no longer need cross-border aid operations, especially through the intelligence centre in Turkish Gaziantep. We in the Government are working with our allies to liberate that area. This, of course, runs counter to the plans of some who would like to continue cross-border aid operations. Reopening Aleppo airport would mean that we no longer need cross-border aid operations. From what I understood from the statements of some present, they do not want us to reopen Aleppo airport so that they can continue to interfere in our domestic affairs through cross-border aid operations. As usual, we have heard Secretariat officials and representatives deliver identical statements on the suffering of the Syrian people in the current crisis. Some presented fabricated figures and played around with them; some spoke of 3 million or 4 million civilians in Idlib. In fact, the accurate figure is 800,000 civilians in Idlib, plus 90,000 terrorists; if we add their families, we get 300,000. So overall we have 1.1 million civilians and mostly foreign terrorists and their families. Some stated that there are approximately 3 million in the north-east of Syria, thousands in Rukban camp and thousands more in Al-Hol camp. However, over the past nine years no one, not even the Under-Secretary- General, has spoken of the suffering and the difficult living conditions of all Syrians inside and outside the country as a result of terrorism, under its various names; as a result of occupation by various occupying forces by means of various forms of aggression; and as a result of the unilateral coercive economic measures imposed by various countries. I would like to thank my friend the Chinese Ambassador for having addressed this highly important matter. What I would like to focus on today, in our commitment to conveying to the Council the concerns of the Syrian people, is a form of terrorism that is complementary to the armed violence of the terrorist organizations designated by the Security Council and associated entities, namely, economic terrorism and the policies of collective punishment applied by some Governments of Member States to dissuade us from making our own choices and from having our own national positions. This is in flagrant violation of international law and the Charter of the United Nations. It is inconsistent with the principle of sovereign equality among States. It is inconsistent with all human rights instruments and the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The tune those Westerncountries are playing day and night, claiming that they want to empower all Member States and to ensure that no one is left behind. That is what they are saying. I am just repeating what they are saying - do not kill the messenger. It seems that they interpret this phrase as eliminating others so that they can move on and no one else is left behind. Today all Syrians - around 24 million of them - are suffering. Not 1, not 2, not 10 million - 24 million Syrians are suffering under a wide array of coercive measures that affect their daily lives. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) is shamefully ignoring our repeated appeals to accord this issue the importance that it deserves, at least in its reports. Even more shameful are the responses that we get from OCHA representatives in closed consultations. They say that they are not allowed to speak about this matter, as their careers would be affected or they might be punished or even sacked. That excuse is worse than the crime, especially coming from people who are supposed to be carrying out a noble humanitarian mission in a professional, impartial and humanitarian way. OCHA has issued 64 written reports and hundreds of briefings without a single reference to the Syrian children suffering from bitter cold in schools, hospitals and homes without heating as a result of coercive measures that prevent us from importing fuel to compensate for our national oil and gas, which are plundered by the proudly American occupiers. The American occupiers claim that they love Syrian oil and gas. Today, we heard the American Ambassador ask the Syrian Government and _ its Russian ally to deliver humanitarian aid to Rukban camp in the Al-Tanf area. That is what we heard a while ago from the United States Ambassador. The United States of America is occupying the Al-Tanf area in Syria, where it is protecting and arming a terrorist group called Maghawir al-Thawra, which attacked the city of As-Suwayda in the south two years ago and massacred hundreds of civilians at 4 a.m. Men, women and children were massacred, at 4 a.m. The terrorist group that attacked As-Suwayda massacred hundreds of civilians and kidnapped dozens of women and children is sponsored by the United States of America in the Al-Tanf area. Nevertheless, my American colleague is asking us and our allies to allow the delivery of humanitarian aid to Rukban camp and the Al-Tanf area, meaning that the Americans are occupying our territory, sponsoring a terrorist organization on our territory and then asking us to deliver humanitarian aid to that area. It is as if they, a major Power, had never heard of something called the responsibility of an occupying Power under international humanitarian law. The occupying Power is supposed to deliver humanitarian aid to civilians living in the area under occupation. In any case, after dozens of reports and hundreds of briefings, OCHA has not reported on the newborns who have lost their lives as a result of the power cuts to incubators in some health centres and hospitals. It has not reported on other newborns who survived but were killed by coercive measures that prevented them from receiving milk and other basic nutrients. OCHA has not reported on mothers who are educating their children by candlelight. In dozens of reports and hundreds of briefings, OCHA has not reported on those who lost their lives in operating rooms because of a ban on the import of surgical thread, the anti-clotting medication used during surgeries, and basic medical equipment such as MRI and X-ray machines and others. Nevertheless, Mr. Lowcock today deemed that the closure of Al-Yarubiyah crossing, which, by the way, is under the control of the United States of America, is what is preventing us from importing surgical thread. He also spoke of 400 different types of drugs and supplies, including surgical thread. There is therefore no other crossing that can be used to import surgical threads except the Al-Yarubiyah crossing. Is that really true? Only through Al-Yarubiyah are we able to import surgical thread? It is as though that crossing specializes in imports of surgical threads. Those are the lies we have heard today. In the dozens of reports and hundreds of briefings, OCHA has not once mentioned people with special needs, who are affected by coercive measures. They are unable to receive artificial limbs or electric wheelchairs. In the dozens of reports and hundreds of briefings, OCHA has not mentioned the Syrians unable to import materials to meet their basic needs, such as food and medication, as a result of the sanctions imposed on the banking sector, which makes it impossible to conduct financial transactions. OCHA has not mentioned the plight of Syrians abroad, who cannot access consular services in several countries or transfer even a small amount of money to help their families in Syria. OCHA has not mentioned the fate of the tens of thousands ofSyrians who drowned in the Mediterranean at the hands of Turkish human traffickers. Nine difficult years have passed and not once have we heard OCHA asking Germany, for instance, to allow Siemens, a German company, to supply the necessary spare parts for the power plant in Jandar, which was built by Germany decades ago. It is a purely humanitarian matter borne out of a basic need for hospitals and schools and to assist Syrian civilians. What is the point of those reports and meetings it they are unable to provide spare parts for a power plant? Has OCHA not heard the complaints of United Nations offices and international organizations operating in Syria about the effects of coercive measures on humanitarian operations? Has it not reviewed the reports issued by the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia confirming the considerable adverse effects of coercive measures on humanitarian deliveries in Syria? Has OCHA not heard what Mr. Idriss Jazairy, Special Rapporteur on unilateral coercive measures, said about the adverse effects of such measures on the enjoyment of human rights. He said, "TsJuch coercive unilateral measures exacerbate the humanitarian suffering of the Syrian people. It is hard to believe that they are there to protect Syrians". Should OCHA not remove its head from the sand and describe the situation as it is? What I am talking about is humanitarian criticism about the humanitarian situation in Syria. I said all of that because OCHA reports to the Council must be in line with its noble mission. However, that is not the case. As the saying goes, do not go around fire expecting not to sweat. Whoever makes that mistake must suffer the consequences. OCHA has not reported on many effects of coercive measures. Some in the Council might deem that issue to be asecondary one, merely as collateral damage. That is how the liars refer to it: collateral damage. It is a lovely phrase. However, such matters affect all the Syrian people, and are therefore a top priority for us and for anyone who respects the principles of international law and international humanitarian law. I assure the Council that we have no problem with OCHA as an institution. We have a problem with those controlling OCHA, who replace the humanitarian agenda of the United Nations with that based on the views of their countries. If they were honest, they would not have refused to respond to our calls to provide assistance to the 40 towns and cities in Idlib and surrounding areas that were liberated from terrorism this month. Hundreds of thousands of civilians were liberated from terrorism, but OCHA has never provided humanitarian aid to them. In conclusion, my country underscores that we will build on the great achievements we made in cooperation with several United Nations agencies, the International Committee of the Red Cross and 38 foreign non-governmental organizations authorized to work in Syria, including five French organizations, three American organizations, five British organizations, four German organizations, three Russian organizations andothers from Denmark, Norway, the Netherlands, Italy, Spain, Austria and Finland. My country stresses that it is of the utmost importance to immediately and unconditionally lift all coercive measures and end once and for all the policies of economic punishment adopted by the Governments of some Member States, as they are inconsistent with international law, international humanitarian law and international human rights law. I assure the Council that, despite the pressure on the Syrian people, we will not relinquish our sovereignty or allow anyone to prevent us from making our own decisions. The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.
