Mr. Osman (Somalia): As I am taking the floor
for the first time during your presidency, Madam,
allow me, on behalf of my delegation, to sincerely
congratulate you on your stewardship of the Security
Council's work for the month of August. I also wish
to congratulate your predecessor, the representative of
Peru, on his efforts in presiding over the work of the
Council for the month of July. I extend the thanks of
the Federal Government of Somalia to the briefers, in
particular the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ambassador James Swan, in his first briefing
to the Security Council.

At the outset, I would like to reiterate the
commitment of Somalia to cooperate with the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia so that it
can fulfil its mandate, as well as our gratitude for
the service of the personnel of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). We also want to thank
Ambassador Madeira, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia, for his briefing today.

It is with great pleasure that the Federal Government
of Somalia welcomes Mr. Swan back to Somalia. In
particular, Mr. Swan's long association with my country
gives him an important perspective that situates current
events and developments in Somalia within the arc of
progress. It is inevitable that we all focus on the most
immediate challenges and tasks in front of us, but, as
we discuss the issues of immediate importance today,
I encourage the Council to see them in the context of
Somalia's continued upward trajectory and steady path
towards rebuilding our State.

Let me also take this opportunity to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, for her
briefing and her visit to Somalia. Let me also express
our gratitude for the briefing by Ms. Amina Arale.

A State can only be as strong as the people within it.
During the reporting period, Somalia has demonstrated
the resilience and determination necessary to
reconcile differences. Galmudug state - one of the
federal member states - was until recently divided
between two administrations in two cities seeking to
lead a divided population, with independent armed
groups providing security. As a result of the Federal
Government's sustained and inclusive engagement, the
state is now an example of what we hope to achieve
throughout all of Somalia.

Prime Minister Hassan Ali Khayre, many Cabinet
members and his security force chiefs and officials spent
nearly six weeks in Galmudug. During the visit, they
spoke to local communities, including elders, members
of the business community, young people and women.
They brought groups together and discussed a vision of
a united Somalia that will benefit all of its people.

As a result of that engagement, there is now
agreement to hold a state-wide reconciliation
conference that will begin in a few days, bringing
together Galmudug's ll clans, geared towards the
holding ofelections following a period ofreconciliation.
The armed group Ahl Al-Sunna Wal-Jama'a has also
entered into an agreement with the Federal Government
of Somalia, and their forces are now being integrated
into the Somali security forces. Like all other army
personnel, those integrated are being biometrically
registered, trained and paid directly via their personal
bank accounts.

It is said that Galmudug is the heart of Somalia
and that, if there is stability, unity and prosperity in
Galmudug, the same will be true in the whole country.
Not only are those State-building, security and
reconciliation efforts vital for the people of Galmudug,
but they also lay the foundations for similar unity and
reconciliation across Somalia.

We do not pretend that this is easy. In that regard,
it is necessary to remember the wider context and the
painstaking path towards stability that Somalia is on.
Tomorrow, there will be so-called elections in Jubaland,
which have been marred by threats, intimidation,
violence and outside interference.

As the Federal Government of Somalia, the
international community and its partners have made
clear throughout the process, the election has not been
credible, inclusive or legal. The Federal Government
and its international partners have consistently pointed
out its flaws and the risks that that corrupted process
poses to Somalia's democratic development. From the
outset it has been our fear that the methods and approach
taken by the incumbent state President will result in a
deeply divided state, with whole communities excluded
from the process, and will create a dangerous precedent
for future elections in Somalia, including the federal
elections to be held in 2020 and 2021. The worst-case
scenario - God forbid - could involve violence and
the loss oflives.

We are making good progress towards the holding
of federal elections in 2020 and 2021. Voter registration
work is on track, and we are committed to ensuring that
a historic number of Somalis will have the opportunity
to elect their leaders.

Somalia has much to do in the coming months, with
key milestones ahead on our State-building journey.
That includes building on the significant progress
that we have made under the fourth staff-monitored
programme, working towards a decision point on
debt relief, preparations for elections in 2020, the
continuation of decisive operations against Al-Shabaab
and the conclusion of our constitutional review process.
Re-engaging with international financial institutions,
which will pave the way for arrears clearance and debt
relief, will not only contribute to economic growth and
security in the country but will also promote peace,
unity and cohesion.
The Federal Government is focused on those
objectives and determined to ensure that Somalia
continues its steady progress in achieving them. To that
end, we look to the federal member states to play their
role in Somalia's future and work towards deepening
federalism and fostering collaborative engagement with
the Federal Government. As the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/661) highlights, at the technical level
that is well under way with good cooperation. It is now
up to the leaders to put aside political differences and
work to deliver on the critical milestones that will lay
the economic, social, security and political foundations
for Somalia's future.

Somalia's resilience has been tested once again by
the deadly attack on the Asasey Hotel in Kismaayo,
which killed one of our prominent Somali journalists,
Ms. Hodan Nalayeh, and the attack on the Benadir
Regional Administration in which Somalia lost a great
citizen and leader, Mr. Abdirahman Omar Osman,
Mayor of Mogadishu and Governor of Benadir. His
legacy will endure with many of the initiatives that he
put in place to create opportunities for Mogadishu's
young people, businesses and communities.

The security of Mogadishu is one of the objectives
of the ongoing operations conducted by the Somali
National Army on the outskirts of Mogadishu in
Lower Shabelle. With the strong support of AMISOM
and international partners, the Somali National Army
has demonstrated its ability not only to retake and
liberate the strategic towns of Sabiid, Bariira and,
more recently, the town of Awdheegle, which were in
the grip of Al-Shabaab, but, critically, to hold those
locations to enable stabilization and local governance
to be reinstated.

In addition to those critical tactical gains,
operations provide a vehicle for the implementation
of the institutional capacity-building elements of the
transition plan and national security architecture.
In addition to engaging in comprehensive planning,
which has included military, police and stabilization
planners drawn from across the Federal Government,
regional administration and international partners, we
are strengthening the institutions that will sustain our
security forces and early recovery initiatives. Operations
have provided a pilot for force generation, with one
mixed integrated battalion drawn from across Somalia
generated, trained and deployed and a second being
generated. We remain grateful for the commitment and
bravery of AMISOM, which is deployed side by side
with the Somali security forces and fighting a vicious
enemy. My Government would again like to thank
Ambassador Francisco Madeira, Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia, for his unwavering and tireless efforts to
help Somalia.

We are currently undertaking significant reforms,
including on screening, systematic human rights
training, professionalization and, more important,
discipline and a code of conduct for our security
forces. The Ministry of Women and Human Rights
Development has conducted training with ministries,
departments, international agencies and human rights
civil society organizations and facilitated human rights
skills training for public officials, including members
of the security forces. Those are vital steps towards
addressing many of the issues raised in the Secretary-
General's report on sexual violence in conflict as it
pertains to the Somali National Army and Somali
Police Force.

Security is critical not for its own sake but in order
to improve the lives of all Somalis. Alongside our
political and security efforts, the Federal Government
continues to revive social institutions, such as health,
education, sanitation and recreational facilities,
among others. The Government has managed to
regain possession of a couple of national hospitals and
schools. And, for the first time in three decades, Somali
students sat for harmonized national examinations. A
cadre of students from the Somali National University
graduated in June - the first batch of students in 30
years to graduate.

I have set out the evolving nature of Somalia's
political, economic and security reform developments.
Despite major challenges and continuing security
threats, there is a clear trend of improved stability and
development in Somalia. However, the gains made
remain fragile, serious protection concerns persist and
humanitarian needs in Somalia remain high. Therefore,
the Federal Government of Somalia asserts that any
current or proposed measure that aims to prevent and
combat violent extremism in Somalia should advance,
rather than hinder, our common and shared objectives
of achieving lasting peace, stability and security in
the region.

Al-Shabaab has been listed under the sanctions
regime of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 751 (1992), concerning Somalia, since
12 April 2010. That listing was intended to deny the
group financial and material support to carry out terrorist
attacks. The measures include an arms embargo, a travel
ban and an assets freeze on members of the group, as
well as a charcoal ban to prevent that resource from
being used to finance terrorist activities. The proposed
listing of Al-Shabaab under the sanctions regime of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, comes
at a time when a heightened humanitarian response
is urgently needed to respond to climate shocks and
deteriorating drought-related humanitarian needs.

Under the 751 sanctions regime, there is an
exemption clause for humanitarian access. It could not
be expected that the same blanket exemption could be
made under the 1267 regime. Humanitarian access to
some of the most vulnerable parts of the country would
be severely impeded and the delivery of assistance to
persons in those areas would be hampered. The ability
of the Federal Government of Somalia to provide
assistance to vulnerable populations, with the support of
partners, would be restricted and play into Al-Shabaab's
narrative and self-image as a de facto Government in
areas where State reach is limited. It would also deter
investment and hamper economic growth.

The Federal Government of Somalia takes this
opportunity to reiterate its condemnation of any
interference in the internal affairs of Somalia and
cautions against the repercussions that may arise
from such actions, with serious consequences for
regional instability.

Somalia calls on all States to abide by General
Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV) on the "Declaration
of Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations", which
emphasizes that all States enjoy sovereign equality,
every State must respect the personality of other
States and that no State may use or encourage the use
of economic, political or any other type of measures
to coerce another State in order to obtain from it the
subordination of the exercise of its own sovereign
rights or to secure from it advantages of any kind.
Furthermore, the Federal Government of Somalia calls
attention to articles 53 and 54 of the Constitution of the
Federal Republic of Somalia, which grants the Federal
Government of Somalia the exclusive authority to
enter into international agreements with other States,
including international treaties related to international
boundaries - either land or sea boundaries - and
control over the airspace of Somalia.

The contours of the Somali State are emerging. It is
natural that there should be vigorous and divergent Views
as they evolve. We encourage all Council members to
see it as an essential part of the State-building process.
As Somalia's federalism deepens and the contours

become more defined, we are grateful for the continued
support of our partners and the Council in building a
progressively more stable and prosperous Somalia.

