Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
On behalf of my delegation, I should like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity you have provided us
today to participate in this meeting on the situation
prevailing in Guinea-Bissau. Indeed, we are indebted to
Council members for their interest in our country, a
small country in difficulty - I would even say a
country in distress. That concern has never wavered,
and I believe that the statements we heard this morning
strengthen us in the conviction that, with the help of
the Security Council and of other members of the
international community, we will be able to meet the
challenges and to return to what we have always
wanted: to re-establish constitutional order in our
country and to create conditions for a genuine
democracy.

I should like to tell the Council that, by electing
President Kumba Yala in January 2000, the people of
Guinea-Bissau had hoped that it would be possible for
the country to choose democracy once and for all. The
people of Guinea-Bissau had hoped that it would be
possible for all the conditions to be created so that
participatory democracy could see the light of day in
our country. The people of Guinea-Bissau had hoped
that it would be possible 4 through rigorous
management of our country's scant resources - to
ensure the equitable distribution of those resources.

The circumstances that we are experiencing today
are the direct consequence of poor management of the
affairs of State. I should like to thank Mr. Kalomoh,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs with
responsibility for Africa, for the information that he
was kind enough to bring to the Council's attention. I
believe that that information has convinced Council
members once again of the gravity of the situation
prevailing in our country. But Mr. Kalomoh's briefing
also confirmed a factual situation on which the
successive reports of the Secretary-General have
updated the Council: chronic instability in a country
facing grave economic and financial difficulties.

I should also like to thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Timor-Leste, our
great friend and brother Mr. Jose Ramos Horta, who,
on behalf of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries, led a mission in Guinea-Bissau. But it was
not only in that capacity that he went to Guinea-Bissau.
He went as a true brother, as an expert on the situation
in Guinea-Bissau and on the psychology of the
country's inhabitants. Above all, he went with the
intention of understanding how to able to give us the
most appropriate advice. That is what he did, and we
thank him for it.

I should like to thank all of those who have
gained a better understanding of the situation in
Guinea-Bissau. I want to mention the Economic and
Social Council's Ad Hoc Advisory Group and the
Security Council's Ad hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa. I want to mention
earnestly and with great gratitude the Group of Friends,
under the dynamic leadership of the Ambassador of
Gambia, for its unceasing efforts to ensure that Guinea-
Bissau is better understood and thus can be adequately
assisted.

We are faced with a humanitarian situation. It is
true that a coup d'etat took place in Guinea-Bissau. We
understand all those who - along with you, Mr.
President, and other Council members - condemned
that act. We deplore the fact that it was necessary to
resort to that kind of change in our country. The
Military Committee itself recognized that. I saw its
communique, in which it recognizes that any change of
the constitutional change by force is to be condemned.
But there are circumstances in which one must do what
is necessary to understand what is happening in a
country. Ambassador Zinser just recalled what he
himself and his colleagues verified in Guinea-Bissau:
an instability, a situation whose precariousness was a
harbinger of the situation that we are experiencing
today.

We must avoid the temptation to make a
comparison that is sometimes not so exact. We are not
in favour of coups d'etat. But I must say that the
situation in Guinea-Bissau is not similar to the one
prevailing in the Central African Republic. The people
of Guinea-Bissau welcomed the coup, because the
people of Guinea-Bissau - whose dignity everyone
recognizes - had experienced and silently endured
unspeakable difficulties. One cannot ask a nation to
suffer forever. One cannot ask heads of families who
are not in a position to ensure their children's survival
to continue to tighten their belts. There are limits. We
had hoped that it would be possible for those changes
to take place differently.

Today, we are here to ask the international
community to understand the situation in Guinea-
Bissau and to help us ensure that the changes we
wish - and that we will carry out - can be made in
calmness and stability, and that all the participants,
both political parties and members of civil society -
the whole population in general - can participate in
the rigorous management of a poor country that wants
to get back on its feet. I believe it is perhaps that aspect
that should hold the international community's
attention. Our decision and our commitment to do
everything we can so that the country can get back on
its feet, so that we can put the country back on track -
that is to say, our commitment to the democratic
path - is expressed by the fact that, through
consultation, cooperation and in-depth discussion, all
the participants and actors in Guinea-Bissau's political
life agreed on a transitional charter. The charter is clear
and precise; it unequivocally specifies all the steps that
must be undertaken for the country to restore the
constitutional order that we all want.

The Military Committee for the Restoration of
Constitutional and Democratic Order understood that it
was necessary and in conformity with international
principles for the country to be ruled by civilians. The
political parties recognized that it was indispensable
for everyone to put the country ahead of their own
individual interests. Civil society is now, more than
ever, determined to participate in the strict management
of the affairs of our country.

It is always difficult to accept this type of change,
but I believe that we must, as Mr. Kalomoh has
indicated, make the necessary effort to understand that
there is a process of "give and take", which should lead
us, in the near future, to a return to constitutional order
and democracy.

For now, with your help and that of the entire
international community, we hope it will be possible to
mobilize the necessary resources, because nobody can
be expected to perform miracles. In a country that is
suffering, as our country is, a country that finds it very
difficult to reestablish itself, it should be easy to
understand that it is urgently necessary to provide the
necessary financial assistance to this country so that it
can be up and running again shortly.

The United Nations, whose role has been under
discussion, has established through the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) an Emergency
Economic Management Fund. If money is added to the
Fund quickly, that would help our country meet some
of its pressing financial needs right now.

I would like to now thank UNDP and its
representative in Guinea-Bissau for his useful and
effective role and the courage which he has displayed
in the discharge of his duties. I would like to pledge to
you, Sir, that we will do our utmost to be worthy of the
trust of the international community and that
everything will be done, with the assistance of one and
all, so that the country will return to true democracy
and so that finally we will be able to devote our
energies and skills and the scant resources of our
country to the disposal of a people that really needs it
and which merits help.

