Ms. Rice (United States of America): I would
like to thank Ambassador Osorio for his report.

We meet at a critical moment in the Council's
ongoing effort to address the threat posed by Iran's
illicit nuclear activities. Since our last meeting, the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) recently released a damning report on
the status of Iran's implementation of its Safeguards
Agreement under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and on its response to Security
Council resolutions on Iran (see S/2011/695).

That IAEA report, issued in November,
concluded that Iran remains in non-compliance with its
international nuclear obligations. The report adds to the
mountain of evidence that Iran is misleading the
international community about its nuclear activities
and its nuclear intentions. Of even greater concern, that
report addressed the question at the heart of the
international community's concerns, namely, whether
Iran has carried out, and whether it is still carrying out,
activities related to the development of a nuclear
weapon. The report is clear: the IAEA's information
indicates that Iran has carried out activities that are
"relevant to the development of a nuclear explosive
device". The report further states that "prior to the end
of 2003, these activities took place under a structured
programme, and that some activities may still be
ongoing".

I want to draw the Council's attention to yet
another alarming development, namely, Iran's self-
proclaimed intention to start enrichment at the
11-64673
underground Qom facility, perhaps as soon as this
month. That is the same facility that Iran hid from the
international community until it was discovered two
years ago. At Qom, Iran now intends to consolidate its
provocative production of uranium enriched to a level
near 20 per cent. That is of concern because it brings
Iran significantly closer to the capability to produce
highly enriched uranium. To date, Iran has yet to
provide a credible rationale for the production of near
20 per cent-enriched uranium. It has already produced
sufficient fuel to power the Tehran Research Reactor
for another five years, at a minimum, and Iranian
leaders have already described that production as
uneconomical. The start of enrichment at Qom will
serve as yet another illustration of Iran's flagrant
disregard for the Council's very clear position on Iran's
enrichment activities.

Iran's behaviour plainly belies the purported
peaceful nature of its nuclear programme. No one, after
reading the November IAEA report, can reasonably
believe Iran's contention that its continuing uranium
enrichment programme is for peaceful purposes only.
The decision by the IAEA Board of Governors last
month to censure Iran demonstrated yet again the
overwhelming view of the international community
that Iran's illicit nuclear activities are unacceptable.
The Council must, therefore, redouble its efforts to
implement the sanctions that have already been
imposed. Full implementation of those measures will
show Iran that there is a price to be paid for its
deception. Full implementation can also slow down
Iran's nuclear progress, buying us more time to resolve
this crisis through diplomatic means. The Committee
established pursuant to paragraph 18 of resolution 1737
(2006) and the Panel of Experts are key to that effort.
Those bodies must continue to implement their
mandates and programmes of work effectively and
robustly. The Committee must reinvigorate its efforts
to implement the Panel's recommendations, including
the publishing of further detailed implementation
assistance notices to help Member States meet their
obligations. The Panel must continue to investigate
sanctions violations and must promote international
awareness of the measures we have imposed.

The United States would like to express
appreciation for the Panel's recent work, including its
midterm report and its recent report on Iran's space
launch activity, which involved both projects related to
ballistic missiles capable of delivering nuclear
3
weapons and launches using ballistic missile
technology, in violation of resolution 1929 (2010). The
Committee should review those reports carefully and
take action in response. The Committee must also do
more to respond to sanctions violations and sanctions
violators, such as by designating violators for the
imposition of targeted sanctions. Resolution 1929
(2010) directed the Committee to respond effectively
to those violations. Resolutions 1803 (2008) and 1929
(2010) also decided that the Committee may designate
additional individuals and entities that have assisted in
the evasion of sanctions or violations of Security
Council resolutions. New designations of such
individuals and entities would send a powerful signal
of the Committee's commitment to enforcing Security
Council resolutions.

My Government remains seriously concerned that
the Panel's final report has not yet been released to the
wider United Nations membership owing to the
continued objections of a couple of members of this
Council. That is an appalling failure of transparency.
As I have stated before, we strongly believe that the
report must be made available to all Member States as
soon as possible, because it highlights information and
best practises that can help States carry out their
obligations. The time has come for a prompt solution to
that impasse in order to allow the release of that report.

Sanctions are only a means to an end. Our
ultimate goal is to ensure that Iran enters into full
compliance with all of its international nuclear
obligations and that it takes the necessary steps to
resolve outstanding questions. In the face of Iran's
deception and intransigence, the international
community must speak with one voice, making clear
that Iranian actions jeopardize international peace and
security, and that they will only further isolate the
regime.

President Obama has been unequivocal with
respect to our policy towards the Iranian nuclear
programme. As he has said,

"There should be no doubt. The United
States and the international community are
determined to prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear
weapons. Iran's illicit nuclear activity and the
threat it poses to regional stability and the rules
underpinning the nuclear non-proliferation
regime is one of the greatest global challenges we
face".
