Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico would like to thank Lithuania for
convening this open debate and for its proposal to
have the Security Council identify synergies between
the work of the Council and the relevant instruments
aimed at preventing trafficking in small arms and
light weapons and at preventing their diversion to
non-authorized users. We welcome the report of the
Secretary-General on the issue under discussion today
(S/2015/289), and we urge Member States to analyse
the recommendations contained therein in order to
more systematically and effectively tackle the misuse,
diversion and illicit circulation of small arms and light
weapons and their munitions as threats to international
peace and security.

The United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and
the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) are the sole initiatives
adopted by the United Nations to address this problem.
We must redouble our efforts to foster synergies
between the relevant international instruments, because
all of them converge on the single challenge of ensuring
that the use of such instruments is supposed to promote
peace and security.

My delegation is concerned that the irresponsible
sale of and trafficking in small arms and light weapons
continues to take an alarming toll in civilian lives
around the world. This is a phenomenon that presents a
rather complex challenge, as its effects often result in
human-rights violations, destabilize societies, threaten
the rule oflaw, exacerbate and prolong armed conflicts,
and feed into transnational organized-crime activities.
Easy access to such weapons and their possession by
civilians without any limitations or effective controls
and the lack of adequate regulations have devastating
humanitarian consequences, particularly given their
impact on such vulnerable groups as women and
children.

The stockpiling of weapons for destabilizing
purposes is in itselfa source of great concern in many
regions of the world, particularly those regions bearing
the heavy burden of armed violence. No less important
is the issue of the diversion of small arms and light
weapons for illicit purposes. That is a significant
challenge at the domestic level, and we believe it
essential that the membership of the Organization make
progress on strengthening our collective commitments
to eradicate this scourge. At the same time, the United
Nations should also do more to ensure the adoption
of concrete measures, including national measures, to
prevent violations of arms embargoes established by
the Security Council.

The most recent of our international instruments,
the Arms Trade Treaty, constitutes a historic
achievement. It is the first global effort to regulate the
trade in conventional weapons, including small arms
and light weapons, and to establish a legal framework
for accountability and transparency in international
arms transfers. To date, the Treaty has 130 signatures
and 67 ratifications, and my country will continue to
work to help it achieve universality. The Treaty's recent
entry into force, less than two years after its adoption
by the General Assembly, is a clear demonstration of
the great support it has garnered.

It is for that reason and because ofmy Government's
commitment to the consolidation of the international
regulation of the trade in conventional weapons
established by the ATT, that Mexico will chair the
discussions on the fundamental issues of the ATT and,
as I mentioned, will host the first Conference of States
Parties to the Treaty, to be held from 24 to 27 August.
We will continue to work openly, transparently and
inclusively, while taking into consideration the views
of the States parties and signatories to the Treaty, the
relevant international and regional organizations and the
representatives of industry and civil society. As Chair
of the Conference, Mexico will encourage inclusive
decision-making aimed at building the institutional
and procedural regime outlined in the Treaty in such
a way as to enable us to make progress in controlling
the conventional arms trade, with the two main goals
of fostering a responsible arms trade and preventing
the misuse of weapons or their diversion to the illicit
market.

My delegation recognizes the Council's
determination, starting with its adoption of resolution
2117 (2013), to ensure that this issue receives systematic
and comprehensive attention in order to prevent
the armed conflicts on its agenda from worsening.
Diverting weapons and blocking their supply in
conflict and post-conflict situations are among the
main challenges that the international community has
to deal with, and we therefore support the Secretary-
General's recommendation that the Council include
illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons
when considering the geographic and thematic issues
on its agenda. It is vital that the Council promote the
implementation of the arms embargoes that it imposes,
as well as the promotion and implementation of effective
programmes for collecting and registering weapons. In
that context, we believe that peacekeeping operations,
the panels of experts of the sanctions committees and
the other actors on the ground should step up their
coordination of efforts aimed at exchanging operational
information within the scope of their mandates, in order
to improve the monitoring and effective implementation
of sanctions.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity
to affirm Mexico's support for women's full and
meaningful participation in the policymaking, planning
and implementation relating to the fight against the
improper use and illicit transfer of small arms and light
weapons, in line with the provisions of the relevant
Security Council resolutions on women and peace and
security.

