Mr. Fowler (Canada): It is, indeed, a pleasure to see
you here, Mr. President, participating in this important
debate. The commitment of your country and
Government, and your own personal commitment, to
Africa, is well known and deeply appreciated around this
table. On a more personal note, I should also like to thank
you for your support, both moral and material, for our
efforts to bring the civil war in Angola to an early
conclusion through the effective application of Security
Council sanctions. Your call for specific and focused
action is welcome.

As you, Sir, are well aware - although some in the
Chamber may not be - it is my intention, as Chairman
of the Angola sanctions Committee, to submit on time, by
the end of February, the report of the expert group
established by the Council, and to see it presented to the
Council in March or early April. I very much hope that
it will contain very focused recommendations for
additional action that the Council may take to do exactly
as you proposed.

Canada is particularly grateful that you, Sir, have
agreed to a format today that will allow the participation
of non-members in this innovative discussion. The
Council can only benefit by exploring fresh approaches to
conducting its work, and this, indeed, is one. We very
much share the concern that, while Africa absorbs a
significant percentage of the Council's time, we have, in
fact, achieved rather little in terms of concrete results.
Too often, for a combination of financial and political
reasons, the Council has contrived to avoid a great deal
of its responsibility for maintaining peace and security in
Africa. The result has been a devolution of responsibility
for conflict prevention, mediation and resolution to the

 

Organization of African Unity (OAU) and to subregional
organizations, often with little regard for their respective
capacities in those areas. Even when such organizations can
play an effective role, prevention efforts conducted at local
or regional level frequently need the impetus that only
active Council engagement can give. Our focus must
therefore be on effective partnerships based on a realistic
understanding of each other's relative strengths and
weaknesses, an efficient division of labour and equitable
burden-sharing.

Not all of the news is bad. The recent authorization of
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, which received
a robust mandate to protect civilians, and, eventually, to
take on some of the burdens now shouldered by the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) was, we believe, a step in
the right direction. But from our perspective, we still came
up with a hybrid solution, with attendant confusion and
inconsistencies inherent in the relationship between the
United Nations force and the remaining ECOMOG
elements. We must continue to work harder for clearer
mandates and less confusion.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
involvement of the United Nations is an important signal of
the Council's commitment to peace efforts there, and it
should help create - or at least facilitate and build - the
confidence required to underpin the eventual deployment of
a reasonably sized and effective United Nations mission to
oversee the implementation of the Lusaka Agreement. I
would certainly agree with previous speakers that we have
waited too long in that regard.

Given the growing importance of the work of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) on peace and
security, closer cooperation is indeed needed between the
Council and the OAU. Practical proposals include more
frequent contacts between the Council President and the
Secretary-General or Chairman of the OAU, and more
regular meetings between the Council and OAU
representatives in New York.

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations becomes more important
upon the expiry of a Council-mandated mission, as these
organizations are called on to assume the leading role in
post-conflict peace-building and reconstruction. We
welcome the initiatives already undertaken by the
Secretaries-General of the United Nations and of the OAU
aimed at increasing the level of cooperation between the
two bodies, particularly regarding the exchange of
information on key African issues. We are pleased to
encourage the two Secretaries-General to continue their
coordinating efforts, and the recommendations we have
just heard from Secretary-General Annan and from you,
Mr. President, are welcome in this regard; Canada looks
forward to cooperating in whatever way we can to give
substance and moment to those proposals.

It is important to emphasize that no amount of
United Nations collaboration with regional or subregional
organizations will make peace possible if the parties to an
agreement do not fulfil their obligations or if they resist
efforts to establish a workable peace.

Too often, the window of opportunity for
international engagement closes quickly, and the chance
for peace is tragically lost. We need to improve the
capacity of the United Nations to plan, deploy and
manage peace-support operations. When a political
decision is taken to respond to a situation - not only in
Africa - there must be a commensurate ability to act.
Increasing that capacity includes improving the ability of
the United Nations to deploy forces rapidly, something
which Canada has been working hard for over six years
to achieve, and without any success.

We also want to ensure that African peace-support
operations are matched with appropriate mandates and
resources. Failure to do this in the past has had disastrous
consequences. Mandates must be sufficiently robust to
give a realistic chance for mission success, and therefore
they must be adequately funded and supported. Voluntary
trust funds established for such purposes do not work, and
I hope we will soon come to terms with that reality. They
are not appropriate to the task. Multinational forces are
not equitable in the burden they place on a small number
of countries. Our collective experience in Sierra Leone
amply demonstrates this. We have a system that works:
United Nations missions funded through assessed
contributions. Let us use it.

The Security Council should also consider preventive
deployments in Africa. As noted in the recent presidential
statement on conflict prevention, such preventive action
can be more cost-effective than measures taken in the
aftermath of a conflict. The Secretary-General, of course,
was remarkably eloquent in this regard in his statement to
the General Assembly of 20 September 1999. The
Council should give careful consideration to early
warning indicators and should be prepared to act before
armed conflict breaks out. We support the efforts of the

 

Department of Peacekeeping Operations to establish a
working group, and we look forward to working with it.

The challenge is not so much one of seeking new
instruments, but of making existing ones work more
effectively. An effective conflict-prevention and conflict-
resolution strategy requires a broader definition of security
and of challenges to security, one which takes into account
the multiple factors that contribute to conflict and which
addresses conflict in its earliest stages and manifestations.
Such a definition implies our focusing our attention in the
Council not only on aggression between States but also on
intra-State security issues, which include gross and
systematic human rights abuses, catastrophic humanitarian
emergencies, failures of governance and the rule of law,
and economic deprivation. In short, it means paying greater
attention to threats to human security, which, as recent
history shows, have been a key source of conflict in Africa.

Canada believes that rapid and resolute action to
resolve and end conflicts can be an important deterrent
against future conflicts. To achieve such a goal, the Council
must be able to count on a United Nations that is capable
of deploying effectively and rapidly. The Council must
therefore explore the deterrent qualities of its available
instruments. Existing sanctions must be made to work, and
members will not be surprised to hear me include those
against UNITA. Africans are not selling arms to UNITA,
and Africans are not buying Mr. Savimbi's diamonds.
However, Africans have a key role to play in making travel
and representation sanctions effective.

