Mr. Elarahy (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me, Sir, to begin Egypt's first statement since its
admission to membership in the Security Council by
expressing our pleasure at seeing you preside over the work
of the Council for this month. We are confident that thanks
to your well-known diplomatic abilities and wide
experience, the Council will conclude its work successfully.
Allow me also to express the appreciation of the Egyptian
delegation for the exemplary manner in which the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation,
His Excellency Ambassador Lavrov, conducted the work of
the Council last month.

The Egyptian delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution for the following reasons.

First, it is important that the Council always take the
measures necessary to maintain international peace and
security. Secondly, we must encourage the parties
concerned to reach a political settlement that would
preserve the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Georgia, with the contribution of the Russian Federation
as facilitator, in consultation with the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Brunner, and
with the resident Deputy, Mr. Bota, and in coordination
with the efforts of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

It is important for the Council to demand acceptance
of a timetable, as the mandate of the monitoring group of
monitors will end next June. It is important also for the
Council to condemn strongly the killings and violations
committed in Abkhazia, and it should request the Abkhaz
side to ensure the safety of all persons in areas under its
control.

Thirdly, it is important for the Council to request
both parties, particularly the Abkhaz side, to accelerate
the voluntary return of refugees and displaced persons,
particularly to the Gali region, according to a timetable
based on the proposals made by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).

Fourthly, both parties must be requested to cooperate
fully with the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia (UNOMIG) and to facilitate its tasks in creating
a safe environment for the return of refugees and
displaced persons, including by not obstructing or
impeding the movement of the United Nations force,
particularly in the inspection of storage sites for heavy
weapons.

In view of these considerations, we agree that the
mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia (UNOMIG) should be extended for six additional
months and that the Council should review this mandate,
in case any changes are made in the mandate of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) peace-
keeping forces at the forthcoming CIS summit meeting,
which is scheduled for 19 January, or at any time before
the termination of the UNOMIG mandate.

The draft resolution before us is stricter in tone than
Security Council resolution 993 (1995). This is warranted,
and the Council must take a firm stance vis-a-vis the
positions repeatedly taken by one party to the conflict -
the party which ignores the resolutions of the Council -
and must also support sincere efforts to reach a
comprehensive political settlement that may achieve peace
and stability for both parties.

 

