Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
introducing his report (S/2002/1299), to Olara Otunnu
for all the work that he is doing, and to Carol Bellamy
for her contribution to today's discussion.

Unfortunately, the suffering of children as a result
of hunger, disease and violence remains a bitter reality
today. The changed nature of armed conflicts has
meant that more than 90 per cent of their victims are
now civilians and at least half of them are children,
who account for more than 65 per cent of refugees and
internally displaced persons. Protecting the rights of
children, including those in armed conflict and post-
conflict situations, is one of the international
community's most important tasks.

The best way to protect children is to prevent
conflicts from erupting or to settle them before they
become destructive. The role of the United Nations and
of the Security Council - which bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security - is difficult to overestimate here.
However, the practical implementation of humanitarian
objectives aimed at protecting children, including those
in armed conflicts, should be the prerogative primarily
of specialized organizations and humanitarian
agencies: the World Health Organization, the United
Nations Children's Fund, the World Food Programme,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the International Committee of the Red
Cross, and other bodies that have their own mandates
and are operationally and financially autonomous. Of
course, they must function with the Council's overall
political support.
The problems faced by children are far from
being limited to armed conflict. The protection of
children must be seen in a broader context. Child
abandonment, drug addiction, trafficking - including
trafficking in children's organs and tissues - and child
sexual exploitation are but part of the full and tragic
list of problems that are threatening children today, and
which threaten the future of mankind as a whole.

A separate point must be made about the problem
of terrorism, which is becoming increasingly ruthless
and which spares neither adults nor children. It is our
shared obligation to establish reliable barriers to the
spread of this scourge, as well as to other widespread
inequities. One of those barriers could, and indeed
should, be the International Criminal Court (ICC),
whose Statute entered into force last year. We are
convinced that the ICC will merge harmoniously into
the existing system for maintaining international peace
and security, with the United Nations and the Security
Council playing a key role. This will ensure that there
is no evasion of punishment for the most heinous
international crimes, including crimes against children.

An important milestone was the entry into force,
on 12 February 2002, of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. This
instrument should facilitate the full protection of
children from the horrors of war.

We commend the Secretary-General on his report.
We would like to touch on a couple of points that we
believe are of priority importance. First and foremost, I
would like to refer to the problem of the use of child
soldiers by armed groups, so-called rebels and terrorist
groups. We strongly condemn the recruitment of child
soldiers, and we believe that those guilty of it should
be brought to justice. We support the efforts of the
Secretary-General and of his Special Representative to
identify parties to armed conflicts that continue this
shameful practice. By combating the use of children in
hostilities we are not just protecting them from the
horrors of war, we are also preventing their inevitably
becoming anti-social adult members of society. A child
traumatized by war early in his life and who knows
nothing except weapons, hatred and violence will
hardly be able to live normally under conditions of
peace and law and order.

Another important subject is that of the sexual
exploitation and abuse of children. Children, and girls
in particular, are the most vulnerable group in this
regard during conflict situations. We are outraged that
sexual violence is practised not only by members of
armed groups but also by humanitarian personnel and
peacekeepers, namely, people in whom victims place
special trust and who are expected to provide only
kindness and help. Russia fully supports the efforts of
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative to
provide comprehensive training for United Nations
personnel, to monitor their conduct and to prevent
impunity for perpetrators.

We also agree with the Secretary-General's
approach to this issue by integrating the child factor
into the mandates of peacekeeping operations,
providing humanitarian agencies with access to conflict
areas and separating civilians from armed elements and
maintaining the civilian nature of areas in which
refugees and internally displaced persons are
assembled. Further increasing the work done by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict in the area of information
and education at the country level will help us achieve
our common goals.

