Mr. Vaverka: I thank you, Madam President, for
the invitation to brief the Security Council on behalf
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). I will present
the main focus of the Commission's work over the past
couple ofmonths, as well as our upcoming priorities for
the fall of 2016.

Let me first take this opportunity to congratulate
the Liberian Government on the successful resumption
of security responsibilities on 30 June. An important
milestone was reached this summer, and I would also
like to commend the peacekeeping mission in Liberia,
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), for its
continued support provided during the transition.

In May, the Government of Liberia and the
Peacebuilding Commission launched the revised
statement of mutual commitments on peacebuilding
in Liberia. It encapsulates the priority actions to
be undertaken by the Government and the PBC,
respectively, over the next two years. I feel confident
that the statement of mutual commitments provides a
robust basis for our work in support of peacebuilding
efforts during a crucial period of transition for Liberia.

In the statement of mutual commitments, the
Commission commits to continuing to provide support
in the areas of promoting national reconciliation,
security-sector development and strengthening the rule
oflaw. I was pleased to note that the statement of mutual
commitments was consistently referred to by Liberian
officials during the recent visit to Liberia by the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Macharia
Kamau of Kenya. It signalled to us a true sense of
shared ownership and genuine interest in rolling out the
commitments without delay.

In addition to the three areas that I have just
mentioned, the PBC will follow up on conversations
with national interlocutors regarding good governance,
employment-generation, equal treatment of ethnic
and religious groups, as well as the need to build
trust and confidence between the security sector and
citizens. The PBC also came away from the visit with
a renewed commitment to forge stronger collaboration
with the international financial institutions. Allow me
to describe two areas to which the Commission will
devote special attention over the coming months.

First of all, we will pay particular attention
to preparations for the upcoming presidential and
legislative elections in 2017. That will include
engaging with national stakeholders, such as the
National Elections Commission and the Governance
Commission, in supporting efforts by the Government
to ensure that the elections are conducted successfully
and contribute to further democratic consolidation.
By addressing critical factors early, the PBC will be
able, we hope, to support preventive measures, ranging
from ensuring that efficient and quick mechanisms for
dispute-resolution are in place to supporting regular
channels for dialogue between the security forces and
the public. In addition, the PBC will emphasize the
importance of the participation of women, youth and
civil society throughout the electoral process.

Secondly, the Commission will pay close attention
to reconciliation. As noted in the report (S/20l6/706)
of the Secretary-General, there have been delays in
advancing national reconciliation. We know that,
in order to ensure a prosperous and stable Liberia in
the years to come, it will be important to continue
strengthening the social fabric and social cohesion.
The Liberian Government has described reconciliation
as a multidimensional process of overcoming social,
political and religious cleavages, healing the physical
and psychological wounds from the civil war and
confronting and addressing historical and structural
wrongs. The process cuts to the core of addressing the
root causes of the conflict, and we remain committed to
helping the Liberian authorities in that pursuit.

Later this fall, important decisions will be taken
by the Security Council regarding the future United
Nations presence in Liberia. In preparation for those
deliberations, and in fulfilment of our advisory
mandate, the Peacebuilding Commission looks forward
to providing succinct and targeted advice on the longer-
term peacebuilding needs and priorities. The Chair of
the Liberia configuration will be travelling to Liberia
early this fall to consult with the Government, national
stakeholders and international actors.

In the statement of mutual commitments, the PBC
committed to convening a dedicated multi-stakeholder
forum on Liberia to discuss peacebuilding priorities
for that purpose. It is our hope that such advice will
complement the input received by the Council from
other United Nations system entities, and in the end
contribute to helping the United Nations and the
international community in planning strategically and
comprehensively for a smooth and successful transition.

In conclusion, let me reiterate what we have
stated before. There is no excuse for either the United
Nations system or the international community to
provide peacebuilding support based on a fragmented
approach. As UNMIL continues to draw down, we
have a responsibility to sustain international attention
on Liberia during and beyond the transition period, in
terms of mobilizing both financial support and political
accompaniment. The resolutions on peacebuilding
adopted this spring provide clear guidance and strong
impetus in that regard. The PBC looks forward to
continuing its close collaboration with the Security
Council in supporting Liberia on its path towards
further consolidation of peace over the coming years.

