Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having organized this very important briefing. I
welcome the briefers, Lieutenant General Tesfamariam,
Major General Lollesgaard and Major General Michael
Finn. The clarity and incisiveness of their perspectives
on the issues under consideration bear out the wisdom
and importance of this interaction, which is aimed at
fostering greater synergy between the field and the
Security Council. Let me commend them in particular
for their immeasurable sacrifices in leading their
various peace missions.

It is of global concern that civilians are often
deliberately targeted in armed conflicts and frequently
subjected to blatant violations of their rights under
international law. The Council has since 1999 responded
to this challenge by prioritizing the protection of
civilians in theatres of conflict. In furtherance of this
quest, Security Council resolution 1894 (2009) called
for dedicated resources for the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. That underlines the compelling
necessity to protect the rights of civilians in theatres
of conflict and highlights the urgency of continued
efforts to improve strategies to address this arduous
task. We believe that enhanced cooperation among
the United Nations, troop-contributing countries,
police-contributing countries and the hosts in the
beneficiary States, particularly in areas of mandate
formulation and implementation, could achieve this
objective.

In a briefing by the Head of Mission of the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan, Ellen
Margrethe Laj , to the Council last month (see S/PV.7444),
the widespread human rights abuses and killing of
civilians in Unity state of South Sudan was highlighted.
It necessitated the evacuation of humanitarian workers,
thereby aggravating the suffering of civilians in the
state. We note the challenges sustained in these camps
and would appreciate the comments of Lieutenant
General Tesfamariam on measures being taken to
ensure their long-term viability.

As we reflect on modalities for sustained
protection-of-civilian sites under such challenging
circumstances, we want to reiterate that clarity of
mandates on the protection of civilians, and accord
among peacekeeping contingents on implementation
strategies, are both essential to safeguarding civilians
in conflict areas. As peacekeepers strive to implement
such mandates, they must at all times endeavour to
remain transparent in their actions, as incidents of
misconduct - particularly those that border on violence
and sexual exploitation of women and children - are
inexcusable. Nigeria condemns such acts whenever
and wherever they occur. We believe that a speedy and
impartial investigation into allegations of such heinous
acts and imposition of appropriate sanctions on errant
personnel will serve to establish accountability as a
hallmark of peacekeeping operations.

The increasing asymmetric attacks on peacekeepers
in conflict areas have generated much concern. The
casualty rates, especially those in the Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, have taken
on unacceptable proportions. We propose that the
international community increase its assistance to
peacekeeping missions and other regional arrangements
involving anti-terrorism operations. That could be
achieved through the provision of much-needed
equipment designed to mitigate the devastating effect
of improvised explosive devices.

Also of great concern is the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons, especially among non-State
actors. That exacerbates conflicts and threatens the
well-being of civilians in conflict situations. It also
poses challenges to the effective implementation of
peacekeeping mandates, especially when non-State
actors carry out asymmetric attacks against
peacekeepers. That is why denying non-State actors
sanctuary and forces is of the utmost importance.

We are witness to the evolving nature of conflicts in
a contemporary world. This underscores the imperative
for the Council to demonstrate greater flexibility
in adjustment of peacekeeping mandates without
necessarily waiting for their expiration. Such flexibility
will enable prompt and appropriate responses to threats
on the ground.

I would like to conclude by affirming our
commitment to collective security as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, while paying tribute to
those who have paid the ultimate price in the line of
duty so that others might live in peace. Let us take this
opportunity to renew our resolve as peacekeepers to
respecting and preserving the fundamentals of United
Nations peacekeeping.

