Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): As
other delegations have done, my delegation thanks
Lord Paddy Ashdown, High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and Judge Theodor Meron, President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, for their presence in the Chamber and for
the information they have given us. We also thank them
for their tireless spirit of service and their commitment
to their work.

Next month, November, will mark eight years
since the signing of the Dayton Peace Accords. As the
High Representative's report made available to the
Security Council today demonstrates, there can be no
doubt that since their signing in 1995 Bosnia and
Herzegovina has made progress in normalizing daily
life.

Mexico has noted with interest the contents of the
report. Our attention has been drawn in particular to the
progress made with regard to the administration of
justice, to corruption and to combating organized
crime. Mexico trusts that the country's police services
will eventually be able to assume the policing functions
now provided by the European Union. Similarly, we
emphasize the importance of the initiatives under way
to strengthen the justice system, which is the key to
building up the rule of law in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In that connection, my delegation welcomes the
valuable information provided by Lord Ashdown and
Judge Meron with regard to the establishment of a
special War Crimes Chamber in Bosnia and
Herzegovina's State Court to address serious violations
of international humanitarian law. The details presented
provide further information about the arrangements
proposed to establish such a Chamber. My delegation
has lent its support for the completion strategy
proposed by the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, and in particular the idea of
transferring cases relating to low- and mid-level
accused persons to the competent national
jurisdictions, with a View to ensuring that the Tribunal
can attain its goal of completing its judicial activities at
first instance by 2008. What is proposed therefore
augurs well for the proper implementation of the
completion strategy.

Turning to the political sphere, we are pleased
that, eight months after elections were held, the process
of forming a Government was finally concluded in
June in the only remaining canton where that was yet
to be accomplished.

We also take note of the efforts made in the
economic area to promote growth in trade and
employment. We were particularly struck by the
participation of civil society in the debate on economic
reform and by civil society's monitoring role in
implementing that reform.

Over 1 million refugees and internally displaced
persons have returned to their homes in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Approximately 40 per cent of them are
members of minority groups. However, 500,000
persons have yet to return home. Those figures prompt
us to mention the suffering caused by armed conflict
and the courage that gives rise to hope. They also
prompt us to think about the infinite possibilities that
open up when political will and economic resources are
brought together. The international community's
support, both political and economic, has been
essential to the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is important that that support continue
until outstanding issues have been addressed.

The statistics compiled by Operation Harvest this
year are also encouraging. Although there was a
decline in the collection of small arms over 2002, the
amount of ammunition, mines and hand grenades
turned over to the Stabilization Force has increased.

As has been pointed out, the road travelled has
not been easy, and we will still have to overcome
various types of setbacks. In particular, we believe that
it will be necessary to ensure that there is no impunity,
if the process of reconciliation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina's society is to be completed. Specific
steps must be taken to arrest, try and punish those
responsible for war crimes.

Finally, Mexico trusts that the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina will soon become solely responsible
for their future.

