Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank the Special
Representative for his comprehensive briefing and
continuous efforts in Libya.

Italy remains at the forefront of international
support for the Libyan people, the institutions validated
by Libyan Political Agreement in Skhirat and the
mediation role of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya. We are committed to the full implementation
of the Libyan Political Agreement, while at the same
time promoting reconciliation and inclusiveness.

My first point concerns the political and security
track. Cohesive support from the international
community is key to consolidating the results attained
thus far so as to fight terrorism and achieve stability.
Our message should therefore be very clear. First, the
Presidency Council and the Government of National
Accord, headed by Prime Minister Serraj, remain the
sole legitimate executive authorities of Libya pursuant
to resolution to 2259 (2015). Furthermore, we intend to
support them as vigorously as ever in their crucial role
in combating terrorism.

Secondly, we encourage initiatives aimed at
consolidating the Skhirat framework and improving it
where possible through finding workable solutions to
outstanding issues, including strengthening inclusivity
within the Libyan Political Agreement framework.

Thirdly, we promote the cooperation of the
Presidency Council with all legitimate Libyan
institutions to broaden its base of support and achieve
a sustainable political settlement. There is no military
solution to Libya's problems. A solution can be achieved
only through inclusive political dialogue and national
reconciliation. We reject any attempt to use force to
acquire political and territorial gains, and we emphasize
the difference between acts against terrorist threats and
those that can lead to the further deterioration of the
situation in Libya.

We are following with concern the recent violence
in the south and the area of Sabha, We call for full
de-escalation and avoiding provocative actions. We
welcome the ongoing efforts of neighbouring countries
and regional organizations. Cohesive and coordinated
international efforts to support the United Nations-
mediated political process can foster a constructive
attitude for the Libyan stakeholders towards fully
implementing the Libyan Political Agreement.

Moreover, with regard to efforts aimed at
reconciliation, we need to consolidate the progress
achieved thus far by the country in very challenging
circumstances. We have enhanced our capacity to
reach out to the Libyan people and communities in
the entire country through our embassy in Tripoli.
We deem it crucial to promote stability through
engagement with all Libyan parties. We are regularly
reaching out to the east and actively promoting
dialogue and mutual understanding with key political
and security figures, including General Haftar. We
are encouraging a constructive approach including on
the crucial issue of implementing the formal security
setup outlined in the Libyan Political Agreement with
unified and strengthened national security forces under
civilian oversight.

In that regard, we echo the Secretary-General's
report (S/2017/283) in welcoming progress on the
formation of the Presidential Guard. We are also
stepping up our humanitarian help in coordination
with the Presidency Council, for example by offering
medical treatment in Italy to injured Libyans, including
those from the east who were involved in combating
terrorism. We are also planning to step up our
diplomatic presence in the east with a consulate and
visa office in Tobruk.

We are also focusing on the south of Libya, another
key strategic area of the country. We have repeatedly
provided emergency aid to those fragile communities,
and we are promoting initiatives to enhance dialogue
with local municipalities. On 31 March, representatives
of the Tebu and Awlad Sulayman tribes signed an
agreement in Rome aimed at fostering reconciliation,
combating terrorism and countering human trafficking.
Tuareg representatives and Libya's Deputy Prime
Minister representing the Presidency Council attended
the ceremony in Rome.

Fourthly, concerning the economy, we remain
concerned about the latest developments with regard
to oil infrastructure. As new sparks of tensions rise,
it is crucial to reiterate our support to the mandate
of the National Oil Corporation, acting under the
authority of the Presidency Council to manage the oil
infrastructure, resources and revenues for the benefit of
all Libyans in line with the Libyan Political Agreement.
We support the Libyan economic dialogue to encourage
cooperation between the Presidency Council, the
Government of National Accord and the Central Bank
of Libya. For the first time in years, the Government
now has a budget to implement initiatives for the good
of the Libyan people. We now call on the Government
of National Accord and the Libyan Central Bank to stay
the course and implement their agreement so as to keep
the economy functioning and ensure that the necessary
funds for Government activities bring the budget under
control and end the liquidity crisis.
My last point concerns migration. We reiterate our
concern about the smuggling of migrants and human
trafficking that has endangered the lives of thousands
of people in the Mediterranean Sea. In its efforts to
combine security, solidarity and development, Italy
remains committed to rescuing people at sea and helping
migrants from the south to reach our shores. During
Easter weekend alone, 8,500 people were rescued. But
a stronger and shared effort is needed to enhance the
capacity of the Libyan authorities to disrupt criminal
networks that exploit illegal migration flows.

Through its leadership role in Operation Sophia of
the European Union military operation in the Southern
Central Mediterranean, Italy is therefore working in
partnership with Libya to jointly address that common
challenge, thereby fostering cooperation in the area
of the prevention of illegal immigration, human
trafficking, smuggling and border security, based on a
comprehensive approach. We believe that it is a key step
towards better managing migration flows, which would
also sustain the stability of Libya, its neighbouring
countries and the Mediterranean in general.

In conclusion, we can see that it is particularly
important for the Libyans themselves to hear from
the Council that we share the desire for a secure,
democratic, prosperous and unified Libya in which
the State authority and the rule of law prevail. That is
indeed our challenge - to not let the Libyan people
and institutions down while we facilitate their return
to stability and prosperity and stand by their side in
combating terrorism and criminal gangs of smugglers
of human beings.

