Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Pascoe, for his briefing. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of the State of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements.

I should like to address four points, starting with
the issue of Gaza, which has been front-page news due
to the flotilla episode. France condemned the
disproportionate use of force. We would like to see the
full implementation of the presidential statement of
1June 2010 (S/PRST/20lO/9), in which the Security
Council called for a prompt, impartial, credible and
transparent investigation conforming to international
standards. We hope that the efforts of the parties
concerned, especially Turkey, the State of Israel and
the Secretary-General, will make it possible for this
objective to be met.

Furthermore, the flotilla episode brought to the
fore what we have been saying for some time in this
forum: the blockade of the Gaza Strip is not only
unacceptable, but also counterproductive. We welcome
the decision of the Governments responsible for this
policy to reconsider it. In particular, the announcement
by the Government of Israel of measures easing the
restrictions is welcome, and we hope that it will be
fully implemented. We believe that it would be timely
to go even further, with the aim of improving the lives
of the civilian population and making economic
recovery possible in Gaza. I am thinking specifically of
such steps as increasing the capacity of crossings,
resuming exports and liberalizing the conditions
governing the movement of persons to and from the
Gaza Strip.

The European Union is following the situation
very closely, as shown by the visit at the beginning of
this week by High Representative Ashton. The
ministers for foreign affairs of the European Union
also expressed their willingness for the Union to
contribute to a mechanism allowing for the full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009).

I also note the need for the immediate cessation
of all violence, in particular rocket attacks on southern
Israel. We further call for the unconditional and
immediate liberation of Gilad Shalit, an issue that is
being followed very closely in my country.

The flotilla incident also demonstrated the need
to reintegrate the territory of Gaza into the peace
process. To that end, one of our highest priorities
should be to encourage the current mediation efforts in
favour of inter-Palestinian reconciliation.

My second point is that we must not lose sight of
the fact that the main objective remains the immediate
relaunching of the peace process. There is no
alternative to the resumption of negotiations towards
the creation of a viable and contiguous Palestinian
State living in peace side by side with Israel within
secure and recognized borders on the basis of Security
Council resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. That
is also the position of the European Union, as will be
indicated by the acting head of its delegation in his
statement, with which France associates itself.

The international community must commit itself
to assisting negotiations and to guaranteeing the
parameters of a final agreement that would enable the
parties to re-engage in dialogue. We are working very
closely with United States and Egyptian authorities to
define the terms of an international framework that
would allow the negotiations to resume.

My third point is that changes are necessary on
the ground to create conditions favourable to the
resumption of negotiations. The situation in Jerusalem
remains concerning. We therefore deplore the recent
demolition of homes in Arab neighbourhoods of the
city. Like the destruction of Palestinian houses,
settlement activities in East Jerusalem are unacceptable
and provocative. There can be no peace that excludes
Jerusalem, which, as the President of the French
Republic said in his address to the Knesset on 23 June
2008, is likely to become the capital of two States.

Settlements throughout the Palestinian territories
remain a major obstacle to a solution. The decision of
the Government of Israel to announce a 10-month
moratorium on new construction and building permits
in the West Bank was a step in the right direction that
should be fully implemented. No peace will be possible
without the complete cessation of the illegal
construction of settlements. As noted by the President
of France, settlements complicate the establishment of
a Palestinian State and thus do not contribute to Israel's
security; on the contrary, they increase the dangers.

The implementation by the Israeli authorities of
confidence-building measures on the ground would be
likely to promote the rapid resumption of the direct
talks that we all hope to see. For instance, prisoners
could be released, Zones A and B could be extended,
and restrictions on access and movement in the West
Bank could continue to be lifted. The Palestinian
Authority, for its part, must pursue its efforts to
strengthen the security sector and establish the rule of
law. The merciless struggle against terrorism must
remain a priority.

My fourth and last point is that the international
community must provide strong support for the
Palestinian Authority and President Abbas in
consolidating the institutions of the future Palestinian
State. The challenge is also for Israel to assist more
resolutely in that process, particularly in the West
Bank. Gestures have been made on the ground, but
they are insufficient. The Palestinians must be able to
see that developments on the ground will lead to the
end of the occupation, in particular in terms of freedom
of access and movement.

In this regard, we reiterate our support for
Palestinian Prime Minister Fayyad's plan, pursuant to
the Paris Conference of December 2007, to create a
Palestinian State within a fixed period of time. In order
to maintain the momentum of international support
created by the Conference, on 1 July French Minister
for Foreign Affairs Bernard Kouchner held another
follow-up meeting with the co-Presidents in the
presence of Prime Minister Fayyad and Egyptian
Minister for Foreign Affairs Ahmed Aboul Gheit.

I reiterate that our prime objective is the urgent
resumption of negotiations, not only on issues of
concern to Israelis and Palestinians, but also other,
regional aspects of the peace process. Accordingly, we
are working to establish conditions for the resumption
of talks between Israel and Syria. We are also pursuing
our efforts in Lebanon and call on the parties to
implement resolution 1701 (2006), which would
guarantee peace between the two countries. In this
context, we reaffirm the crucial role played by the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. The Force
must be able to discharge its mandate with the full
cooperation of the parties.

The international community and this Council
have a major role to play because the situation in the
Middle East concerns all of us. France is ready to play
its full part in that effort. To that end, the President of
France has called for a peace summit, organized in
cooperation with all concerned actors, to support
United States efforts and assist in the resumption of
talks between the two parties.

