Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): Allow me first of all to
join previous speakers in thanking Under-Secretary-
General Pascoe and Assistant Secretary-General Mulet
for their briefings.

In previous meetings and consultations, my
delegation has made clear its position with regard to
the ongoing conflict, so we shall limit ourselves to a
few points that we find particularly important or see as
new and relevant elements with regard to the situation
in Georgia.

Croatia welcomes the six-principle agreement,
signed by Georgia and Russia through the diplomatic
efforts of the European Union, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
United States, to end the hostilities and reach a
political solution to the conflict. According to that
agreement, all military action must cease and military
forces must return to their positions held prior to the
outbreak of hostilities. We call on all parties to the
conflict to fully comply with the agreement.

Accordingly, we call on Russia to immediately
withdraw its forces from those areas within Georgia
that it entered following the outbreak of hostilities on
7 August, as specified in the aforementioned
agreement. We also call on Georgia to return its forces
to their usual bases, also in line with the situation that
existed before 7 August. In that regard, we would also
like to welcome today's decision of the Permanent
Council of the OSCE to appoint 20 additional military
observers.

Croatia is extremely concerned also by the
humanitarian situation on the ground. We deplore the
loss of life and the civilian casualties resulting from the
conflict. Croatia has undertaken measures in concert
with international organizations and interested
Governments, in order to provide much-needed
assistance to the civilian population affected by the
conflict. We call on all the parties to ensure that this
assistance reaches all affected populations.

Croatia also reiterates its support for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Georgia, which are recognized by international law and
existing Security Council resolutions.

Finally, Croatia fully supports the draft resolution
on the situation in Georgia prepared by the delegation
of France as a first and necessary step towards the full
implementation of the six-principle agreement. We
hope that the draft resolution can be adopted
expeditiously with the aim of ensuring that the parties
implement the six-principle agreement in its entirety
and in good faith.

