Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would like
to add my voice to those of us who have expressed
condolences to Pakistan for the unspeakable atrocity
that occurred today. I am very sorry to say, also, that I
would like to extend my condolences to Yemen, where
a horrible attack has also taken place. My Government
condemns these acts of appalling terror that violate
everything humanity stands for.

Mr. President, I would now like to express my
appreciation for your initiative to organize this important
open debate. I align myself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union. In the light of time
constraints, I will read out a shortened version of my
statement. My full text will be available via Twitter.

My Government thanks Chad for the excellent
cooperation between both our contingents in the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). Mr. President,
we commend the dedication and perseverance of
your country's peacekeepers under the harshest of
circumstances in northern Mali. We commemorate the
brave Chadian peacekeepers who were killed in action
and pay tribute to their determination and to their
contribution to the cause of peace.

We need new and innovative approaches to
maintaining and restoring peace and security. Conflicts
are changing in nature, from conflicts between States
to conflicts within States. Poverty, inequality and lack
of perspective combine into an unstable mix, which
forms a breeding ground for violent extremism that
can easily spill across borders. New threats, such as
terrorism, transnational crime and Ebola, demand
international cooperation and a concerted effort.
These are not just challenges for Africa, but for the
international community as a whole. Enhancing the
partnership between the United Nations and the AU
is therefore in the interest of all of us. Member States
should contribute what they can, and the Kingdom of
the Netherlands aims to do its fair share.

My Government is committed to peace and
security in Africa. Most of our military, police and
civil experts worldwide are deployed in missions in
Africa. The Kingdom ofthe Netherlands is a partner for
Africa. Let me mention, for example, our contingents
in MINUSMA and the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, our training of African peacekeepers, our
anti-piracy activities and our logistical support through
our naval vessel Karel Doorman in the fight against
Ebola.

Regional organizations play an increasingly
important role in maintaining peace and security,
complementing United Nations efforts. We therefore
welcome the fact that the African Union is rapidly
developing into a stronger and more effective
organization. As an example already addressed by some
speakers today, AU missions are increasingly deployed
ahead of United Nations missions. That illustrates the
need for close cooperation between the United Nations
and the AU, especially between the Security Council
and the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union.

Complex conflicts demand a comprehensive
approach, combining diplomacy, development
cooperation, defence, police, justice and trade, with a
specific focus on the issue ofwomen, peace and security.
The Netherlands believes that such a comprehensive
approach would further strengthen United Nations-AU
efforts. For example, links between the African Peace
and Security Architecture, the African Governance
Architecture and the regional economic communities
could be enhanced. We believe that this would lead
to more sustainable results. Transparent and inclusive
governance, respect for human rights and post-conflict
reconstructive measures lead to more stable societies,
lowering the risks of a return to conflict. We welcome
the African Union's initiatives in those areas.

Let me also highlight the issue of prevention,
echoing my Indonesian colleague. The African Peace
and Security Architecture contains several important
instruments in that field. It is quite simple - prevention
saves lives.

In conclusion, it is my country's ambition to remain
Africa's partner for peace, justice and development. We
are fully committed to continuing our active role in
United Nations peacekeeping, in particular in Africa.
We wholeheartedly support the initiative to strengthen
the role of the African Union in maintaining peace and
security on the continent, and to improve cooperation
with the United Nations.

