Mr. Kang Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I would like to thank Ambassador Grauls for his
briefing on the work of the Committee over the last 90
days. Since its establishment and under the diligent
leadership of Ambassador Grauls and Ambassador
Verbeke, the Committee has successfully undertaken
various kinds of tasks. I thus take this opportunity to
express sincere thanks to Ambassador Grauls and
Ambassador Verbeke for their vigorous efforts.

The Iran nuclear issue relates to the effectiveness
of the international nuclear non-proliferation regime
and its close connection with the security regime in the
Middle East and its impact on international nuclear
energy security. This issue is complex and sensitive
and has received extensive attention from the
international community.

China is always of the view that the peaceful
solution to the Iran nuclear issue lies in diplomatic
negotiations, which is the best option and in the
interest of the international community.

At the present time, the Iran nuclear issue is at
crucial juncture. The United Kingdom, France,
Germany, China, the United States and Russia are
currently, through the European Union, maintaining
constructive dialogue and contact with Iran regarding
the resumption of negotiations.

The IAEA and Iran are also cooperating on
pending questions with regards to Iran's nuclear
programme. This demonstrates that the international
community's diplomatic efforts to advance the
resumption of negotiations are effective and opportune.
No side should readily pass up that opportunity.

China notes the new report submitted by
Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), on the
Iran nuclear issue. China commends the IAEA and its
Director General for that effort. In the current
circumstances, the international community should
further intensify its diplomatic efforts and maintain and
promote dialogue with Iran to seek an early resumption
of negotiations. At the same time, Iran should be
encouraged to strengthen its cooperation with the
IAEA to resolve pending issues at an early date, to
alleviate the international community's misgivings
about its nuclear programme, and to seek an
appropriate, comprehensive and long-term solution to
the Iran nuclear issue. China is prepared to continue to
play a constructive role in that regard.

China consistently supports maintaining the
international non-proliferation regime, opposes the
proliferation of nuclear weapons and hopes that there
will be no new turbulence in the Middle East region.
China supports a peaceful settlement of the Iran
nuclear issue through diplomatic negotiations. We will
continue to participate actively in the work of the
Committee, support and cooperate with the Chairman
in his efforts, and do our best to help the Committee
play a constructive role in appropriately resolving the
Iran nuclear issue.

