The President (spoke in Spanish): At the outset of
this meeting I should like, on behalf of the members
of the Security Council, to express our profound
sadness over the intolerable attack that took place in
Paris yesterday, which led to the loss of many lives. To
the families of the victims, and to the people and the
Government of France, the Security Council expresses
its heartfelt sympathy and condolences.

I now invite the members of the Council to rise and
observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of
the victims.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute ofsilence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf.

"The Security Council recalls its presidential
statement of 5 November 2014 and reiterates
its deep concern regarding the security and
humanitarian crisis in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo due to ongoing destabilizing activities
of foreign and domestic armed groups, and stresses
the importance of neutralizing all armed groups,
including, among others, the Forces democratiques
de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR).

"The Security Council notes that the 2 January
deadline set by the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) and the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) has
passed, and that the FDLR has not only failed to
unconditionally and fully surrender and demobilize,
but has also continued to recruit new fighters in
their ranks.

"The Security Council, while noting the
surrender of an estimated 300 former rank-and-
file members of the FDLR in 2014, consisting of
mainly old and non-essential combatants, stresses
that such surrenders alone are insufficient to end
the threat posed by the group, and do not come
close to representing the full demobilization of the
FDLR as called for by the ICGLR, SADC and the
Security Council.

"The Security Council further recalls that the
swift neutralization ofthe FDLR is a top priority in
bringing stability to and protecting the civilians of
the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo and the Great
Lakes region, in line with the wider commitments
made in the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region.

"The Security Council notes the Democratic
Republic of the Congo Government's 2 January
statement, in which it stated that military action
against the FDLR is now "inevitable", and that the
region, represented by the ICGLR and SADC, has
made clear its support for military action by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
in the absence of the full demobilization of the
FDLR, including its military leadership, with the
objective of ending the threat posed by the group.

"The Security Council reiterates the need to
put into sustained action the plans of the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo
(FARDC) and MONUSCO through its Force
Intervention Brigade, in cooperation with the
whole of MONUSCO as per paragraph 4 (b) of
resolution 2147 (2014), to neutralize the FDLR by
commencing military operations immediately.

"To that end, the Security Council calls on the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and in particular President Kabila as Commander
in Chief, to approve swiftly and implement fully
the MONUSCO-FARDC Joint Directive.

"The Security Council further notes the
convening of a SADC/ICGLR summit scheduled
for 15 and 16 January in Luanda, Angola.

"The Security Council reiterates its support
for MONUSCO and calls on all parties, including
the Force Intervention Brigade troop-contributing
countries, to remain committed to the full and
objective implementation of the mission's mandate,
including military operations to neutralize the
FDLR. The Security Council stresses that such
operations must be done in strict compliance
with international law, including international
humanitarian law.

"The Security Council further stresses
that ending the threat of the FDLR, including
through robust military action by the FARDC and
MONUSCO through its Force Intervention Brigade,
in cooperation with the whole of MONUSCO as
per paragraph 4 (b) of resolution 2147 (2014), is
a critical and necessary component of civilian
protection, and expresses its intention to take into
account progress made in ending the threat of the
FDLR in assessing next steps in the Great Lakes.

"The Security Council reiterates its readiness to
consider targeted sanctions against any individual
or entity found to be supporting the FDLR.

"The Security Council further reiterates that
FDLR combatants and their dependents may still
at any point and without any preconditions choose
a peaceful path by entering into the existing
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement programme, which has
successfully repatriated a significant number, and
continues to successfully repatriate, former FDLR
to Rwanda.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of addressing the root causes of the
conflict in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the need for a comprehensive approach
to restore peace and stability in the affected areas."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ZOlS/l.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.15 p.m.

