The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Indonesia.

My delegation voted for the resolution before us
today, by which the Security Council decided to establish
an international commission of inquiry for Burundi.
Having been a member of the Security Council's second
mission to Burundi, which recommended the
establishment of such a commission, I take special
satisfaction in the decision just adopted by the Council.
The establishment of the commission is indeed necessary
to ascertain the facts about the October 1993 assassination
of the President of Burundi and the subsequent genocide,
so that persons responsible for Burundi's tragedies can be
brought to justice. Without such justice, fairly determined
by neutral observers, the result would be an environment
of impunity which could then lead to unsanctioned
retribution by parties seeking redress for past injustice.
Such acts of violence are seized upon by other parties as
unjust, and are similarly reacted to with violence, which
continues the cycle. This cycle makes national
reconciliation, prosperity and development virtually
impossible.

Even if the current level of violence is not as
extreme as the period of genocide in 1993, the savagery
that has dominated Burundi's recent history still exists to
a large extent today. Recent reports of violent protests,
shipments of land mines into Burundi and attacks which
have killed innocent children have reminded the world
that ethnic and political tensions in the country have not
been allayed. My delegation echoes the concern that the
situation in Burundi remains volatile, and could easily
deteriorate.

We believe that this resolution has the potential to
provide the solutions to some of Burundi's problems. For
instance, the general lack of information regarding the
events of 1993 has led to an environment in which it is
easy to assign blame and in which little evidence is seen
as necessary to invoke violent revenge - a situation
which should be ameliorated. Burundi itself has
recognized this need, and in this regard my delegation
expresses its appreciation for Burundi's approval of the
establishment of a commission composed of impartial,
experienced, internationally respected jurists. Its efforts to
formulate terms of reference for the commission
demonstrate the political will to improve its judicial
system.
My delegation expects that the work of the
Commission will contribute to a climate conducive to the

 

establishment of a justice system of fairness and equality,
which will further Burundi's efforts to become a nation of
peace and prosperity. In this regard, the Commission is
expected, among other things, to recommend measures of
a legal, political and administrative nature, as appropriate,
and measures with regard to bringing to justice persons
responsible for the assassination of the President of Burundi
in 1993 and the massacres and other related serious acts of
violence which followed, in order to prevent any repetition
of deeds similar to those investigated by the Commission,
and in general to eradicate the climate of impunity.

However, we wish to emphasize the sensitivity of the
functioning of the Commission. Its recommendations should
carefully consider the political context in which the parties
in Burundi are working towards national reconciliation. My
delegation therefore emphasizes that the functioning of the
Commission should not undermine the equally important
process of national reconciliation in Burundi.

My delegation is of the opinion that Burundi's
sovereignty and territorial integrity are of great importance
and that the recommendations of the Commission should
not impinge upon those sacrosanct principles. Given the
complexities of the situation, observance of those principles
will make a distinct contribution to resolving the situation
and to furthering the national unity and reconciliation that
Burundi requires.

We have faith that the good cooperation between the
Government of Burundi and United Nations officials will
extend to the specifics of the resolution and that, in
particular, the Commission will enjoy the freedom to obtain
all relevant information in a safe and secure environment,
as reflected in paragraph 5. We further believe that the
international community recognizes the importance of this
process and will support it wholeheartedly with all available
resources. Without such support, the cycle of blame and
revenge may continue, exacerbating the tragedy that has
already befallen Burundi.

My delegation would like to thank the sponsors of the
resolution before us today for addressing the delicate
situation in Burundi. We believe that the implementation of
the resolution will help restore confidence and security to
the country, enabling Burundi to move towards an
environment of peace and prosperity.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The representatives of France and Rwanda wish to
speak at this point.

