Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Quinlan for the 90-day report of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) that he just presented. I also
thank the Panel of Experts for its outstanding work,
without which the Committee's work would not be
possible.

In that connection, we welcome the publication
of the final report of the Panel of Experts (see S/2013/331, annex). That document is a valuable source
of information with regard to the illegal programmes
conducted by Iran and the means used by Tehran
to evade sanctions. It also proposes operational
recommendations that the Committee wishes to see
implemented. We hope that all States Members of the
United Nations will read the report and draw their own
conclusions with regard to Iran's actions.

I also commend the Chairman's initiative in
organizing a briefing ofthe 1737 Committee on 24 June,
which was open to all Member States. The fact that many
delegations attended, as well as the scope of the issues
raised, serves to confirm the interest that exists with
regard to the work of the Iran Sanctions Committee. We
hope that this initiative will be repeated.

The Committee's quarterly report shows that Iran
continues to fail to respect its international obligations.
In violation of Security Council resolutions, the country
is continuing sensitive activities in the nuclear and
ballistics spheres, as well as its illegal arms transfers.

France is particularly concerned about Iran's
ongoing violations of the arms embargo established
by resolution 1747 (2007). Those violations fuel the
spiral of violence in the Middle East. In that regard,
the seizure off the coast of Yemen of a large quantity
of arms from Iran in February is additional evidence
of Iran's destabilizing activities in the region. The
Experts' report on the incident is a particular cause
of concern. The quantity and type of weapons seized
by the Yemeni authorities - man-portable air defence
systems, rocket launchers and explosives - have the
capacity to undermine the political process in Yemen
today. In addition, we previously received reports
concering arms transfers by Iran to non-State groups
in Gaza, as well as information with regard to the
increased support by Iran in weapons and personnel
to Bashar Al-Assad's regime, in violation of resolution
1747 (2007).

Iran is also continuing its ballistics programme, in
violation of resolution 1929 (2010). In July 2012, Iran
launched Shahab-l and Shahab-3 ballistic missiles as
part of the Great Prophet VII military exercise. The Panel
of Experts carried out an investigation, and its report
clearly shows a violation of paragraph 9 of resolution
1929 (2010). In a letter, the Committee requested
explanations from Iran, to which its authorities have
not responded. The Committee has waited long enough.
It must now assume its responsibilities and take the
necessary decisions.

All these incidents are part of a broader context
of lack of cooperation by Iran with the international
community. On 22 May, the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) submitted
a report (GOV/2013/27) on the implementation of
safeguards in Iran. The report shows that Tehran
continues to favour the path of defiance over that of
dialogue. The report confirms a total absence of
progress on pending matters, as well as the possible
military dimension of Iran's nuclear programme. Iran
has still not granted the Agency access to the Parchin
site. Moreover, the Iranian authorities have decided to
pave over a portion of the site, which seriously hampers
the IAEA's capacity to carry out verifications, if and
when the Agency is given access to the site. Also, the
fact that uranium enrichment is continuing - to 3.5 per
cent and 20 per cent - at the Natanz and Fordow sites,
with increasingly numerous and modern centrifuges,
is another cause of concern. Finally, the report by
the Director General confirms the continued rapid
construction of a heavy-water reactor in Arak capable
of producing plutonium, in violation Security Council
resolutions.
At the IAEA Board of Governors meeting held
barely a month ago, the Director General himself
acknowledged that discussions went in circles because
of the lack of cooperation by Iran. Together with
our partners in the E3 +3, we expressed our serious
concerns about the lack of progress in talks between
the Agency and Iran. The situation cannot continue,
and Tehran must promptly engage in substantive
discussions with the Agency to resolve all outstanding
issues, including the possible military dimensions to its
nuclear programme.

We are of course open to dialogue. The many
meetings between the E3 +3 and Iran in 2012 and 2013
bear witness to that. But endless discussions serve no
purpose. In April in Almaty, Iran failed to demonstrate
its goodwill by providing a constructive response to the
balanced proposals of the E3 +3 and the concerns of the
international community.

We have taken note of the election of Mr. Rowhani,
with whom we are ready to work. But words alone
will not do when it comes to threats to international
peace and security. Iran must make concrete efforts to
establish confidence through the full implementation
of the Security Council's resolutions and those of the
IAEA Board of Governors. That is the only way that
Iran can emerge from the economic stagnation and
international isolation in which its relentless nuclear
policies have left it.

