Mr. Pleuger (Germany): My delegation would
like to thank Mr. Stephen and Ambassador Kumalo for
their reports. I must say that these reports paint a very
bleak picture of the situation in Guinea-Bissau. The
country stands on the brink of collapse. The economic
situation is desolate. Good governance is absent.
Freedom of the press and freedom of opinion are
increasingly restricted and human rights violations
further illustrate the dire situation of the country.

All efforts of the international community to
engage the President and the Government of Guinea-
Bissau in a constructive dialogue have so far yielded
no results. The International Monetary Fund has
withdrawn, World Bank projects will not continue to be
financed as planned, and yet the donor community is
fully prepared to assist Guinea-Bissau if Guinea-Bissau
does its own part. This was again confirmed this week
at the meeting of the Security Council Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa with
the Group of Friends of Guinea-Bissau, the Economic
and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group on
Guinea-Bissau and representatives of the United
Nations system.

We feel that, in this situation, three points are
essential. The first problem that must be addressed is
the need for a functioning elected National Assembly.
Parliamentary elections must take place as soon as
technically feasible. That such elections are feasible, I
think, was proven by the fact that free and fair
elections took place only a few years ago in that
country. Yesterday, the European Union issued a
declaration on Guinea-Bissau that lists the conditions
which are indispensable for free, fair and democratic
elections. Provided that these principles are adhered to,
the European Union and Germany, as a member of the
European Union, are willing to fund the electoral
process. We will thereby be heeding the appeal made
by Ambassador Kumalo.

Secondly, human rights must be respected. As a
member of the Group of Friends of Guinea-Bissau,
Germany is prepared to support sustainable solutions
that will help Guinea-Bissau to overcome its crisis.
However, solutions must be based on full respect for
human rights and the principles of good governance.
That brings me to my third and last point.

The separation between the executive, judicial
and legislative powers in Guinea-Bissau must be
restored and the budget must be handled responsibly
and transparently. It is our hope that the Security
Council's visit to the West African region will be able
to impress on the authorities in Guinea-Bissau that
adherence to these basic principles of good governance
are a prerequisite for the return of Guinea-Bissau to
democracy and to sustained development that benefits
its people.

