Mr. De Miranda (Angola)(spoke in Portuguese; English text furnished by the delegation): Allow me at the
outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, on behalf of my
Government and myself, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
should also like to congratulate the outgoing president for

 

the dynamic and wise manner in which he conducted the
proceedings of this organ during his term in office.

Let me also take this opportunity to welcome very
specially the presence in our midst of His Excellency
Mr. Peter Hain, Minister of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom, and to
commend him for his Government's commitment and the
efforts of the international community aimed at the
effective implementation of the Security Council resolutions
on Angola.

Once again this Council has an opportunity to address
the question of Angola, one of the longest conflicts in the
history of Africa, which, fortunately, is finally coming to an
end. This meeting is not intended to search for any new
peace solutions, for these already exist and are still valid.
We are here today to assess the extent to which United
Nations Member States are adhering to United Nations
resolutions, and in particular to those of the Security
Council, and to try to find ways to make them more
effective.

The report of the Panel of Experts established by the
Security Council pursuant to resolution 1237 (1999), the
introduction to which we have just heard, is clear proof of
what my Government has repeatedly stated in this Council:
the rearming of UNITA's military wing and Mr. Savimbi's
insistence on the option of war have been possible only
because of the connivance of some Governments, political
individuals around the world and businessmen in violating
the sanctions imposed by the Security Council.

Parallel with the destruction of the social fabric and
the infrastructure of Angola, we have been witnessing
attempts by some political circles in various world capitals
to bring about a lifting of the international pressure and
cleansing the image of Mr. Savimbi, despite the
condemnation of Mr. Savimbi by the Security Council and
the entire international community for being mainly
responsible for the continuation of the war in Angola. In
addition to gravely violating the spirit and the letter of the
resolutions on sanctions, such actions are an incitement to
and unequivocal encouragement of terrorism in Angola. We
note with concern and apprehension that those States that
harbour such political circles, although they profess to
uphold the sanctions, continue to allow such practices to
take place.

The violation of the sanctions regime imposed by the
Security Council is in all respects a criminal act. By
financing and supporting the war effort, those responsible
have rendered themselves co-perpetrators of crimes
against humanity committed in Angola by Jonas Savimbi.
At the same time, interference in the internal affairs of
other States is of particular concern because such
interference is always a source of conflicts. The United
Nations will never be able to fulfil its role in the area of
international peace and security as long as Members
continue to fail to comply with its Charter and the
decisions of its organs.

By imposing mandatory sanctions against UNITA,
the Security Council intended to curtail its ability to wage
war and to persuade its members to embrace the
democratic system. The achievement of these goals will
help speedily to put an end to instability in Angola.

The report that has been submitted to the Council is
the result of complex and tireless work carried out at
great risk by an independent team of experts who are
recognized for their moral integrity, their great and
unquestioned sense of justice and their devotion to the
cause of world peace.

By their nature and reach, their suggestions seek to
contribute to the establishment of peace in Angola and to
put an end to the insecurity now prevailing in the world.
We must recognize that all of this is an imperative for
which all of the members of the international society bear
great responsibility.

We expect the countries mentioned in the report to
react in some way, trying to deny the evidence presented
against them in the report. We understand this attitude,
but we would be remiss were we not to remind them that
sanctions violations have resulted in a major disaster at all
levels of political, social and economic life in Angola. It
seems to us that at this stage, the most important thing is
for the countries, organizations and individuals mentioned
to examine their own consciences and change their
attitudes towards the war in Angola, ending their support
for Mr. Savimbi.

We hope that from now on all of the countries,
Governments and individuals mentioned will cooperate
with Angola and with the United Nations, even tacitly, if
they prefer, and that the whole of the international
community will, in the interest of world peace, fully
respect the sanctions imposed against UNITA and in this
way contribute to ending the war in Angola.

The situation resulting from the international
impunity of culprits who perpetrate, finance, encourage or

 
abet atrocities against humankind is extremely bleak. In my
country, we are witnessing, as I have mentioned earlier, a
situation comparable to a natural disaster. We have already
had some illustration of this here. Over 3 million people
have been displaced and are surviving thanks to
international charity. Hundreds of refugees in neighbouring
countries have been abandoned to their fate, and a pattern
of death and poverty has emerged that is unprecedented in
Angola's recent history.

All of this has happened because of one individual by
the name of Jonas Savimbi, with the support of a handful
of countries and individuals - in all parts of the world,
unfortunately - who are completely indifferent to the
suffering of their fellow men.

We feel that appeals to their consciences or sense of
duty no longer suffice. It is imperative that we take decisive
action and call things by their proper names. I will say it
again: crimes against humanity are being committed by
Jonas Savimbi. The Organization of African Unity, the
Southern African Development Community and the
Non-Aligned Movement have named Jonas Savimbi as a
war criminal as a result of this bleak situation.

In view of the irrefutable evidence contained in the
sanctions Committee report, the Security Council must
consider taking measures against those implicated.

My Government fully supports the recommendations
contained in the report as a step in the right direction, and
we trust that they will be included in the upcoming draft
resolution of the Security Council on Angola.

Making these recommendations mandatory will once
again underscore the important role that the international
community should continue to play in the search for
lasting peace in Angola. In current circumstances, this
role should include an increase in international pressure
for the greater isolation of Savimbi and the direct
attribution to Mr. Savimbi of responsibility for the crimes
against humanity being committed in Angola; the
strengthening of sanctions against UNITA; the effective
implementation of resolutions 864 (1993), 1127 (1997)
and 1173 (1998); and the ensuring of the smooth
functioning of the sanctions Committee.

The dynamic impetus imparted by Ambassador
Robert Fowler and his team from the time he became
Chairman of the sanctions Committee cannot and must
not be held back, because thus far he has made a
significant contribution towards reducing violations and
enhancing the mobilization of various sectors of the
international community in order to block the sources of
financial support for terrorism in Angola. This immense
effort on the part of the members of the Committee and
its Chairman is fully recognized and deeply appreciated
by my Government. We will continue to lend our full
cooperation to the accomplishment of their task.

