Mr. Mayong Onon (Malaysia): Allow me to express
our gratitude to you, Sir, for convening today's open
debate on United Nations peacekeeping operations and
their potential contribution to the overarching goal of
sustaining peace, which is indeed timely.

I wish to take this opportunity to thank Her
Excellency Ms. Amina Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-
General; Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, Senior Adviser at
the International Peace Institute; and Ambassador
Gert Rosenthal, former Chair of the Advisory Group
of Experts on the 2015 review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, for their briefings and
invaluable insights on today's topic.

Malaysia associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

I would also like to reaffirm Malaysia's support
for the central role played by the United Nations,
particularly by the Security Council, in the maintenance
of international peace and security. We are very mindful
of the daunting responsibilities and expectations placed
on the United Nations, in particular on the Council. My
delegation views that positively, as it demonstrates the
desire of the international community for the United
Nations and the Council to do more, ultimately, to
secure durable and sustainable peace in conflict-
affected countries.

My delegation believes that there is no one-size-fits-
all approach in peacekeeping because each mission is
unique. Therefore, in our collective efforts to enhance
and improve the situation in the various peacekeeping
missions, we need to take into account the different
missions' components, situation, environment and
challenges, including the relevant coordination among
the various stakeholders in the field. Indeed, the active
participation ofhost countries is an important component
when it comes to the success of any mission. Therefore,
in our view, it is timely for the Security Council and the
relevant host countries to shift from the concept of a
Government approach to a citizens approach.

Security and development are not mutually
exclusive; they always go hand in hand. Without
peace and security, countries will not be able to focus
their resources on their socioeconomic development
programmes for the well-being of their people.
Therefore, continuous efforts are needed to develop
peacekeeping operations with a more holistic and
comprehensive strategic approach that involves
the community. In that regard, Malaysia is willing
to share its experience, in particular in peacekeeping
training with a focus on winning the hearts and minds
of the local population.

My delegation supports the efforts of the Council
and the United Nations in their engagement with all
stakeholders, including youth and women, with a view
to achieving equal access to quality education and
leadership training programmes. We also support the
roles of youth and women as mediators in sustaining
peace. We remain mindful that it is the responsibility
of all Member States to ensure the development of their
own socioeconomic development plans in our joint
efforts to achieve the 2030 Sustainable Development
Goals. Peacekeepers in the field can provide relevant
assistance and, wherever possible, facilitate the host
country's process of achieving peace and sustainability.

Finally, Malaysia would like to pay tribute to the
sacrifices made by peacekeepers - to the devoted men
and women who have served and to those who are now
serving with unwavering dedication and distinction in
our joint endeavours to maintain international peace
and security. Some paid with their lives towards such
noble efforts.

