Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
We are also grateful for the briefings by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Tadamichi
Yamamoto and Ramiz Bakhtiar, representative of
Afghan youth. We also thank Ambassador Saikal
for his statement. We would also like to welcome the
appointment of Ms. Ingrid Hayden as Deputy Special
Representative for the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

Peru notes with concern the complex security
situation in Afghanistan. We vigorously condemn the
continued terrorist attacks against the population and
civilian infrastructure. We express our solidarity with
the victims and their families of the most recent attacks
carried out by Da'esh in Kabul and Nangarhar.

We stress the need to address terrorism in a
comprehensive manner, including tackling its root
causes. Terrorists must be held accountable for their
crimes. Their links with transnational organized crime,
in particular illicit drug trafficking, must be identified
and combated. We consider it of the utmost importance
that the political class remain united, in view of the
upcoming parliamentary and district council elections,
in order to guarantee the stability and governability of
the country and, based on that, to overcome the serious
challenges that the country faces.

We note with concern the threats of electoral
boycott by some political sectors, and we agree with
the Secretary-General on the need to participate
responsibly and constructively in the ongoing process.
We hope that all political forces, and citizens in general,
will be able to participate massively in the elections, in
safe conditions and in the spirit of democratic unity.

We would like to highlight the Government's
commitment to women's empowerment, and the support
provided by UNAMA in that area. We believe it is
particularly important to promote greater participation
by women and young people, such as Ramiz Bakhtiar,
in the political life of the country, in accordance with
resolution 2419 (2018), in order to build a shared vision
for the future and to combat violent extremism.

We would also like to highlight President Ghani's
initiative to promote direct negotiations with the
Taliban. However, it is regrettable that the Taliban did
not respect the ceasefire proposed by the Government.
We believe that intra-Afghan dialogue, supported by
the international community and the countries of the
region, offers the only viable path towards sustainable
peace in the country. In that connection, we look forward
to the convening of a ministerial conference in Geneva
in November so that the international community can
revitalize its commitment to peace and development
in Afghanistan.
We underscore the need to strengthen Afghanistan's
defence and security capabilities to reduce the
country's external dependence. Similarly, we stress
the importance of supporting the Government's efforts
to modernize and boost the economy and generate
decent employment for young people, who represent
60 per cent of the population and often fall prey to
violent extremism and drug trafficking. In that regard,
we note with concern the humanitarian crisis and the
displacement of people caused by the drought that is
besetting the country. Nearly 1.5 million people require
assistance. I would like to conclude by highlighting
the work being done by UNAMA, including on the
humanitarian front.

