Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (Spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the United States for convening
this meeting. I would also like to congratulate
Ambassador Umarov on assuming the chairmanship of
the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and
1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea. China
will actively support his work.

At present, the situation in Somalia is seeing
positive developments. The Federal Government
of Somalia is committed to advancing the political
process and national reconstruction, and has achieved
positive results. China commends the African Union
and countries of the region for their contributions to
combatting Al-Shabaab. We call on the international
community to help Somalia's statebuilding and support
the efforts of the African Union Mission to Somalia
(AMISOM) and the Somali National Army to counter
terrorism in order to achieve peace and stability in the
Horn of Africa as soon as possible.

The Horn of Africa has great geopolitical
significance. The countries of the region have
interconnected interests and are all tasked with
attaining economic development and achieving better
livelihoods for their people. Those goals require a
peaceful and stable regional environment. China
hopes that the countries of the region will promote the
overall peace and stability of the Horn of Africa, as
well as the fundamental interests of its peoples. They
should strengthen good-neighbourly and friendly
relations, conduct pragmatic cooperation, resolve
disputes through dialogue and consultations and jointly
address the threat of terrorism, in line with their
common interests.

It has always been China's position that sanctions
are not an end in themselves but contribute to the process
of achieving a political solution. Sanctions should be
adjusted based on developments on the ground. China
hopes that the Somalia-Eritrea Monitoring Group
will strictly adhere to its mandate bestowed to it by
the Council. We hope that it conducts its work in an
objective and impartial manner. The Group should
strengthen its communication with all parties and issue
a report based on solid, credible information in order to
play a constructive role in achieving peace and stability
in the Horn of Africa.

China firmly supports Somalia's peace process and
has provided the best possible assistance to AMISOM
and the countries of the Horn of Africa in their peace
processes. We are ready to work with the international
community in order to continue making our due
contributions to peace, stability and development in the
Horn of Africa.

