Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Ms. Zerrougui for her briefing and welcome
the presence Mr. Okitundu, Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The current situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo remains difficult. In particular, the security
situation in the central and eastern parts is still serious.
That is mainly owing to the foreign armed groups.
China would like to highlight the following points.

First, advancing the political process is an
important path towards resolving the tensions in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The international
community should respect the leading role and
ownership of the Congolese Government and people in
the political process and provide the necessary funding
and resources to advance the political process. The
international community should continue to support
African regional and subregional organizations, such as
the African Union and the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, as the main channels for good
offices. They should also strengthen coordination, form
partnerships and foster cooperation.

Secondly, security and stability represent an
importance basis for advancing the political process
and national reconstruction. The Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has the primary
responsibility for protecting the civilians. It is important
to assist the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
enhancing its capacity to guarantee its own security
and achieve peace and stability through a process led
by the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) has played an important role in
maintaining peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. China supports the
recommendations of the Secretary-General to continue
to extend the MONUSCO mandate. We hope that the
Secretariat and MONUSCO will continue to strengthen
communication and coordination with the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, listen
carefully to its views and improve the rapid response
capability and operational effectiveness of MONUSCO
so as to better respond to the difficult situation on
the ground.
Yesterday, at the meeting of the countries
contributing troops to MONUSCO (see S/PV.8196),
many representatives spoke of the difficulties in
equipping and training personnel, which merit the
attention of the international community. We hope
that the international community will provide the
necessary support.

Thirdly, it is important to continue to scale
up humanitarian and economic assistance to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to help the
country to advance the national reconstruction process
and to resolve the root causes of the conflict.

The Chinese Government has consistently
supported the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, provided assistance to its
national reconstruction efforts to the extent possible,
and contributed peacekeepers to MONUSCO. China
stands ready to join the international community in
continuing to play a constructive role in achieving
peace, stability and development in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

