Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his statement
this morning, and let me join others in welcoming High
Representative Mogherini to New York to brief us
today, in the first of many such briefings, I hope.
At the outset, I would like to offer condolences
on behalf of the United Kingdom to the families of
those killed and injured in two terrorist attacks in
Mali over the weekend, among them United Nations
peacekeepers, United Nations staff and European
Union (EU) delegation staff.

The importance and value of the United Nations
cooperation with the European Union and other
regional organizations speaks for itself. In 1945,
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
specifically encouraged regional arrangements to play
their part in the pacific settlement of local disputes, and
the following 70 years have borne out that foresight.

The European Union, just like the United Nations
itself, arose as a direct consequence of the Second
World War. Building closer ties among European
Union countries to foster mutual understanding and
cooperation has led to a more secure Europe, which
has delivered increased prosperity for citizens of EU
member States. The echoes of Article 1 of the Charter
of the United Nations are clear to see in that progress.
Both organizations champion human rights, the rule of
law, development and the pacific settlement of disputes.
Among many other things, International Women's Day,
celebrated yesterday, highlighted the role that women
play in international peace and security, another issue
to which both organizations give particular emphasis.

By championing those values, both organizations
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security. That is apparent in Somalia, where an
African Union mission with United Nations and EU
logistical and financial support has helped drive back
Al-Shabaab and allowed for the re-emergence of a
legitimate Somali Government working for the Somali
people. In the Central African Republic, an EU force
helped bridge the transition from an African Union
mission to one from the United Nations. The European
Union is also actively supporting the United Nations
peacekeeping mission in Mali.

EU support to transitions has worked successfully
in reverse as well. The EU force in Bosnia has taken
the place of the United Nations peacekeeping mission
there, supporting stability in that part of Europe and
allowing the people of Bosnia to choose their own
future. The continued presence of Operation Althea
of the European Union-led peacekeeping force, with
a mandate under Chapter VII of the Charter, is vital
to preventing any return to the violent ethnic divisions
that once plagued the region.

Aside from peacekeeping, the EU leadership of the
E3+3 negotiations with Iran on the nuclear dossier is
another strong example of how our cooperation can help
counter nuclear proliferation and preserve international
peace and security. That we may be close to a deal is
in large part due to the diplomatic efforts of former EU
High Representative Catherine Ashton, and I hope that
under the guidance of High Representative Mogherini
we will soon see a successful outcome to the talks.

The EU is also supporting United Nations efforts
in Libya and leading on the dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina.

While the EU can and does support the United
Nations in a number of ways, there are situations in which
the United Nations is unable to take action because of
the position of certain Council members. In the face of
such situations, the European Union can still speak out
and act based on the shared values I have set out. This
is particularly the case with regard to the situation in
Ukraine. When the Council failed to condemn Russia's
illegal annexation of Crimea last year, the European
Union delivered a clear message and backed it up with
clear consequences for Russia. As Russia increased
its support for the separatists in eastern Ukraine and
the violence there escalated, the EU ratcheted up the
sanctions regime. As Ukraine's economy suffered, the
EU provided significant financial support. With the
Minsk agreements, an end to the hostilities is possible,
but implementation of the agreements needs to be
verified and effectively monitored by the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, if trust is to
be rebuilt.

EU/United Nations cooperation has proved its
worth on numerous occasions. The two organizations
will continue to work together, complementing each
other's efforts and thereby strengthening the purposes
and principles of the Charter.

