Mr. Soares (Portugal): Portugal fully supports the
objectives of the draft resolution before the Council. The
measures contained in it seek to reverse the situation
created by the illegal coup d'etat in Sierra Leone and to
bring about, by peaceful means, the restoration of
democratic rule, constitutional order and respect for
human rights.

Under Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter,
which foresees the utilization of regional arrangements for
the enforcement of Council decisions, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) has been
authorized to ensure the strict implementation of the
provisions of the draft resolution that are referred to in
operative paragraph 8.

It is our understanding that the draft resolution seeks
the restoration of the democratically elected Government
of Sierra Leone by peaceful means. Indeed, we
understand these sanctions as a political tool designed to
make the junta realize that its unlawful actions have not
been received with indifference by the international
community. These sanctions are tailored to penalize those
who have consistently refused to abide by the rules of
democracy. They are not addressed against the people of
Sierra Leone, the very people we want to protect by
adopting this draft resolution.

One aspect of the draft resolution we consider very
important, and the inclusion of which we supported, is the
need to establish appropriate mechanisms for the
provision of humanitarian assistance and to ensure its safe
delivery to the population for which it is intended.

We are very concerned about the plight of refugees
and internally displaced persons, and the United Nations,
with other relevant organizations, must continue to ensure
the well-being of those affected by the crisis.

The crisis in Sierra Leone is, of course, worrying in
itself on account of the usurpation of constitutional order.
But it is also a destabilizing factor for the region, in
particular for neighbouring countries, such as Liberia,
where the still-fragile process of national reconciliation is
trying to take hold.
The international community, through this draft
resolution of the Security Council and through the
activities of ECOWAS and other organizations, is

 

demonstrating its willingness to help resolve the crisis in
Sierra Leone by peaceful means. We urge the military junta
to take heed of the will of the international community and
respond positively by giving up its illegal Claim to power.
It should resume negotiations in good faith to make way for
the return of democratic rule and constitutional order in
Sierra Leone.

