I would like to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Acting Assistant Secretary-General Ramesh Rajasingham for their briefings and updates. I also welcome the Permanent Representative of Yemen to our meeting today. Once again, we welcome the unilateral ceasefire of the coalition and efforts to protect civilians and to save lives, especially amid the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We reaffirm our support for the unity, sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Yemen. We remain concerned about the recent situation in Yemen. With regard to humanitarian issues, Viet Nam welcomes the timely delivery of medical equipment and other supplies to the United Nations humanitarian team and stresses that it is high time to assist doctors and humanitarian workers to do their work to the best of their ability so as to help the Yemeni people to fight the COVID-19 pandemic. However, Viet Nam regrets to learn that the World Health Organization ordered staff to cease work in the Houthi-controlled areas. We are concerned that hundreds of humanitarian projects of non-governmental organizations have not been conducted. The fight against the COVID-19 pandemic cannot be fully implemented if humanitarian access continues to be hindered. Viet Nam shares the concern raised by other members about the continued decrease in funding from donors. Yemen has received only $455 million of the $2 billion needed for humanitarian operations from June 2020 to December 2020. Against that backdrop, my delegation wishes to make the following observations. First, we urge all parties to come to an immediate nationwide ceasefire in order to facilitate humanitarian work and the fight against COVID-19. The World Health Organization has warned that there will be full-blown transmission of the virus in Yemen. Therefore, it is essential for the parties concerned to cease hostilities and cooperate with United Nations teams to fight against the pandemic. Secondly, we support the efforts of the United Nations and other partners in organizing the donor conference for Yemen expected to take place on 2 June. We call on international donors and other partners to fulfil their pledge to fund humanitarian operations in Yemen. Thirdly, we join other members in calling on all relevant parties to fully implement the Stockholm and Riyadh Agreements with United Nations mediation. We also stress the importance of ensuring the meaningful participation of women in the political process and the protection of women and children. Fourthly, we call on all parties to strengthen their cooperation with and support for Mr. Griffiths's three-pillar approach, including a nationwide ceasefire agreement, confidence-building measures and restarting a Yemeni-led and Yemeni- owned inclusive political process. We also urge the Government of Yemen and the Houthis to reinforce their engagement with a view to reaching an agreement on the Special Envoy's proposals as soon as possible. In conclusion, we commend the tireless work and support the peace proposals of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and the United Nations team. We call for closer cooperation and further efforts among the United Nations, international partners and all parties in Yemen to stop the ongoing hostilities, ensure unimpeded access to humanitarian aid and join hands to fight the COVID-19 pandemic.
