Mr. Kandeel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): My
country listened closely to the briefings on the situation
of human rights in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea and would like to make the following remarks.

The Charter of the United Nations has given a
mandate to the Security Council to address cases
that pose a threat to international peace and security
exclusively, while other organs have been charged with
addressing human rights situations in States, taking
an approach that is based on respect and free from
politicization, slander or the use of the lofty principles
of human rights as a tool for selective targeting in the
service of narrow political interests.

My country would therefore like to express its
dismay at the way in which some are insisting on
portraying human rights violations in a certain country
as one of the root causes of conflict and claiming that
such cases and situations fall under the mandate of the
Security Council. In this regard, we wish to note that we
reject any link between the two issues, which represent
an overlap between the main pillars of the work of the
United Nations.

The promotion of the situation of human rights
in all countries of the world depends on an approach
that is based on honest and constructive dialogue,
international cooperation and the exchange of best
practices, including through technical cooperation.
The Human Rights Council, especially through the
Universal Periodic Review, is an international forum
that allows all States to exchange views and relevant
concerns in order to achieve the common goal of
promoting and protecting human rights in all countries
under review.

Egypt rejects any consideration of the situation
of human rights by the Security Council because we
believe in the need to reject politicization, partiality,
subjectivity and double standards. All human rights
issues must be addressed fairly and honestly, and they
should not be used as a means to interfere selectively in
the internal affairs of States, in line with Article 2 ofthe
Charter of the United Nations and in order to preserve
the credibility of the international bodies mandated
to address human rights as forums for international
cooperation and dialogue instead of confrontation.
On the other hand, and taking into consideration the
aforementioned, Egypt would like to express sympathy
in connection with the issue of Japanese abductees. We
stress the need to find effective means to address the
concerns of the Japanese Government in this regard
at the bilateral level and in international, bilateral and
multilateral forums. We encourage the two parties to
engage in a constructive dialogue to reach an immediate
and satisfactory solution to this issue.

In closing, we stress the need for the political will
necessary to respect the Charter and the prerogatives
of the organs of the United Nations. Current conflicts
around the world, continued occupation and protracted
conflicts, the proliferation of terrorism and weapons of
mass destruction, the increasing number of refugees
and the problem of illegal migration all highlight the
need for the Security Council to focus exclusively on its
important role of maintaining international peace and
security instead of encroaching on the prerogatives of
other United Nations organs.

