I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr David Shearer, and Mr. Edmund Yakani for their briefings. First, let me welcome the recent compromise reached by President Kiir and First Vice-President Machar on the allocation of states. It is a positive and a long overdue step towards a better future for South Sudan. Estonia encourages all parties to maintain the momentum towards further implementation of the peace agreement, including its transitional justice provisions. We hope that such a momentum will help resolve the slow movement on transitional security arrangements. We are alarmed by the increase in intercommunal violence, including the use of military-grade weapons and tactics. The Government of South Sudan should open investigations and prosecute the individuals who bear the primary responsibility for this violence. Such vile actions again show us the necessity of the sanctions and the territorial arms embargo. Continuing in the same vein, Estonia believes that it is important to appoint Governors with no human rights record. This sends a clear signal that grave human rights violations have no place in South Sudan's public administration. It is also a way to send a positive message to the population of South Sudan, showing that attacks against civilians are not rewarded. We remain very disturbed by the dire humanitarian situation in the country. The situation has got worse due to the pandemic. Fifty-six per cent of the population has no access to even primary health-care services. Displaced people in camps or camp-like settings are in increasing danger due to overcrowding, poor access to safe water and sanitation and limited health care and related services. Added to that food insecurity, approximately 2.4 million children are out of school. I agree that it is a lot to deal with, but where there is a will, there is a way. We call on the Government of South Sudan to do its utmost to help its citizens. This requires keeping the humanitarian assistance and protection flowing, as the impact of the pandemic is growing. We know the capabilities of the country; it is therefore of major importance to take note of all precautionary measures. That said, the pandemic should not be used as a pretext to impede implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) or to slow down the implementation of the peace agreement. It is sad to see that violations of the status-of-forces agreement are on the rise. Moreover, not allowing medical evacuation flights is unacceptable, as UNMISS peacekeepers are risking their lives to help others. Last but not least, I want to thank the UNMISS personnel and Mr. David Shearer for all their work during these testing times. They have done a tremendous job supporting the country and the civilians.
