Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): First, I would like to thank Ambassador
Pederson for his briefing and wish him every success in
his work as the Secretary-General's Special Envoy for
Syria. We are confident that his extensive diplomatic
experience will serve him well on the long and often
tortuous road travelled by his predecessors in the quest
for peace in Syria. We recognize that the challenges
ahead are very serious.

For almost eight long years now, the Syrian people
have been plunged into a conflict with devastating
consequences - a conflict that has stripped millions
of people of the conditions necessary to achieve a
promising future. We must work to ensure that a new
Syrian generation is born free from the odious scourge
of war. The Dominican Republic is a faithful believer
in dialogue and in the concerted search for peaceful
solutions to conflicts. We therefore understand that the
process of mediation and rapprochement between the
parties responsible for driving the political renewal of

Syria must be promoted on the basis of the provisions
and guidelines of resolution 2254 (2015), thus ensuring
its full implementation.

Our task is clear - we must work together as
one to strengthen the role of the United Nations as
facilitator of the political process in Syria and as a
guarantor of conditions that are viable for all parties
but especially for the Syrian population. We know that
the task ahead of us in this new stage in the Syrian
conflict is not easy - how to unify criteria, purposes
and objectives. That is what is implied by what we see
as a political process that must be carried out by Syria
and for the Syrians as shapers of their own future. That
will also require the full participation of all levels of
society, including organized groups, in an inclusive,
transparent and safe environment. The achievement of
a sustainable and lasting peace in Syria that leads to
national reconciliation in a fragile and complex context
leads us to reflect on two points that we consider crucial
to highlight collectively.

First, we must build confidence in the political
process so that the Syrian people can make it their
own as part of a broader and more integral political
transformation towards the attainment of their own
peace. We believe it is important to emphasize that
there is a need for concrete facts that demonstrate the
necessary political will to move forward so that the
Syrian people can see the real fruits ofthe process, such
as the provision of sustainable solutions for the civilian
population and for its security and protection, as well
as the acceleration of the process of releasing detainees
and hostages and the clarification of the situation of
disappeared persons.

Secondly, we must ensure the full participation of
civil society, in particular Syrian women, both inside
and outside the country. Syrian women should no longer
be seen as passive entities, victims of war or consorts
of terrorists. The reality we see is that, more and more,
Syrian women are owning new spaces as activists,
journalists, artists and entrepreneurs. Let us put in their
hands the construction of a new country and we will see
extraordinary results.

As Special Envoy De Mistura said on 20 December
in this Chamber (see S/PV.8434), we need a renewed
sense of our common purpose and concerted action in
the Security Council if 2019 is to be the real turning
point for Syria. The Dominican Republic shares this
sense of renewal and is willing to participate in that
spirit by building bridges and fostering dialogue. Let us
be ambitious in our aspirations.

