Baron Ahmad (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's debate.
Your country deserves great credit for your leadership
and your steadfast support for the countries of the
Sahel. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
Foreign Minister of Mali Abdoulaye Diop, Chairperson
of the African Union Commission Moussa Faki
Mahamat and European Union Special Representative
for the Sahel Angel Losada Fernandez. We welcome
the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/869) and today's
briefing on the activities of the Joint Force ofthe Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).

During the recent Security Council visit, all
Council members saw the serious challenges facing
the countries of the Sahel. Those challenges represent
a serious danger to the people of the region and to
partners and allies who are working to support them.

I want to begin by offering my condolences to all
those so tragically killed, including, most recently,
three United Nations peacekeepers from Chad in
Northern Mali on Thursday. In the past 12 months, we
have witnessed a continuing stream of deadly terrorist
attacks resulting in the tragic loss of innocent lives; an
increase in attacks against forces of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA); the ongoing corrosive influence

of organized criminals trafficking weapons, drugs and
people across the region; and the desperate journey of
migrants, so often intercepted by people traffickers
seeking to exploit them.

We all have a role to play in addressing those
challenges. The United Kingdom have supported
projects across the Sahel and the wider region,
particularly in Nigeria and the Lake Chad basin.
Last year alone, the British army trained 22,000
Nigerian troops in counter-terrorism tactics. We have
invested over $6 million in tackling modern slavery,
and $2.5 million in a joint border task force with the
Nigerian army. We also provide training for Nigerian
anti-trafficking officers. Across the Sahel, the United
Kingdom spent over $225 million on humanitarian and
development projects last year, and we are providing
human rights training to Malian troops through the
European Union Training Mission in Mali.

Our national crime agency recently dismantled
two people-smuggling rings in Mali, and we stand
ready to do more to support the G-5 Sahel countries
and their allies to improve the security situation. The
establishment of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force is a step
forward in countering terrorism and illegal migration.
We were pleased that the Council offered its political
support to the Mission earlier this year. For its part,
the United Kingdom is currently undertaking a scoping
mission to see what more it can do in the Sahel,
including potential bilateral support to the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force.

Funding is an important factor in determining a
mission's success, which is why we were pleased to
support the European Union commitment to provide
€15 million to the Joint Force. We welcome the work
undertaken to establish the G-5 Joint Force. I was
encouraged by reports from my Ambassador following
his visit to the region.

We recognize the challenges faced by the Force and
the value of tackling terrorists and traffickers with a
holistic approach right across the region - in particular
ensuring there is a clear plan to deliver services
alongside security. If security gains are to take root,
work must also continue to develop robust frameworks
for compliance with human rights and international
humanitarian law. We welcome the Secretary-General's
support and his proposals for potential United Nations
support. We are studying them in detail and considering
the complementary roles that bilateral and multilateral
support can play in the Sahel region. We must ensure
that MINUSMA is able to deliver its current mandate
effectively and efficiently.

More than 140 brave MINUSMA peacekeepers have
given their lives for the people of Mali. They and the
G-5 Sashel forces operate in one of the most dangerous
places in the world, and I pay tribute to them. I call
upon the Government of Mali and other parties to the
peace process to show the same courage, commitment
and resolve to bring unity to the country. A successful
peace process is at the heart of any strategy to defeat
terrorism and traffickers in the Sahel. We in the Council
expect a redoubling of efforts for peace and to see the
political will to overcome the remaining obstacles.

In conclusion, the United Kingdom remains
committed to peace and security across the Sahel.
To that end, I reiterate our strong support for the G-5
Sahel Joint Force, which I sincerely believe can make
an important contribution to achieving that goal.

