Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): Recent developments
in the Middle East have shifted the focus of the
international community from the Palestinian issue to
more pressing items on the agenda: the situation in Syria
and preserving regional stability. However, Ukraine
believes that, in the current circumstances, the peaceful
settlement of the Palestinian issue should remain one of
the buttresses of a stable and secure Middle East. We
understand the claims on both sides and think that it is
only through compromise and direct Israeli-Palestinian
talks that the sides will reach a final agreement.

Ukraine welcomes the efforts of the United States
Secretary of State, Mr. John Kerry, in advancing direct
dialogue between the parties with the aim of achieving
a framework agreement that would provide guidelines
for permanent status negotiations and address all the
core issues - in other words, a full and final peace
treaty between the parties. We see some positive signs.
The third group of prisoners was released in late 2013.
We are very well aware that it was a very painful and
difficult decision for the Israeli side. We understand
the Israeli security concerns and support all initiatives
aimed at elaborating adequate guarantees.

My State also understands the need to continue to
assist the Palestinian Authority in building its social and
economic development, which is of critical importance
for the viability of a future Palestinian State and to
its Palestinian inhabitants to be able to lead a normal
life. We hope that 2014, proclaimed by the General
Assembly as the International Year of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People, will contribute to finding a true
and durable solution to the conflict.

Ukraine supports a two-State solution resulting
from successful negotiations between Palestine and
Israel. We support the Palestinian people's efforts
to obtain an independent State, and we hope to see
Palestinians enjoying freedom and prosperity in their
own State. A historic compromise should be achieved.

That brings us to the importance of the mediation
endeavours of the regional players, with Jordan being
one of the key brokers. With this in mind, we support the
official Jordanian position, voiced earlier this year by
Prime Minister Abdullah Ensour. Jordan should be part
of the final agreement between the Palestinians and the
Israelis. Its position should be taken into account while
settling the important issues of the status of Jerusalem,
border issues, water and security arrangements.

Ukraine has repeatedly expressed its concern
over the situation in Syria, where a two-year conflict
continues to take the lives ofinnocent civilians. In that
context, the important task in the short term is to ensure
the holding of a successful second Geneva conference
on Syria. We have high expectations for the results of
that conference, while welcoming the strong diplomatic
efforts of Russia and the United States. We appeal to
all parties involved to overcome the contradictions that
have long hindered the development of consensus on
the issue of a Syrian settlement within the Security
Council.

The humanitarian situation in the country is also
dangerous. We call on all parties, in particular the
opposition groups, to provide unhindered access to
humanitarian organizations in the country in order to
begin to overcome the terrible situation that is currently
affecting the lives of civilians, particularly women
and children. In that context, we welcome the recent
international donor conference, held in Kuwait, which
resulted in the international community managing to
raise $2.4 billion of the required $6.5 billion.

However, benefiting from international assistance
is impossible without an understanding between the
parties to the conflict. We are concerned about the
lack of unity inside the opposition camp in Syria and
urge it to take part in the second Geneva conference in
order to reach a political compromise, which is needed
now more than ever. Ukraine believes that the only
possible solution to the Syrian crisis is an inclusive
political dialogue and the necessary transformation in
the country.

