Mr. Mercado (Philippines): My delegation
thanks the British presidency for convening this
meeting to discuss the successful transition process in
Sierra Leone. We also thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Daudi Ngelautwa
Mwakawago, for his comprehensive briefing.

As the chapter of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) closes and the era of the
United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIOSIL) opens, we cannot but commend the
combined and coordinated efforts of the United
Nations presence, the Government of Sierra Leone and
their international partners over the past few years in
achieving valuable progress towards building a
sustainable peace.

Indeed, Sierra Leone can now be called a
peacekeeping success story, and we should
acknowledge the factors that contributed to that
success. First would be the alignment of political will
and resources; secondly, the speedy deployment of a
robust and well-equipped Mission with a strong
mandate; thirdly, agreement among warring factions;
fourthly, the institution of civil affairs operations to
win the hearts and minds of the population; and fifthly,
the implementation of properly designed disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes.

The next step now is to translate peacekeeping
success into peacebuilding accomplishments. In that
regard, various challenges face Sierra Leone in its
process of reconstruction: decline in foreign aid, good
governance issues, social problems and external
threats. This, however, can be overcome as long as the
international community, the partners, the United
Nations presence and regional organizations continue
their engagement in Sierra Leone.

We believe that the first priority is to focus on the
economic front. Efforts must be undertaken to help
Sierra Leone make up for the expected decline in
foreign inflows due to the phasing out of humanitarian
and post-conflict recovery aid by developing and
maximizing its revenue-generating sources, such as
agriculture and mining.

Creating jobs and stimulating private investment
and sustained economic growth should be a major
concern. The Security Council can actually be of
assistance here. The Council's sustained attention to
Sierra Leone, as exemplified by today's meeting,
encourages donors to continue to provide development
assistance and pursue investment opportunities. Since
peace and security are paramount considerations for
investors, the Council's imprimatur can entice
investors to bring in resources, for example to rebuild
physical infrastructure, an important requirement for
long-term economic development.

In the same vein, Council advocacy of
transparency and accountability in governance builds
institutional stability and will encourage sustained
international donor support and, equally important,
improve the business climate for investor confidence.

The newly established United Nations Integrated
Office in Sierra Leone (UNIOSIL) is also expected to
assist the Government in dealing with the challenges
just mentioned. We believe that UNIOSIL's integrated
structure, as provided for by resolution 1620 (2005),
will positively contribute to the efforts at peace
consolidation through enhancing economic governance
and creating lasting national capacities for conflict
prevention.

By coincidence, as we consider the situation in
Sierra Leone today, the Council and the General
Assembly have just adopted the resolution creating the
Peacebuilding Commission. We believe that Sierra
Leone would be the ideal first candidate for assistance
from the Peacebuilding Commission because of the
good foundation already laid and its great potential for
success.

The realization of the promise of Sierra Leone
will not be complete without regional efforts. Support
from the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Mano River Union will be crucial
to maintaining external peace and security. Regional
players would be wise to acknowledge the positive
developments in Sierra Leone and Liberia and to work
towards the common goal of achieving peace and
security in the subregion.

Continued inter-Mission cooperation among
United Nations missions and offices in West Africa -
UNIOSIL, the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and the United Nations Office for
West Africa (UNOWA) - also reinforces peace and
security in the region.

In conclusion, my delegation hopes that the
innovations introduced by Sierra Leone in the area of
peacekeeping will be followed in other operations and
that another example could be set by Sierra Leone, this
time in the area of peacebuilding. It is incumbent upon
us, as a member of the family of nations, to help Sierra
Leone in its transition from relief to development.

