Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): Let me start by
congratulating you, Madam President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March and by thanking you for inviting Sierra Leone
to participate in the debate on the final report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/192) on the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL).

I wish to convey, on behalf of His Excellency
President Mr. Ernest Bai Koroma, the Government
and people of Sierra Leone, fond appreciation for
the invaluable support and unfailing interest of the
Security Council, the wider membership of the United
Nations and our international partners in consolidating
our hard-won peace, security and stability to the point
of being considered a historic success story of United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

Mr. Ernest Bai Koroma, has asked me to tender
his apologies for not being able to attend this meeting
himself to deliver this message to the Council on this
historic occasion.

"It is a pleasure to address the Council today
on this epoch-making event marking the end of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone and the transition of the United
Nations engagement in Sierra Leone to the new
United Nations country team model. Prior to this
meeting, we were honoured to receive in Sierra
Leone, first, Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski
in February, followed by no less a person than
the Secretary-General on 4 and 5 March. The two
eminent personalities came to join us in celebrating
the wonderful transition in the United Nations
mandate to Sierra Leone, defined by the residual
and future roles of UNIPSIL and the Peacebuilding
Commission.

"We were heartened by their inspiring words
about the remarkable progress our country has
made, especially in identifying and resolving
tensions and threats of potential conflicts, in
monitoring and promoting human rights, in
building peace and security, in consolidating good-
governance reforms, and in undertaking the boldest
ever sector-wide and nation-wide public investment
programmes.

"Those, together, provide for us the appropriate
healing therapy for a country that has emerged
from a massively devastating internal conflict,
in terms of loss of innocent lives, displaced
people and wide-ranging destruction of physical
infrastructure. We are at the same time cognizant
of the remaining huge challenges to healing. On
behalf of the people of Sierra Leone and in my own
name, I wish to reiterate our very firm commitment
to sustaining our transformation.

"About 23 years ago, war broke out in our
beloved nation. The conflict brought out the worst
hatred and criminality in a few Sierra Leoneans
and their international backers, but it also
inspired the best resilience in the overwhelming
majority of our people. The great majority of our

compatriots - including members of the armed
forces, the military, the police and the civil defence
forces, as well as civil society at large - resisted
the onslaught on their humanity. So many of our
people suffered in the process, and so many were
displaced, murdered and wounded, but they stood
firm, held on to their spirits and ushered in a return
to peace, security, democracy and civilian rule in
1996. But unfortunately, the struggles continued
until the war was formally declared over in January
2002.

"We were not alone in our actions for peace,
democracy and security. Members of the Economic
Community of West African States, particularly
Nigeria and the Republic of Guinea, were among
the first to join our resistance to the carnage. The
United Nations, the United Kingdom and other
friends of Sierra Leone later joined the concerted
efforts to put an end to the carnage and ensure that
our nation once againjoined the ranks of peaceful,
stable and democratic countries.

"We have in diverse ways tried to honour the
memory of the people - men and women - whose
perseverance, dedicated service and sacrifice
brought peace and healing to the nation. At this
moment, I would kindly ask that the Council join
us in remembering them in a quiet moment and
to remember a strong pioneer for national peace
and reconciliation, Alhaji Ahmad Tejan Kabbah,
former President of Sierra Leone, who passed away
on Thursday, 13 March and was laid to rest on
Sunday, 23 March. May their souls and the souls of
all faithful departed rest in perfect peace.

"Today, we are here to recognize a significant
transition in our actions to move towards a
democratic, peaceful, stable, developing and
prosperous country. We have seen several United
Nations transitions in Sierra Leone, commencing
in 1998 with the transition to the United Nation
Observer Mission in Sierra Leone, to monitor and
observe efforts to disarm, demobilize and socially
reintegrate ex-combatants while at the same
restructuring the security forces. That was followed
by the transition to the much larger United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone in 1999, which focused
on the implementation of the Lome' Peace Accord,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, while continuing
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme and the resettlement, rehabilitation and

reconstruction processes. That was then followed
by the establishment of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Sierra Leone in 2006, which
supported the Government in consolidating the
peace, security and democracy. That in turn was
followed, finally, by the United Nations Integrated
Peace Building Office in 2008.

"UNIPSIL has been pivotal in many processes
in the country, including furthering the work of
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and
the Special Court for Sierra Leone; building civil
society capacities and promoting political dialogue,
human rights, good governance and the rule of law;
undertaking comprehensive security sector reform;
furthering gender empowerment; contributing to
the holding of credible internationally recognized
elections in 2012; and in transforming the
Government-owned broadcasting service into an
independent public service broadcaster, the Sierra
Leone Broadcasting Corporation (SLBC).

"The SLBC is still facing certain challenges,
but it has been a worthwhile transformation. More
than at any time in the nation's history, there is
now greater diversity of information and opinions
thanks to it, and its reach is wider than in the decades
before. Those are laudable achievements, but the
partnership to improve its financial base, technical
competencies and coverage must continue.

"The transition we are recognizing today is a
very special one. It is a transition that crowns with
success all the preceding transitions. The goal of
all the other transitions was to bring the country to
this particular stage - a country that once received
peacekeepers is now contributing peacekeepers to
other countries; a country that was once a byword
for humanitarian crisis now has one of the fastest
growing economies in the world; a country that
succumbed to military dictatorship has held a
succession of free and fair elections; a country
rocked by armed and uncivil divisions is healing
itself, thanks to the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, the Special Court for Sierra Leone,
the perseverance of our people and the commitment
of the United Nations and our many international
friends. That we are now inaugurating another
profound shift in the core mandate of the United
Nations in Sierra Leone, from peace consolidation
to development, shows that the Organization has

always aligned its actions with the aspirations of
our people.

"On becoming, President in 2007, I signalled
my determination to move the country towards
economic development and prosperity. The
United Nations has been a valued partner in
that transformation. The indicators of the
transformation are more evident in every part of
the country today than at any time in its history.
We are constructing roads in our cities and towns.
We are regenerating agricultural productivity and
significantly re-establishing food self-sufficiency.
We are ensuring greater access to health care for
pregnant women, lactating mothers and children
than at any time in our country's history. We are
providing more funding for education and seeing
increases in school enrolment rates. We are
promoting small and medium-sized enterprises and
attracting large-scale investment and creating job
opportunities for all. We are expanding the provision
of electricity and ensuring that more women are in
positions of authority in the Government, security
forces and other key institutions and organizations
within the country.

"Now, we have taken a collective decision to
move towards becoming a middle-income nation
by 2030, in alignment with the targets of the United
Nations sustainable development goals. Moving the
target date from 2035 to 2030 was inspired by the
Secretary-General himself. We have commenced
the implementation of the Agenda for Prosperity,
the first five-year national plan towards achieving
the goal of middle-income status, and we welcome
the alignment of the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework with our Agenda for
Prosperity.

"As I intimated earlier, we still face formidable
challenges going forward, but we are inspired by
the commitment of the United Nations to support
us in meeting them through its new United
Nations country team. We also welcome the
commitment of the United Nations to supporting
our Constitutional Review Committee, the Political
Parties Registration Commission and other good-
governance institutions. A successful partnership
is one that is underpinned by an alignment of goals
and aspirations. We salute the United Nations for
being an avid supporter of such alignments.

"Today, Sierra Leone is addressing this body
for the last time as a subject for its consideration.
We have now moved from a country on the Security
Council's agenda to a nation that is a storehouse
of lessons on how to successfully move away from
war to peace and development.

"With UNIPSIL's closure, Sierra Leone is
leaving fragility behind. We are improving our
international risk profile as a post-conflict country
and advancing confidence as a destination for
quality investment. Those are valuable prerequisites
for putting the very negative insignia of a blood-
diamond nation behind us. We are now harnessing
our diamonds and all our other natural resources
for purposes of ensuring sustainable development
and national prosperity.

"Our people have shown determination and
great dignity during all the transitions I have
mentioned. We have built enduring partnerships
for dignity, peace, security, democracy and
sustainable development, and we remain committed
to continuing to work with the Peacebuilding
Commission and other partners to promote those
overarching aspirations both in Sierra Leone and in
the wider world.

"We salute the leaders and members of the
various configurations for peace, justice and
development in Sierra Leone, including the
European Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the African Union, the
Peacebuilding Commission, Nigeria, the United
Kingdom, the United States, China, Guinea, the
Netherlands, Canada, and all other development
partners, including Arab funding agencies.

"The journey has been a challenging one, and
there are remaining challenges, no doubt. But there
shall be no turning back; we shall continue to be a
force for peace in the world, a symbol of successful
transformation and a partner for peace, security,
democracy and development."

In closing, I should like on behalf oins Excellency
the President, the Government and the people of Sierra
Leone to recognize the sentiments and words of
encouragement that I have received from all present
here. I also want to recognize the good work of the
outgoing Executive Representative of the Secretary-
General, and wish him and his wife every success in
their future endeavours.

Finally, Iwould like to thank Ambassador Rishchynski
for his efforts in undertaking the residual functions of
the Peacebuilding Commission. He is still around, and
I am sure that his heart is still in Sierra Leone.

