Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom regrets Russia's decision to block a new
mandate for the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia. We continue to believe that a continuing
United Nations presence in Georgia is a vital tool for
diffusing tensions and maintaining security in Georgia
and in the wider South Caucasus. We have made every
possible effort to negotiate a new substantive draft
resolution.

As we made clear during consultations on
27 May, we fully endorsed the Secretary-General's
recommendations, as set out in his report of 18 May
(S/2009/254), for a new security regime and mandate.
The Secretary-General's report provided us with a
strong basis, building on previous Security Council
resolutions. We would have preferred a stronger
security regime, but in the spirit of compromise we and
others were ready to adopt a mandate along those lines.

Along with the whole of the international
community - apart from Russia, which is a party to
this conflict, and one other State - the United
Kingdom continues to recognize the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders. It is therefore regrettable that
Russia, through its continued insistence on removing
all references to Georgia's territorial integrity in the
draft resolution, including previously agreed references
to Security Council resolution 1808 (2008), should
have sought to force the Security Council to change its
agreed position on the territorial integrity of a Member
State.

Russia itself voted for a whole series of Security
Council resolutions upholding Georgia's territorial
integrity and sovereignty, including as recently as
February 2009. We regret that Russia refuses to stand
by those resolutions, particularly as the situation on the
ground has not materially changed since February.

With today's veto, Russia has effectively
removed a key component of the international
community's ability to promote stability and address
the needs of vulnerable civilian populations living in
the conflict area. We understand that the Abkhaz de
facto authorities were keen to see the Mission
maintained, making Russia the only party to this
conflict that has sought to end the role of the United
Nations in Georgia.

Despite Russia's decision, we call on all parties
to the unresolved conflict in Georgia, including Russia,
that are parties to that unresolved conflict to engage in
dialogue and cooperation aimed at increasing stability
and addressing the needs of civilians on both sides of
the administrative borderline.

Furthermore, the United Kingdom would like to
reiterate the importance of all parties to this conflict
abiding by their existing commitments, as was made
clear in resolution 1866 (2009), other resolutions, and
the agreements of 12 August and 8 September 2008.
We also would like the Council to remain seized of the
matter.

Finally, I would like to conclude by paying
tribute to the men and women who have served with
the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia since
1993 for their efforts, despite difficult circumstances,
to promote peace and security.

