Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the convening of this
meeting and express our thanks to Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu
and her team for her informative briefing. We reaffirm
the support of the Government of Equatorial Guinea
for the work of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), whose personnel operate
in very sensitive and risky conditions.

We reiterate that the complete destruction of the
27 chemical-weapons production facilities declared by
Syria is an important development that reflects the will
and commitment on the part of national officials of the
Syrian Arab Republic and of international parties, above
all the Russian Federation, to take resolute steps towards
the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). It also
aims to achieve the objectives of the original declaration
on the Syrian Government's chemical-weapons
programme. In that regard, we continue to commend
the close cooperation between the OPCW and
Damascus in order to clarify any discrepancies or
inconsistencies that might have been observed in the
original declaration and in the information exchanged
in compliance with the obligations provided for in the
Chemical Weapons Convention.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea takes note that
the Fact-finding Mission has not yet reached conclusions
with respect to the events of 7 April in Douma.
However, we endorse the idea that further investigation
into the indicent should be carried out with rigour and
professionalism, as well as the other five incidents
reported to the OPCW Technical Secretariat.

With respect to the safety of OPCW personnel at
investigation and inspection sites, our Government
believes access to the sites of alleged incidents
requires that the security of the mission be ensured on
a permanent basis in accordance with the provisions
of the Conference of the States Parties held on 26 and
27 June. In that regard, we reiterate the need for the
Technical Secretariat to implement the new measures
aimed at mitigating high-security risks proposed by
the United Nations Department of Safety and Security.
That would lead to better planning on the upcoming
inspections planned at the Barzah and Jamraya facilities
of the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre.

We must remember that we are talking about
the most effective, cheapest and easiest type of
weapon available - certainly more so than nuclear
weapons - and we must therefore prevent warring
parties from using this weapon again in Idlib or any part
of Syria at all costs. The demilitarization agreement on
Idlib, which has brought about relative stability to the
area, should make it impossible for chemical attacks to
re-emerge.

Let us not be deceived. Opposing positions in the
Security Council show that the end of chemical weapons
in Syria effectively depends on a political agreement.
In that context, the Security Council and the OPCW are
the main channels for addressing this thorny problem.
We recognize the important role they have been playing
and we hope that the parties concerned will adopt a
constructive approach to find a solution through direct
and unhindered dialogue, which can make it possible
to prevent and put a definitive end to any further use of
chemical weapons in Syria by any party that intends to
use them.

In that regard, we continue to emphasize the need
for the establishment of a mechanism for attribution of
responsibility, which would be essential in reaffirming
the prohibition of the use of those weapons and to
deter their use. We also welcome the decision of the
Conference of the States Parties urging the Technical
Secretariat to take steps in identifying those responsible
for the use of chemical weapons in Syria. It is a step
in the right direction, as we firmly believe that it is
the common responsibility of the entire international
community to uphold the prohibition on the use of
chemical weapons and prevent those abominable
attacks from being repeated and by ensuring that no
one can be exonerated from responsibility in the event
of those situations.

I conclude by reiterating the official position of
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea: we oppose the
production, trade, distribution, storage and use of
chemical weapons by anyone and anywhere.

