Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
leadership you have shown in conducting the work of
the Council during your term, as well as your entire
support team.

You have made a sustained attempt to continue
the Council's efforts to meet the requirements of
transparency, as outlined in presidential note S/2010/507.
We commend your initiative in organizing an open
debate on development as it relates to the maintenance
of international peace and security (see S/PV.7361), a
subject that the Security Council had not covered since
2011 and that attracted great interest among Member
States, along with the fact that your country's President
personally took part in and led the debate, which
culminated in the adoption of a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2015/3). As we affirmed in our statement
in the debate, security and development are highly
interdependent, and even while the responsibility
for preventing conflict lies chiefly with States, the
Security Council nonetheless has a primary role to play
in countries in post-conflict situations, particularly
when it comes to implementing its resolutions.

Regarding the meeting on the peacebuilding
architecture (see S/PV.7359), Council members noted
the progress that has already been made in that area,
while emphasizing that much still remained to be done.
Among other things, the Security Council is awaiting
with interest the results of the forthcoming 2015
review of the peacebuilding architecture, a process
that began last month conjointly with the General
Assembly. For our part, we emphasized the importance
of proper identification by States themselves of their
national priorities as a basis for intervention by the
Peacebuilding Commission, as well as on strengthening
national institutions so as to restore the authority of the
State and ensure the provision of basic services to the
people.

Concerning Burundi, while some progress has
been made in achieving peace and stability, much
remains to be done, particularly when it comes to
expanding the political space. However, we welcome
the establishment of the United Nations Electoral
Observer Mission in Burundi, which on 1 January
began official operations alongside the African Union,
the European Union and the International Organization
ofla Francophonie, while hoping that the elections will
adhere to democratic standards so as to ensure stability
and peace in the country.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is still worrying, owing to the political challenges
related to the electoral process and the threat posed by
armed groups, including the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda. We welcome the launch of the
joint military operation against those groups between
the Congolese armed forces and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, while hoping that the necessary
measures will be taken to ensure the protection of the
civilian population and their access to humanitarian
aid.

My delegation has concluded that, regrettably, the
Council remains divided on the issue of the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. Far from
calming the atmosphere of defiance between Israelis
and Palestinians, recent events have seen the prospects
for the speedy resumption of negotiations recede even
further. At the meeting on the situation in Palestine
(see S/PV.7360), Council members noted the failure
of the draft resolution submitted to the Council on
30 December (S/2014/916), the purpose of which was
to reach an agreement on ending Israel's occupation by
the end of 2017. However, we should note that Council
members were unanimous in urging the international
community to play an active role in promoting a two-
State solution.

We commend Chile for organizing a mission to
Haiti designed to enable the Council to see at first hand
the implementation of the stabilization process in Haiti
in the wake of the disaster that devastated it in 2010.

In conclusion, I would like to once again reiterate
my congratulations to you and your team, Sir, for the
enormous amount of work tackled, the relevance of the
subjects addressed and the perseverance you displayed
throughout your term. I would also like to take this
opportunity to congratulate China on its assumption
of the presidency for the month of February, assure its
entire team of my delegation's unreserved support and
wish them every success.

