Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso, to today's meeting,
and we thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-
General for Africa, and the other briefers for the
information they have given us.

We agree with the alarming views expressed today
about the situation in the Sahel. The level of the threats
to security in this part of Africa is now unprecedentedly
high. The geographic area of terrorist activity is
expanding, and extremist ideology is continually
gaining new adherents. We are very concerned about
the attacks on religious shrines and other assaults by
extremists and terrorists. The roots of these issues are
well known, and Mr. Barry just discussed them. In
the Sahel we are reaping the fruits of the collapse of
statehood in Libya, which was the legacy of a crude
foreign intervention. We believe that if the situation
in that country is not normalized - and many of
the people we talked to during the recent Security
Council mission to Mali and Burkina Faso spoke about
this - it will be impossible to reliably stabilize the
region, practically speaking.

We welcomed the initiative of the States of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5) to create a Joint Force
to combat terrorism and organized crime. It appears
that in a relatively short period of time it has already
become an important element in regional security. We
were pleased with the information that as of January the
Joint Force had resumed its operations in all its areas
of responsibility, as well as the fact that its deployment
levels have reached 75 per cent. Of course, there are still
many unsolved problems. Last year's terrorist attack on
the Joint Force headquarters revealed its weaknesses.
As we understand it, the relevant conclusions have been
drawn and work has been done to fix the mistakes. Of
course, for the G-5 Joint Force to function fully, it has
to ensure stable and predictable funding. We see that
the funds promised by foreign donors are gradually
reaching the region. However, many of those who
pledged funds have not provided them in a timely
manner. In principle, we are willing to consider the
possibility of financing the Joint Force from the regular
United Nations budget.

We believe it is very important for both Africans
and the international community to take further
coordinated steps aimed at combating terrorism in
the Sahel-Sahara region. It is clearly impossible to
eradicate this evil by military measures alone, and we
also share the concerns of our friends from Equatorial
Guinea about the excessive militarization of the region.
It is essential to start effectively counteracting the
expansion of extremist ideology, tackling the area's
acute social and economic problems, strengthening
State institutions and ensuring respect for human rights.

Russia is closely monitoring the developing
situation in the region. We are already providing
appropriate military-technical assistance in a number
of countries and training military and police personnel.
In general, we hope that the G-5 Sahel Joint Force will
become an effective tool for restoring and maintaining
peace in West Africa in the very near future.

