Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, I thank Poland, in its capacity as President of the
Security Council, for holding this emergency meeting.
We also express our gratitude for the sympathy and
condolences expressed by all members of the Security
Council during the minute of silence honouring our
martyrs. We thank Council members for having felt the
urgent need to discuss the grave, deteriorating situation
in occupied Palestinian territory, in particular in the
Gaza Strip, owing to the heinous and deliberate crimes
committed by Israel against unarmed Palestinian
civilians. In addition, we thank the fraternal State of
Kuwait for its current efforts as the only Arab member
of the Security Council. We also thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov for his briefing.

We are meeting today at a tragic and painful
moment for the Palestinian people, with great sorrow
and bitterness. We convey our sincerest condolences to
the families of the martyrs. May they rest in peace. We
also wish a speedy recovery to all those who have been
wounded as a result of the brutal Israeli attack on the
Palestinian people who expressed their resistance in the
besieged Gaza Strip on the first evening of the sacred
month of Ramadan. We condemn in the strongest terms
the odious massacre committed by Israel in the Gaza
Strip. We call for an immediate halt to the military
aggression against our people and for a transparent,
independent and internationally led investigation.

The occupation is the main source of violence in
our region. Attempts by some to deny that fact are
undermined by the reality on the ground. We ask of
those who maintain diverging narratives why they
have often blocked any transparent, independent and
internationally led investigation. We have said in the
Council that we would accept the outcome of such an
investigation beforehand. The Secretary-General, as
well as Mr. Mladenov and 14 members of the Security
Council, have agreed to such an investigation on many
occasions. I reiterate that we will accept the outcome,
whatever it may be, of such an investigation. The
question is whether the other parties are willing to
accept such an investigation themselves.

Why do some block the will of the majority of the
Council? If what is happening on the ground is not clear,
an internationally led investigation should be carried
out for us to find out. As we said, we will preliminarily
accept its outcome. Are the other parties predisposed to
an independent, impartial and transparent investigation
to be conducted under the auspices of the Secretary-
General, so that matters do not continue in an
environment of accusations and mutual suspicion? Let
us conduct such an investigation.

Israel has chosen to intensify its brutal attacks
against unarmed Palestinian civilians in the Gaza
Strip. Israel has decided to target them in cold blood,
in flagrant violation of international law, including
international humanitarian law, human rights law and

the relevant resolutions on the protection of civilians.
That amounts to a war crime and a crime against
humanity under the Rome Statute, which established
the International Criminal Court.

We have come to the Security Council many times
to ask for immediate action to stop Israeli aggression
against our unarmed people, who are crushed under the
odious Israeli occupation and have been suffering from
forced displacement for more than seventy years.

We have sent hundreds of letters describing
the current brutal Israeli occupation of our people's
territory. We have sent numerous appeals asking for
implementation of the provisions of international law,
international humanitarian law, human rights law
and the relevant United Nations resolutions. We have
sounded the alarm about the crushing occupation of
an entire people and the various forms of abuse and
oppression to which they are subjected. We have warned
the Council not to turn a blind eye to the disaster in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, and the continuing deterioration in the
conditions there thanks to the racist Israeli practices,
which have increased and escalated with the illegitimate
and provocative decision of the United States regarding
Jerusalem. We have warned the Council about the
ongoing impunity that Israel enjoys. We have asked for
the exceptional immunity that enables Israel to act as if
it were above the law to be removed. We have urged that
Israel be held responsible for its actions and for justice
for its innocent Victims.

In the past, and specifically over the past two months,
we have not ceased to beg the Council to prevent another
massacre at the hands of Israel, the occupying Power.
We knew that the occupied Palestinian people - our
young people, men, women and elderly - would bear
the burden of such a massacre, carried out deliberately
and indiscriminately. What was the response to all of
those calls? Can it be that the Council did not hear
them or take all those warnings seriously? Can it be
that just one member of the Council can prevent it from
responding to its most elementary responsibility by
blocking three attempts to release press statements?
Those statements asked for just one thing, a transparent
and impartial investigation to determine the facts on
the ground. Why is there such disregard for the lives of
innocent Palestinians? How many Palestinians have to
die before the Council takes action?

If a massacre happened in a Council member's
country, and in the space of 24 hours 61 people,
including eight children, died and more than 3,000
were injured, what would they do? Would they accept
paralysis in the Security Council? Would they accept
seeing it do nothing in the face of crimes committed
by a cowardly occupying Power that hides in hills a
kilometre from Gaza targeting it with air strikes,
rockets and committing other heinous acts? The
occupiers are armed and target unarmed people in
Gaza. Would the members of the Council accept that
on their own territory? Would they accept the Security
Council remaining silent in the face of a massacre that
continued for more than 24 hours?

The world has early-warning mechanisms, means
to mediate and resolve conflicts, even accountability
mechanisms. Despite all of that, none of it was applied
in the case of Palestine. Council members can see
what is happening right now on the ground. Why did
all of those Palestinians have to die? Why are they
not enjoying life this morning with their families?
Did they deserve to die? Did those children deserve
to die? Did they deserve to be taken away from their
parents? The international community has passed laws
and encouraged the protection of the rights of every
human being. Why are Palestinians the exception? Why
should we be the exception? Why do those massacres
happen while the Security Council does nothing? Why
are we the exception? Why is the Council paralysed?
Throughout the past six weeks, while we have been
targeted, the Council has been paralysed. Why are we
the exception? When is the Council going to act? How
long is it going to followthis double standard, especially
when it comes to those who want to teach us a lesson?
Why do they have a double standard when they want
to control the Council? It is so terrible that we have to
keep asking it again and again.

Israel has historically tried to deprive us of our
humanity and our natural right to life, and to justify its
crimes by using its own security as a pretext, as if the
occupying Power has a right to enjoy security while it
denies the same right to the people being crushed by its
occupation. They have the right to security but we do
not. Once again, we are the exception. They have the
right to fire live ammunition at us in order to kill more
than 61 unarmed people and injure more than 3,000 in 24
hours, wielding heavy weaponry. They are in trenches a
kilometre away from the peaceful demonstrations and
they have more weaponry than they need.

Today, yet again and with a heavy heart, our
beloved Gaza Strip is burying more children and young
people who had simply been peacefully demonstrating
to protest the miserable living conditions unfairly
imposed on them by the Israeli occupation, to reject
the humiliation, oppression and servitude they are
subjected to and to call for their rights, including the
right to self-determination and the right of return.
Israel, the occupying Power, killed 61 civilians in just
24 hours, including eight children. Israel injured more
than 2,771 people, many of them severely, in that same
24 hours.

That brings the number of victims since the
beginning ofthe Great March of Return on 30 March to
110 martyrs, including no fewer than 12,000 civilians
injured, with at least 250 of them children. Many of
those Victims' injuries are severe because of the Israeli
occupying Power's barbarous use of live ammunition.
Israel deliberately uses lethal ammunition on Palestinian
civilians, or the kind that delivers the greatest possible
physical injury, leaving victims permanently disabled.
According to reports from international organizations,
many of the victims have suffered severe bone and
tissue injuries. I call on the Council to invite those
organizations - such as Medecins Sans Frontieres, the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, Human Rights Watch and
B'Tselem - here to listen to them. They can tell the
Council about the kind of weapons that were used,
inflicting lasting, lifelong physical disabilities. Their
limbs are amputated. They are crippled. Those are
barbarous acts that show the Israeli army's lack of
humanity where civilians are concerned. That is the
real definition of terrorism. A similar situation in any
other country would have caused an uproar. We will not
be the exception. We are the Palestinian people.

Israel targets our children in order to inflict the
cruellest of punishments on us and thereby extinguish
the fire of life within us, because Israel understands
that our children are invaluable. We live for our
children. They represent our best future, the future that
we wish for.

Civilians have the right to peacefully assemble and
demonstrate. That is an enshrined right for everyone.
The insinuations that Palestinians are responsible
for their own deaths because they are protesting the
illegitimate occupation are provocative and racist.
In other countries the participation of young people,
women and families in demonstrations is proudly held
up as proof of a vibrant democracy, and it is protected
under the right to freedom of speech and peaceful
demonstration. Half a million people demonstrated in
Washington, DC, against the use of guns in schools.
Families and schools participated. That is permitted
in other countries, but when Palestinians do the same
thing in Gaza and occupied Palestinian territory, they
are accused of using children as human shields. We
reject that racist narrative, which turns us into people
excluded from humanity.

We have the right to demonstrate with all of
our family members against the occupation and its
arrogance. We have the right to exercise our rights. Our
men, our older people, our women and our children have
that right. It is natural, civilized and accepted in ever
country that is a member of the Council. Why is it not
accepted in ours? Why are we being accused in a racist,
fallacious way for simply exercising the same rights as
anyone else, in spite of living under occupation and in a
much more difficult situation?

Like the rest of humankind, we wish to teach our
children about love of country and about collective
participation in civilized human actions. Why are
such accusations being directed at us? Those activities
are not scorned in other countries. They do not say
that civilians are being used as human shields. We
categorically reject such descriptions of peaceful
Palestinian demonstrations. We also reject the use
of such claims to exonerate Israel, the occupying
Power, of its responsibility in using live ammunition
against Palestinian civilians, and of its responsibility
for deliberately causing their deaths, mutilations
and injuries. Those actions add to the despair of the
Palestinian people and lessen their hopes for justice
and peace.

Our call for international protection of the
Palestinian people goes hand in hand with international
humanitarian law and the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, which call for the protection of
civilians in times of armed conflict, including the
protection of children, women and humanitarian
workers, especially journalists. We call for the
implementation of those standards and principles in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including the besieged
and occupied Gaza Strip. No matter what version of
events Israeli puts forward, the Gaza Strip cannot be
excluded from the implementation of international
standards for the protection of civilians. Ensuring
international protection is now urgent, especially since
Israel, the occupying Power, has violated international
law. It has clearly failed to shoulder its responsibilities
under international law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention, to ensure the security and prosperity
of Palestinian civilians under occupation. That
responsibility therefore now falls to the international
community, in accordance with the Geneva Convention
and with the resolutions and commitments of the
Security Council itself.

The document sent by the Secretary-General a
year and a half ago, during the Spanish presidency
of the Council, on the various experiences and forms
of international protection for civilians, should not
remain simply words on paper. The Council should
consider it in depth and should determine how to ensure
international protection for the Palestinian people now
that the occupying Power has failed to shoulder the
responsibility that it bears under international law. That
is why it is now the Council's responsibility to ensure
international protection for the Palestinian people until
the end of the intolerable occupation of our country and
until Palestinian independence has been achieved.

I should also mention the illegitimate and
provocative decision by the United States Administration
concerning Jerusalem, which flies in the face of
international consensus and Violates the relevant
Security Council resolutions, particularly resolutions
478 (1980) and 2334 (2016). That Administration has
chosen to support Israel, which has increased and
exacerbated tensions and sensitivities and led to this
trail ofblood. While no one is questioning the sovereign
right of a State to choose the location of its Embassy, if
that right runs counter to international law and Security
Council resolutions, it is no longer a sovereign right. No
country has the right to imperil our territory and place
an Embassy in a territory under occupation. Jerusalem's
status has been well known to the entire Council since
the adoption of General Assembly resolution 181 (II),
which determined Jerusalem's special status, and of all
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
478 (1980) and 2334 (2016), as well as the agreements
concluded between us and the occupying Power.
According to those documents, the status of Jerusalem
is to be determined in final status negotiations.

No one, under the pretext of sovereignty or for any
other reason, has the right to act in flagrant violation of
international law and Security Council resolutions. If
we were talking about transferring the Embassy from
Tel Aviv to Haifa or Ashdod, that would be fine, and
the United States would be free do so. But transferring
the embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem is not up to the
United States. That is an issue of international law and
the international community.

The Trump Administration refuses to listen to what
the world is saying. It refuses to listen to what is stated
in United Nations resolutions, in particular those of the
Security Council, or to what is laid down in international
law and international standards. It refuses to listen. The
United States is a super-Power that should be defending
international law first and foremost. It is a super-Power
that should be defending the resolutions of the Security
Council and of the United Nations before anyone else,
because of its position as a permanent member of the
Council. As a super-Power, it should be the first to
abide by international law, not flout it or close its eyes
to the situation on the ground. The whole world can see
the provocation. The United States should review its
position and its flagrant violation of international law
and the relevant Security Council resolutions.

Furthermore, the United States Administration
did not just ignore the specificity and sensitivity
around the status of the city and its central role in
peace; it also decided to transfer the embassy from Tel
Aviv to Jerusalem while the Palestinian people were
commemorating the seventieth anniversary of the
Nakba, their day of catastrophe. It is another provocative
decision by the United States Administration that
completely ignores the feelings and legitimate rights
of Palestinians and the political concerns and religious
sentiments of Christians and Muslims all over the
world. It is a provocation for millions of Palestinians,
Muslims and Christians. The United States took that
decision in complete disregard of everyone, including
the Palestinian people.

As a super-Power, the United States should have
put pressure on Israel to end its violations against the
Palestinian people, compel it to respect international
law and create an environment conducive to breaking
the political deadlock and achieving peace, security,
prosperity and dignity for everyone. Regrettably,
it decided to do the opposite. It decided to bolster
Israel's intransigence and impunity and protect it
from international condemnation, accountability
and any measure that might rectify a situation that is
unfair to Palestinians and to their right to freedom and
independence. The most recent decision taken with
regard to Jerusalem has inspired the right-wing Israeli
Government to implement its illegitimate policies and
practices, including the murder of innocent civilians
in broad daylight, without fear of consequences, since
Israel has always enjoyed impunity. That has fuelled
its aspirations to gain forcible control over Palestinian
territory, including through the illegitimate and illegal
annexation of East Jerusalem.

We must acknowledge that the absence of
accountability and the protection of Israel from sanctions
has enabled Israel to go ever further in its settlement
building and racist policies towards the Palestinian
people. It has a green light permitting it to commit
increasingly serious crimes against innocent people,
kill larger numbers of people, imprison Palestinians,
confiscate greater stretches of land, destroy more
houses and displace more people. That has provoked
the current developments in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. That impunity has
enabled Israel to continue its illegitimate and inhumane
blockade of the Gaza Strip for more than 10 years. The
blockade has witnessed three devastating wars, during
which Israel has targeted infrastructure on the Gaza
Strip, exacerbating the situation for approximately
2 million Palestinians. Israel has decided to impose
collective punishment, which constitutes a war crime.
Israel deprives Palestinians of protection. Urgent
action is therefore required to rectify this very difficult
humanitarian situation.

We have repeatedly called on the Council to lift the
illegitimate Israeli blockade of Gaza and provide the
humanitarian assistance we need to ease our people's
suffering. Regrettably, that request has not been granted
so far. We are making that request again today. Here
we would like to recall resolution 1860 (2009) and the
Council's demands on this issue. We ask that serious
measures be taken to exert pressure on the occupying
Power to end the blockade and open crossing points to
enable the free movement of people and goods, in line
with international humanitarian law. We also call for
the support of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which,
in spite of the financial crisis imposed on it, continues
to implement its mandate and provide assistance to
refugees. It also continues to play an important role in
easing the suffering of the people of the Gaza Strip and
meeting their most urgent needs.

We call on the Security Council to act without
delay to find an immediate solution to this sensitive
issue, which threatens international peace and
security. The Council must take immediate action
to stop the massacre of our people, especially in
Gaza. It cannot remain silent. It must demand that
its resolutions be respected and it should guarantee
their implementation. We call on all countries to work
collectively or individually on the issue, in line with
their legal commitments and in support of international
law. That should include condemning the illegitimate
and brutal attitude of Israel to the Palestinian people
under occupation. Israeli settlements in our territories,
including in East Jerusalem, should not be recognized.
Any attempts by countries to support that illegal
situation should be denounced. Measures should be
taken to ensure accountability andjustice. We must also
take urgent action to save the lives of innocent civilians
and prevent the situation from deteriorating in order to
have a chance, however small, to achieve a just peace.
That is why international protection must be provided
to the Palestinian people in line with international
humanitarian law.

Seventy years after the tragedy, injustice and
shock of the Nakba, the Palestinian people, along with
the international community and the members of the
Security Council, continue to believe that international
law is the way to justice, given that it is the surest path
towards peace. States should translate words into action.
It is time for serious and immediate action to be taken to
ensure the primacy of international law, resume efforts
to put an end to the Israeli occupation and achieve a
just and lasting peace so that the Palestinian people can
live in dignity and peace and exercise their inalienable
rights, including the right to self-determination and
freedom in an independent Palestinian State and the
right of return. Our people have waited a long time. We
have suffered for a long time. We can wait no longer for
an end to this grave injustice. I request that the Council
not dash our hopes and aspirations.

