Mr. Aho-Glele (Benin) (spoke in French): This
public meeting enables us to assess the activities of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and to discuss
the paths to follow and the means to employ to make
the international community's fight against the scourge
of terrorism more effective. The odious attacks of 11
September 2001 revealed, by their magnitude and their
cruelty, the gravity of the threat and the challenge that
terrorism poses to international peace and security. The
threat of terrorism has increased considerably with the
possibility that terrorist organizations have access to
weapons of mass destruction, which cause us to fear
the worst for humanity.

There is real consensus among States on the need
to fight terrorism through concerted action within the
framework of multilateral cooperation. The United
Nations has played the leading role as the best
framework for coordinating the efforts of Member
States. By shouldering its statutory responsibilities, the
Security Council has rightly taken the lead in the fight
against terrorism.

In the light of the resolve of States to pool their
efforts to stem the threat of terrorism, the Security
Council has given specific content to this fight by
defining the main guidelines for a coherent strategy to
destroy the underpinnings of the apparatus of terrorism
and to break the links that feed its worldwide network.
In that context, resolution 1373 (2001) is a
fundamental reference, in that it formulated clear
measures to guide the conduct of States and to provide
the international community with an appropriate
instrument to guide the implementation of the strategy
adopted. That instrument, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, has proved its worth. The CTC has built
international solidarity in the face of the terrorist
threat, both at the State level and at the level of
international, regional and subregional organizations.

The need to strengthen the CTC's means of action
to enable it to deal more effectively with this threat has
prompted Council member States to draft an important
revitalization plan. The Chairman of the Committee has
just outlined it very clearly, for which we thank him.
The proposal includes innovations that must be proved
in practice. We endorse the objectives assigned to the
Executive Directorate, which must be part of the
Secretariat, in conformity with the Charter. We urge
Member States to support the Directorate when it is
established, because all States have an interest in making
the world in which we live a safer and better place.

That said, the fight against terrorism should not
make us lose sight of the factors from which terrorism
derives its pretext and which it uses to justify itself.
Among those factors - which are numerous - my
delegation would highlight the clash among
civilizations, which must be overcome by promoting
cultural diversity and a dialogue among cultures. Other
factors are extreme poverty and the injustice of the
current international economic system, which dooms
the majority of humanity to destitution and disease. In
addition, there is the persistence of the Palestinian
conflict, which has been going on for more than half a
century. We also note the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons, which is a factor in the
destabilization of entire regions.

As it mobilizes against terrorism, the
international community would gain in credibility if it
consistently implemented the Millennium Declaration
and the outcomes of the major conferences held under
United Nations auspices - particularly the Brussels
Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries, to prevent an increase in the number of so-
called failed States, which easily fall prey to mafia
networks of all kinds. Such an approach would help to
improve the climate of current international relations.

