Mr. Christian (Ghana): Madam President, I wish
to commend you for having convened this meeting and
also to take this opportunity to express to the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ian Martin, my
delegation's appreciation of his briefing on the crisis in
Timor-Leste. We have taken note of the updates and
assessments made by the representatives of Australia,
Portugal, New Zealand and Malaysia - the countries
that are currently leading the international effort to
restore normalcy to Timor-Leste. My delegation joins
others in thanking them for their initiatives, which
deserve our encouragement and support.

S/l'V.5457

 

In that regard, we also welcome the proposal to
establish a United Nations force in Timor-Leste.
Hopefully, the people of Timor-Leste will quickly put
the unfortunate events of the past few weeks behind
them and reunite behind their leaders in building a
united and prosperous nation. We appeal to those still
bent on fomenting trouble to realize that a sharply
polarized, unstable and impoverished country is
ultimately not in anyone's best interest. They must
therefore lay down their arms and revert to frank and
open dialogue in order to address the root causes of the
problems of Timor-Leste.

Venting frustration through violence can only
aggravate the woes of the deprived and make life more
miserable and insecure for the population. Indeed, the
grim spectacle of tens of thousands of displaced
persons sheltering in makeshift camps and dependent
on relief is a step backwards from the optimism that
had, until recently, greeted the steady transition of
Timor-Leste into a viable State.

These setbacks notwithstanding, the international
community can help the people of Timor-Leste step
back from the dangerous course they have taken lately.
My delegation believes that restoring law and order is
an immediate challenge and an utmost priority in these
circumstances. We also support the call for urgent
humanitarian relief for the displaced persons. At the
same time, there is no question but that lasting peace
and stability can be achieved in Timor-Leste only when
the country's long-term development is addressed with
a high sense of urgency. While the carefully designed
programme of institutional development and capacity-
building must be vigorously implemented as the
building blocks of a modern State, the fact remains that
meeting the basic needs of the people is what will
make each citizen live at peace with himself or herself
and with his or her neighbour. That, in turn, requires
that Timor-Leste be given a genuine economic space to
develop, which must also take into account the need to
harness and manage the country's resources in a
manner that would benefit future generations.

