Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I should like to
speak in explanation of vote. Before doing so,
however, I should like to join other delegations in
paying tribute to Ambassador Khalilzad.

The question of the situation in Somalia has been
a genuinely difficult one for the Security Council to
address. Many factors - related to the political,
security and development areas - have needed to be
weighed in making a decision, along with the
imperative of building a peace to keep. I should like to
express the thanks of my Government and our Foreign
Secretary to the United States and Secretary Rice for
all the hard work that has gone into this resolution, in
particular their efforts to take into account the concerns
of others, including those of the United Kingdom. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for the
advice that he and his staff have provided to the
Council on this issue in helping us to reach a balanced
conclusion.

We believe that the current resolution offers a
good way forward that takes account of the key
relevant factors. Crucially, the resolution provides for
enhanced support for the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). AMISOM. troops are doing a
difficult job in difficult circumstances, and we salute
them for their work. This resolution authorizes a
United Nations logistics mission, including equipment
and services that will support the African Union (AU)
peacekeeping operation in Somalia, and it requests the
Secretary-General to establish a trust fund to ensure the
continuity of funding for AMISOM. As regards the
assessed contribution element, we believe that the
funding arrangement provided for in the resolution is
workable, but we will need to monitor it closely and
must not, of course, cut across General Assembly
prerogatives.

Secondly, the resolution provides for a second
decision on whether or not to mandate a United
Nations peacekeeping operation. That is an important
point for my Government, based on Brahimi best
practices and a comprehensive and realistic way
forward. When the time comes for the Council to take
that decision, my Government will look to weigh the
following factors: the situation on the ground,
particularly the political and security situation; the
question of whether there is a sustainable peace that
Blue Helmet troops can realistically keep; and what is
in the best interests of United Nations peacekeeping
overall. We will be looking to the Secretary-General's
report to address those issues in full so that the Council
can take an informed decision at the right time.

Finally, the resolution provides for renewed
impetus for the implementation of the Djibouti
agreement, and the Secretary-General is asked to make
recommendations, including on the option of an
international conference to that end. To make sure that
there is absolutely no doubt, I wish to stress that the
intention of such implementation and such renewed
impetus is not to replace Djibouti, but to reinforce it.
For that, renewed efforts by the parties will also be
necessary.

