Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): In the past few months, considerable progress
has been achieved in resolving the problems on the
Korean peninsula. The region has seen a significant
reduction in tensions as a result of the moratorium
declared by Pyongyang in April on missile launches
and nuclear tests, the closure of the nuclear-weapon-test
site in Punggye-ri and the decision by the United
States and the Republic of Korea to postpone their
summer military manoeuvres indefinitely. We would
like to point to the successful implementation of the
inter-Korean agreements detailed in the Panmunjom
Declaration of 27 April and the September visit to the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea by President
Moon Jae-in of the Republic of Korea, during which
the Pyongyang Declaration was signed. It states the
Korean parties' intention to broaden the scope of their
cooperation, as well as Pyongyang's obligations to
dismantle the Tonchan-Ni missile range and close its
nuclear facilities in Yongbyon, which gives us hope that
the situation in this part of the world can be stabilized.

Russia actively supports a rapprochement between
South and North Korea and a settlement of the problems
on the Korean peninsula in general. For a long time
now we have been urging our partners to work on this,
including within the framework of implementing the
road map established by Russia and China last summer,
which isnow de facto being implemented. We believe
that building trust is the key to finding a political and
diplomatic path to resolving the issues on the Korean
peninsula. The agreement reached in Pyongyang
between the two Koreas on the restoration of rail and
road links is an important step in that direction. We
call on Council members to support Pyongyang and
Seoul's initiatives, which fully respond to the spirit of
our resolutions. Any possibility that the sanctions on
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea can become
an instrument of collective punishment is absolutely
unacceptable. Any lack of trust between Washington
and Pyongyang is an obstacle to developing joint
measures thatboth sides could undertake simultaneously
and gradually with a View to advancing the overall
settlement process. We suggest working together to
consider a system of international security guarantees,
which would be a definitive prerequisite for resolving
the task of denuclearizing the Korean peninsula.

In view of the willingness that Pyongyang has
shown to cooperate and the positive progress it has
made in stabilizing the situation in the region, the
policy of Western partners aimed at further sanctions
crackdowns on the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea seems increasingly ill-timed. Considering that
Pyongyang has taken a number of important steps
towards denuclearization, it would seem logical to
support those efforts and propose something in return
in order to maintain this positive momentum. In that
connection, I would like to hear some of our colleagues
in the Council explain their reasons for obstinately
rejecting any possibility of a positive signal from the
Security Council regarding Pyongyang's steps towards
the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.

We would like to point out that any negotiation is
a two-way street. The steps taken by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's towards gradual
disarmament should be accompanied by reductions in
sanctions. Actions deserve reactions. That is essential
if we are to avoid situations like the one, for example,
that arose with the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action when our American colleagues invented a
pretext for withdrawing unilaterally from the Iranian
nuclear deal, thereby violating their obligations under
Security Council resolutions. The institutions and
mechanisms of the United Nations and its Security
Council should work to support the settlement process
and the inter-Korean dialogue, not to become obstacles
to them. Only then will it be possible to talk about an
effective solution to the issues that have accumulated
in the region, including the nuclear issue, on a basis of
mutually acceptable agreements.

Achieving that with sanctions and pressure would
be difficult if not impossible. The extreme lengths
that the Council's sanctions instruments have gone to
already mean that Member States and international
organizations are often unable to support in a normal
regime even humanitarian, sports and diplomatic
links - which have nothing to do with the development
of nuclear missile programmes - to the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. The further expansion
of sanctions on the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea has already gone beyond measures to block the
channels for financing Pyongyang's banned nuclear-
missile programmes and is threatening North Korean
citizens with social, economic and humanitarian
hardships that are simply unacceptable. Incidentally, it
is relevant to remember here that besides a sanctions
component, all Security Council resolutions in this
area include provisions for measures for achieving a
political and diplomatic settlement of the situation on
the Korean peninsula, and ignoring them is tantamount
to non-compliance with the Council's consensus
agreements on the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea.

The so-called autonomous, or secondary sanctions
imposed by the United States and some of its allies on
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and other
States, and going around and over Security Council
sanctions, are even worse. Such unilateral restrictions
not only undermine the sovereignty and legitimate
interests of Member States and contradict the norms
and rules of international trade, they also undermine
the integrity of the Security Council's own agreed
restrictions. We once again urge the countries imposing
them to stop this practice. We are increasingly seeing
them become a tool for unfair competition and for
scaring business operators away from third countries.
The example of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea in that regard is very instructive. It is
extremely difficult to conduct business even when the
Security Council sanctions regime does not forbid it,
thanks to the existence of these illegal practices and
entrepreneurs' fear of ending up on a banned list. Any
attempts to bless such restrictions by invoking the
authority of the Council or its Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), or to question one or
another country's sticking to the strict implementation
of the Council resolutions on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, are unacceptable.

We support both the Council and its 1718 Committee
in making every possible effort to find political
and diplomatic solutions to the issues on the Korean
peninsula and to help to establish a multilateral security
mechanism in North-East Asia. We also consider it the
right moment for the Security Council to send a clear
message in support of the positive trends in the situation
regarding the Korean the peninsula. That could be done,
for example, by adopting a corresponding resolution, a

draft of which we would like to prepare and submit to
the Council for discussion.

We also consider it important to regularly assess the
advisability of reviewing some of the restrictions on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea as Pyongyang
makes progress towards renouncing its nuclear weapons.
It would be possible to come up with at least some
small steps, for instance. Security Council resolutions
allow for a review of limitations in the case of political
advances. As I already mentioned, the parties to the
Panmunjom and Pyongyang Declarations, for example,
affirmed their interest in implementing joint economic
projects. If we all welcome those agreements, we
should think about having the 1718 Committee come up
with special conditions for considering applications for
exemptions from the sanctions regime for the purpose
of implementing inter-Korean cooperative projects
agreed on by Pyongyang and Seoul.

Russia is ready to work as closely as possible
with all interested countries with the aim of ensuring
peace, stability and a comprehensive settlement of the
problems of the Korean peninsula on a basis of equal,
non-discriminatory negotiations with the participation
of all interested parties.

