Mr. Angelo: Let me thank the Security Council
for the opportunity to present the report (S/2009/359) of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT),
which is dated 14 July 2009. It covers major political,
security and humanitarian developments since the last
report (S/2009/199), of 14 April 2009. The report also
includes an annex containing a strategic work plan
towards the fulfilment of the benchmarks endorsed by
the Security Council in resolution 1861 (2009). I would
like to take this opportunity to give the Council an
update on the latest key developments. I shall turn first
to the political situation in Chad.

In the framework of the agreement of 13 August
2007, the Government and the democratic opposition
reached consensus, on 28 May, on the laws regulating
the status of the opposition and the political parties'
charter. They also agreed on the electoral code and the
Commission electorale nationale independante. These
agreements allowed for serious progress to made in the
internal political process. Last week, the members and
Chairman of the electoral commission were sworn in.

In the same vein, the Government launched a
general population census on 20 May, paving the way
for voter registration and constituency delimitation
ahead of national elections. Support from the
international community for the census also included
some logistical assistance from MINURCAT. The
results are due to be released shortly.

With regard to the security situation, on 4 May
Chadian armed opposition groups, under the coalition
of Union des forces de la resistance, launched an attack
on Chadian territory from the Sudan. The attack was
repelled by the Arme'e Nationale Tchadienne through
air strikes and a direct confrontation on 7 May close to
Am Dam, forcing the rebels to retreat. As a security
measure, MINURCAT relocated a number of aid
workers from Koukou Angarana to Goz Beida during
the armed conflict and significantly increased
patrolling in all sectors. In addition, MINURCAT
called on all parties to respect the humanitarian space
and international humanitarian law.

As to Chad-Sudan relations, notwithstanding the
Doha agreement signed on 3 May by the Governments
of Chad and the Sudan under the aegis of Qatar, the
09-42729
latest clashes that occurred in May once again strained
relations between the two countries. Despite the
statements of both countries on 24 and 25 May
expressing support for the Qatar efforts to end the
current situation, new tensions erupted recently. The
relationship between Chad and the Sudan has a critical
impact on the situation on both sides of the border.
There is an urgent need to de-escalate the situation and
resume diplomatic initiatives.

In this context, we are liaising closely with the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and are in contact with the Dakar
process member States to try to identify the
confidence-building measures that are required for the
next meeting of the Contact Group, to take place in the
near future.

The rainy season is providing a window of
opportunity for renewed political engagement between
Chad and the Sudan. The parties should use this
opportunity to revive the process, including the
implementation of the border verification mechanism.

With regard to the Central African Republic, the
situation in the Vakaga region in the north-eastern part
of the country has been extremely insecure over the
past three months and continues to be of serious
concern, as armed groups and bandits continue to
operate in the area. On 6 and 21 June, armed men
attacked the town of Birao. At least 27 people were
killed in the clashes and at least 60 per cent of the
houses in that town were burned to the ground. As of
today, large segments of the population have not
returned to Birao.

MINURCAT, in close liaison with the United
Nations Peace-Building Support Office in the Central
African Republic (BONUCA), has maintained
continuous contacts with the Government of the
Central African Republic with a view to convincing the
national authorities to combine the military presence of
MINURCAT with the strengthened presence of State
officials and with the initiation of mediation efforts.
MINURCAT is at present fully deployed in the
mandated area of operations in the Central African
Republic, but the gravity of the situation goes beyond
our capacity to respond to all the security needs in the
area. On 1 July, the Government sent a mediation
delegation headed by the Minister for Territorial
Administration. The Minister was accompanied by a
BONUCA political officer and received logistical and
09-42729
security support from MINURCAT. The initial
mediation efforts were successful but need to be
sustained.

The Vakaga region is still in a precarious
situation. Humanitarian assistance is not being
delivered at this stage for reasons of insecurity. The
region requires the sustained attention of the
Government of the Central African Republic and of the
international community. This includes the areas of
Sam Oundja and Sikikede, which for the moment are
effectively without a security presence. They are home
to refugee and displaced populations.

MINURCAT also worked closely with the
Government of the Central African Republic and the
United Nations country team in Bangui to establish a
humanitarian corridor to assist 16,600 refugees from
the Central African Republic who are currently in
southern Chad. It was impossible for us to reach them
from the Chadian side due to the rains. With the
cooperation of the Government of the Central African
Republic, we were able to open a humanitarian
corridor and provide the necessary assistance to the
refugees.

As to the humanitarian situation, during the
period under review MINURCAT established a well-
structured dialogue with the humanitarian community.
This dialogue, which is facilitated by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, takes place on a
weekly basis. It has led to a better understanding of
each side's roles and concerns.

Following the May clashes, a significant rise in
crime, banditry and insecurity took place, reducing
once more the humanitarian space in some areas of
eastern Chad. As a temporary measure, MINURCAT
increased the number of escorts to ensure the
continuation of humanitarian operations. Humanitarian
staff has been included in the security and evacuation
plans and training has taken place at the local level to
ensure a coordinated response, if necessary.

There has been an increase in the number of
small arms and unexploded ordnance. Our mine action
unit has, in coordination with Chad's Centre nationale
de deminage and a number of non-governmental
organizations, undertaken an emergency clearance of
major roads, as well as areas of operation in the
immediate vicinity of previous and recent battle areas.
Having completed clearance of major axes, the mine
action unit will now deploy demining teams to priority
areas of operation, in particular those that have been
identified as areas of potential return for displaced
people.

With regard to the deployment of military force,
it now stands at 46 per cent of its mandated strength.
The slow deployment of the force has limited the
ability of MINURCAT to effectively execute the
military concept of operations and provide the required
safe and secure environment for humanitarians,
refugees, displaced people and vulnerable populations,
including in the returnee areas. As a temporary
measure, the force will offer escorts to the
humanitarian community until such time as there is
enough capacity to make patrolling the preferred
method of intervention.

In the meantime, the force implemented
Operation Pioneer from 13 to 17 July, significantly
increasing its presence in the field through foot patrols
and troops in remote villages of potential return of
displaced people. The force also increased patrolling in
the main axes and made extensive use of rotary assets
to reach areas otherwise inaccessible during the rainy
season. These preventive deployments projected the
force in expeditionary operations. The exercise was
conducted successfully, and I can assure the Council
that it will be repeated with increasing frequency as the
force receives more troops.

There is still a lack of rotary assets with enhanced
night-flight capability, and as of today we have only
four out of the planned 18 military helicopters.
Bangladesh will deploy three utility helicopters later in
the year, but we have so far received no pledges for the
remaining helicopters. Should this unacceptable
situation continue to prevail, it will be necessary to
explore the possibility of acquiring such capabilities
commercially. We would like to ask those already
deployed in the force to strengthen their presence and
prolong their deployment.

I wish to say some encouraging words about the
Detachement integre de securite (DIS). Since October
2008, DIS has conducted approximately 3,000 security
escorts and arrested more than 90 individuals suspected
of involvement in various crimes against the
humanitarian community, as well as 56 individuals
accused of armed robbery and five of rape. These rapes
took place around refugee camps.

The rate of recuperation of hijacked vehicles now
stands at 60 per cent compared to 10 per cent before

the deployment of the Detachement inte'gre de securite.
Currently, DIS is carrying out an average of about 85
escorts and 240 patrols per week. These are excellent
indicators of performance and motivation.

The May events show that DIS, as a national
police force, risks becoming a target of the armed
opposition groups. The Detachement integre de
securite experienced a number of direct attacks during
and after the incursions, with several casualties as a
result. MINURCAT and the Government are in full
agreement that DIS is a police force without a military
mandate, and that its primary scope is to protect and
secure displaced people, refugees, humanitarians and
the local population.

In the meantime, the United Nations police will
intensify close in-service training of DIS elements,
including the two-month training and certification of
40 judicial police officers. We will also continue to
promote close cooperation between DIS and our
judiciary section. The logistical support of the Mission
to DIS remains a serious weakness that we are trying to
address with a great sense of urgency.

The DIS concept can easily be part of a reform of
the security sector in Chad. However, DIS is funded on
a voluntary basis by Member States, and the Trust
Fund is rapidly running out of money. By the end of
October, the Fund will be penniless. As Council
members can understand, the situation is very serious
and I would plead for their continued support for this
central element of our Mission. The budget to keep
DIS operating for another year currently stands at
around $17 million.

I would like to make a brief comment about
justice and prisons. As Council members know, we
have an important justice support programme in the
section. We have trained civil servants to be deployed
as justices of the peace and prosecutors in eastern Chad
in the absence of magistrates. During the reporting
period, we worked very closely with the United
Nations Development Programme and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
facilitate the proceedings of mobile criminal courts in
several locations in eastern Chad. However, the
security of judicial authorities remains a constraint to
the deployment of the judges.

We have also provided on-the-job training for
prison staff in eastern Chad. We collaborate very
closely with the Chadian prison authorities and have
drafted a comprehensive set of laws, policies and
procedures to assist the Government of Chad in the
establishment of a professional prison system. These
measures are now awaiting the approval of Parliament.
Nevertheless, the few existing prisons in eastern Chad
are in a dilapidated state and in urgent need of
rehabilitation.

With regard to human rights, the Mission
continues to follow up on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 1612 (2005), 1820 (2008)
and 1325 (2000). Eighty-four children were among the
rebel combatants captured during the fighting in early
May. These 84 children were handed over to UNICEF
for demobilization and reinsertion. We commend the
Government for this initiative. However, this event
confirms that the mobilization of child soldiers remains
a serious problem in Chad and a key priority for our
work.

There have also been problems with arbitrary and
prolonged detention of men, women and minors as well
as gender-based violence, forced marriages and
domestic violence. As part of a potentially wider
security sector reform, we need to prepare a
comprehensive plan for arms collection.

With respect to political and civil affairs, I would
like to say very briefly that, during the past few
months, MINURCAT, together with local traditional
and administrative authorities, and with the support of
the European Union and the European Commission,
has initiated an intercommunity dialogue programme,
which is based on strengthening existing traditional
conflict resolution mechanisms through the
establishment of local reconciliation commissions
between communities, chaired by traditional and
administrative authorities alike.

More particularly, on 30 June, with our
facilitation and with the assistance of local authorities,
the tribal leaders of the Massalit and Zaghawa groups
agreed to address the issues hindering the return of the
Massalit to their villages of origin. This displaced
ethnic group has now started to return in time for the
planting season, giving hope for a long-term resolution
of the conflict. In a very recent similar effort on
15 July, we managed to bring together two
communities that had been in a process of serious
conflict, and they have agreed to live peacefully and
put a stop to their long-lasting feud. This turn of events
will enable more than 1,000 refugees that have crossed
the border and are currently in the Sudan to return to
Chad in the next few days or couple of weeks.

These positive developments give hope for
building peace at the grass roots level. They are also
conducive to the return of displaced persons, which, as
Council members know, is the primary benchmark of
our strategy.

I would next like to say one or two words on the
strategic workplan. As outlined in my introduction, we
have developed a strategic workplan including the
main benchmarks for the Mission, indicators of
progress, key activities and some of the necessary
conditions which need to be in place. The question of
the return of a critical mass of internally displaced
persons is of particular interest, as this benchmark
requires the implementation of a comprehensive
approach to fight impunity in eastern Chad, improve
security and strengthen the rule of law and civil
administration. All these aspects require the support of
the international community and good coordination
with national authorities.

Speaking of the authorities, during the reporting
period, we have continued our frequent contacts with
the Government of the Central African Republic
concerning the situation in our area of operations. The
Government of Central African Republic signed on
13 June 2009 an amendment to the status of mission
agreement. The relationship with Chad also remains
very constructive. However, we have not yet been able
to complete the discussions with the Government on
the agreement. It is a matter of great urgency and
utmost importance to the Mission, and we hope to
resolve some of the issues relating to taxation and the
status of mission agreement and come to agreement on
this matter shortly.

We have also maintained a very close liaison with
BONUCA and UNAMID. To address issues of mutual
concern, we have worked closely with the United
Nations country team in the Central African Republic
and arranged bilateral and trilateral meetings between
the United Nations country teams in Chad, the Central
African Republic and Cameroon. We also arranged an
inter-mission meeting between MINURCAT, UNAMID,
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan and BONUCA
to improve coordination between these missions and
look for synergies.
To maximize efforts and avoid duplication, the
Mission and the United Nations country team in
N'Djamena have also started preparing an integrated
strategic framework for the United Nations system in
Chad outlining peacebuilding activities in the country.
The framework should be finalized by October 2009
and should be considered an example of integration in
a situation where we do not have an integrated mission.

