The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Algeria, Bahrain, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Somalia, the Sudan, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates
and Yemen in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Baali
(Algeria), Mr. Almansoor (Bahrain), Mr.
Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba), Mr. Olhaye
(Djibouti), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Zarif
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Al-Hussein
(Jordan), Mr. Al-Otaibi (Kuwait), Mr. Kronfol
(Lebanon), Mr. El-Treki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Bennouna (Morocco), Mr. Al-
Sameen (Oman), Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar), Mr.
Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Hashi (Somalia),
Mr. Erwa (Sudan), Mr. Hachami (Tunisia), Mr.
Al-Shamsi (United Arab Emirates) and Mr.
Alsaidi (Yemen) took the seats reserved for them
at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: I should also like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 5 October
2003 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2003/942, and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the forthcoming meeting of the Security
Council to be held today, 5 October 2003,
regarding the letter dated 5 October 2003 from
the Syrian Arab Republic addressed to the
President of the Security Council."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the current debate, in accordance with the
rules of procedure and previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine), took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.


