Mr. Nguyen Duy Thien (Viet Nam): I shall
deliver a shortened version of my statement. The
delegation of Viet Nam highly appreciates the efforts
made by the 1267 Committee, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and the 1540 Committee in
discharging the mandates entrusted to them by the
Security Council in order to enhance the effectiveness
of international cooperation in the fight against
terrorism.

Pursuant to the relevant provisions of the
resolutions concerned, Viet Nam has already submitted
four reports to the CTC, one report to the 1267
Committee and one report to the 1540 Committee,
providing necessary information relating to the efforts
undertaken by Viet Nam in combating terrorism. We
wish to assure the three Committees of Viet Nam's
continued support and cooperation.

My delegation reaffirms the position of Viet
Nam, which is to denounce every act of terrorism.
Given the nature of present terrorist acts, more than
ever the fight against terrorism requires a
comprehensive approach, collective efforts and
international cooperation, in which the United Nations
should play a key role, with due attention paid to the
root causes of terrorism.

To be effective this fight should be conducted in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. Viet Nam is a
party to eight international instruments on counter-
terrorism. Necessary steps are being taken in preparing
for accession to the other instruments with the support
of the CTC and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime.

Last November, Viet Nam successfully organized
a national workshop on accession to and
implementation of international instruments on
counter-terrorism. The competent authorities of Viet
Nam are in the process of completing internal
procedures for Viet Nam's accession to two other
international conventions, the International Convention
against the Taking of Hostages and the International
Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings.

Viet Nam is continuing its cooperation on
counter-terrorism in both bilateral and multilateral
forums, including within the framework of the
Association of Southeast Asia Nations, the Asia-
Europe Meeting, the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation forum and the Asia Pacific Parliamentary
Forum. It joined the General Assembly consensus in
adopting the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism on 13 April
2005.

Once again, my delegation would like to reaffirm
Viet Nam's commitment to fully cooperate with the
international community in general, and the Security
Council and other relevant United Nations bodies in
particular, in our common fight against terrorism.

