Mr. Gautam: It is late in the day, Sir, as you
said, so I will try to be brief. This open debate of the
Security Council has been enormously encouraging to
us at UNICEF. On behalf of Carol Bellamy, our
Executive Director, I would like to thank all Member
States that have so generously acknowledged
UNICEF's work in the demobilization and
reintegration of children in situations of armed conflict
in many countries. We will convey your words of
appreciation and encouragement and your sense of
solidarity to our field staff, who work day in and day
out to try to help children in difficult circumstances. I
know it will be a tremendous inspiration to them.

I would also like to take this occasion to
acknowledge and pay a special tribute to our non-
governmental organization partners. There are very few
of them left here. But I know that there is a large
number of them outside, watching the proceedings of
the Council. Their work and collaboration are of
tremendous value to the work of the United Nations.
We could not be as effective as we are without their
passion, support and solidarity.

As many delegations highlighted, prevention is
better than cure. A major contribution by UNICEF and
our partner organizations to ensure that all children are
helped to enjoy childhood to their full potential
requires investing in basic services and reaching the
Millennium Development Goals, which are very
important for the development of children.

We were particularly happy to hear so many
delegations referring to the commitment that our
leaders made to "A world fit for children". Indeed, if
we can implement some of the goals, targets and
objectives of "A world fit for children", we will do
well for children in difficult circumstances, in armed
conflict and otherwise.

Let me mention just two or three specific things
that we take to heart. Several delegations reminded us
that the illicit traffic in small arms contributes
enormously to violence. We share their concerns and
hope that there will be a stronger response in that area.
We are encouraged by the comments made by many
delegations on the need to ensure that the list in the
annex to the Secretary-General's report is developed,
strengthened, expanded, reviewed and made more of a
practical tool. We hope that these statements will be
reflected in the Council's resolution, when it is adopted
in the next few days. Many delegations made specific
suggestions and recommendations for the follow-up to
the Secretary-General's report. Austria, speaking on
behalf of the Human Security Network, made 10 very
specific and concrete proposals. We trust that some of
those very specific and pertinent points will be
reflected in the draft resolution that the Council is to
adopt in the next few days.

The Council's debate today, and the draft
resolution that it will soon adopt, will provide powerful
encouragement and support for all of us to redouble our
efforts to protect children from the barbarity of armed
conflict and to help them build, and live in, a more
peaceful world - a world that is fit for children.

