Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): It is a great pleasure for
my delegation to associate itself with previous speakers in
expressing our appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his fifteenth progress report on the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) of 23 January
1996.

My delegation should like to welcome the Foreign
Minister of Liberia and to thank him for his insightful
statement. We also wish to express our gratitude to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Anthony Nyakyi, and to the leaders of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Community's Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) for their
continued endeavours towards the implementation of the
Abuja Agreement. We similarly commend the personnel
of UNOMIL for their efforts in the restoration of peace,
security and stability in Liberia.

The signing of the Abuja Agreement in August 1995
gave the people of Liberia and the international
community a sense of optimism that the six-year civil
war, which has had catastrophic consequences, both
human and economic, would be nearng its end. We were
further encouraged by the action of the Security Council
in November 1995 in adopting resolution 1020 (1995),
which we were confident would provide the foundation
for renewed international support for the peace process.

Unfortunately, however, my delegation's budding
optimism has been tempered by the recent report of the
Secretary-General, which, on the whole, portrays a
 

declining political, military and humanitarian situation. We
deeply regret the tragic conflict that broke out in
Tubmanburg, resulting from deep-seated suspicions between
some factions, and the ensuing casualties that were suffered
by the personnel of ECOMOG and the civilian population.
May I therefore take this opportunity, on behalf of the
Indonesian delegation, to extend our deepest condolences to
the bereaved families of the ECOMOG soldiers who died
in the fulfilment of their peace-keeping duties as well as to
the families of the innocent civilians. The profoundly
detrimental implications of this incident on the peace
process cannot be underestimated. We also note and are
concerned that serious cease-fire violations and skirmishes
have occurred in other regions.

These events not only have caused further delays in
the implementation of the Abuja Agreement but are, in our
View, a clear indication of the necessity to further
encourage confidence-building measures between the
factions. In this context, we call upon the Liberian
leadership to demonstrate genuine political will to get the
peace process back on track and to discard the logic of war
in resolving its differences. My delegation therefore wishes
to reiterate that the international community cannot be
expected to support the peace process in Liberia indefinitely
in the absence of a clear determination on the part of the
factions to abide by and implement the commitments they
themselves have undertaken.

My delegation believes that a secure peace will
continue to prove elusive without the implementation of the
detailed disarmament and demobilization plan elaborated by
UNOMIL and ECOMOG in consultation with the Liberian
National Transitional Government (LNTG), the factions and
the humanitarian community. We are, however, keenly
aware of the interlinkages of the various aspects involved,
as alluded to by the Secretary-General in paragraph 43 of
his report, that the success of the demobilization process
depends on the opportunities of the ex-combatants
reintegrating into civilian life, while the success of the
reintegration process requires a revitalized economy that
can only be achieved within a safe and secure environment.

Such an environment can be attained only through a
successful process of disarmament. To this end, it is
imperative that the international community step up its
efforts, without delay, in providing the necessary resources
in order to avert the potential spread of this conflict. We
stress the need in this instance to focus on preventive
diplomacy and peacemaking as measures to deter further
outbreaks of conflict such as occurred in Tubmanburg.

We are encouraged that the United Nations
Humanitarian Assistance Coordination Office is now fully
operational, is engaged in the process of providing
humanitarian assistance and is designing programmes and
activities that will lead to the reintegration of the
demobilized. We believe, therefore, that it is paramount
that efforts be undertaken in a meaningful manner to
address adequately the economic deprivations that so
often provide the catalyst for resorting to violence.

It is in this connection that we would like to echo
the Secretary-General's call to the LNTG to provide its
full support and enlist the support of the Liberian factions
to assist in this critical endeavour.

While the recent record in Liberia has provided
ample opportunity for disappointment, we can
nevertheless foresee the possibility of hope on the
horizon. Our feeling of encouragement emanates from
several elements.

Firstly, we note the recent steps taken by the
Secretary-General to prepare for the legislative and
presidential elections that are scheduled to take place
before the end of August 1996, as provided for in the
Abuja Agreement.

Secondly, we observe that, on 3 January 1996, the
LNTG and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees concluded an agreement
establishing a framework for the repatriation and
reintegration of refugees.

Thirdly, continued cooperation prevails between
UNOMIL and the LNTG and with other United Nations
agencies and local and international non-governmental
organizations to facilitate support for the Liberian judicial
system and human rights groups.

Fourthly, a coordinated effort on the part of the
international community is beginning to take place to
address reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts.

These, in our opinion, are an appropriate framework
and conducive to moving the peace process forward.

It is against this backdrop, and after careful
consideration and analysis, that my delegation fully
concurs with the Secretary-General's recommendation to
extend the mandate of UNOMIL for a period of four
months, until 31 May 1996.

 

As I have explained, we, along with the rest of the
Council, are disappointed and frustrated by the continued
violations of the cease-fire agreement and the slow progress
made in the implementation of the Abuja Agreement. These
serious considerations, however, should not overshadow the
progress that has been made. Moreover, a withdrawal at
this point would send the wrong signal to the parties about
the international community's resolve in this matter, and
would certainly undermine confidence in ECOMOG. Given
the enormous potential that exists to further the peace
process, we feel that this is no time to set the unsavoury
precedent of withdrawing support when it is needed most.

