The President (interpretation from French): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Guinea-Bissau.

The confrontations over the last two days in
Jerusalem and Ramallah, but also in Nablus, Bethlehem
and Gaza, have prompted members of this Council to
hold a formal meeting of the Security Council today, as
demanded by the situation.

Peace and security in this region of the world are
indeed gravely threatened. The peace process in the
Middle East risks being hampered and even cast into
doubt. Direct confrontations between the security forces
of the two camps, which until now have been contained
or averted, have broken out and shown the extent to
which the climate of trust so necessary to the
establishment of peace has been affected. Confidence
must be restored, rancour dispelled. It is indispensable,
even urgent, to return to the negotiating table, for
violence has burst onto the scene with swift and deadly
intensity. Human lives are being destroyed. The wounds
of yesterday, already hard enough to heal, are now
reopened and the chances of seeing them close for good
are diminishing. Peace, the peace of the brave we thought
to be at hand, seems to be fading into the distance. And
yet each one of us still remembers the powerful, indelible
images and the historic handshake between Chairman
Yasser Arafat and the late Prime Minister Rabin. So
many hopes were inspired then, and feelings revived.

Rather than exacerbating tensions and deepening
differences by digging this tunnel under the Al Aqsa
Mosque, a mosque whose symbolism escapes no one, it
is important to promote and respect direct dialogue
between Palestinian and Israeli leaders, to appeal for

 

restraint and calm and to take every measure required to
restore peace.

We believe that it is important to acknowledge very
clearly and loudly the validity of the agreements that have
been signed and to respect them scrupulously. We cannot
stop halfway because there is no such thing as half a peace.
The peace process cannot hinge on electoral issues and
must be free from the political considerations of the
moment.

We believe it is necessary for dialogue to continue and
for the obstacles to be overcome. An end must be put to the
actions of all extremists, which only exacerbate tensions
and provoke further violence and useless killing.

In short, we consider it necessary to take hold of the
situation by eliminating all factors of confrontation. It is
indispensable to respect the agreements that have been
signed. One must act, and act quickly, in a sincere and
constructive direction, calling for the removal of taboos, the
elimination of unrealistic conditions and the good will and
flexibility without which past, present and future difficulties
cannot be overcome.
My country believes that an urgent meeting between
President Arafat and Prime Minister Netanyahu is required,
but it would best be preceded by specific actions. The
closure of the tunnel is one such action, and we believe that
other gestures of reassurance must follow immediately.

It is in this direction, and on the basis of the concerns
we have just expressed on behalf of our delegation, that we
would like the see the Security Council deliberate and
decide.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Algeria, His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Attaf, who will make
a statement in his capacity as Chairman of the Council of
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the League of Arab States.
I welcome him, and invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

