Mr. Bessho (Japan): Allow me first to congratulate
you, Sir, on your excellent presidency during the month
of February, especially today as Japan welcomes
the efforts of the President to make formal wrap-up
meetings more meaningful. I thank the delegations who
made suggestions, and would like to touch upon some
of the points raised.

First, on North Korea, it was significant that
the Security Council, with new members in 2017,
unanimously condemned the 12 February ballistic
missile launch in a timely manner. In 2016 alone, North
Korea conducted two nuclear tests and launched over 20
ballistic missiles, presenting an elevated level of threat.
Such acts constitute blatant violations of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, and are serious and direct
threats to the international community as a whole.
Japan calls upon all Member States, including the
members of the Security Council, to strictly implement
the relevant resolutions so that North Korea will change
its course of action, commit to de-nuclearization, and
return to dialogue.

On Syria, Japan believes that the Intra-Syrian talks
must contribute to improving the humanitarian situation
on the ground. At the Council meeting last week (see S/PV.7888), bureaucratic impediments and the security
situation were raised as obstacles to humanitarian
access. Japan has been urging the Syrian Government
to simplify procedures, and we have received a written
confirmation from the Government in that regard.
However, that must be implemented on the ground.
With regard to the draft resolution on Syrian chemical
weapons, the Council needs to show its determination
that the parties responsible will be held accountable.
Turning to South Sudan, the continuing violence
and worsening humanitarian situation, exacerbated
by the famine, are serious concerns. The national
dialogue should be truly inclusive and widely embraced
both domestically and internationally. Japan urges
the South Sudanese Government to take concrete
actions, including on the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force and unhindered access for the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan and for humanitarian
aid workers.

Japan has been making efforts to ameliorate the
situation, including by dispatching our Prime Minister's
Special Envoy, to urge the South Sudanese Government
on the points I have mentioned and by providing
financial assistance for humanitarian purposes
through United Nations agencies as well as through the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development.

I would particularly like to express my gratitude to
those delegations that showed interest in presidential
note S/2010/507. Discussion is under way at the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and other
Procedural Questions with a View to updating the note
based on the views and proposals expressed at the open
debate (see S/PV.7740) on working methods last July
under Japan's presidency and on other occasions. Thus
far, the Working Group has discussed such matters as
reporting cycles, wrap-up sessions and Security Council
missions. On 24 February, we discussed how we can
improve the way we conduct the informal consultations
of the whole. The goal is to make progress on the actual
working methods ofthe Council. I cannot stress enough
the importance of implementation, particularly by the
Permanent Representatives of the Council.

Concerning the annual report of the Security
Council, Japan is working with all countries that served
on the Council during the 17-month reporting period to
prepare the report to the General Assembly.

Lastly, with regard to the lessons learned on the
process of selecting a Secretary-General, I issued
a note in my personal capacity with some concrete
suggestions, including on announcing the results of
the Council's consideration of the candidates in order
to increase transparency. I hope that the note will be
useful in five or 10 years.

