Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
We too want to thank Mr. Annabi for his customary
informative and thorough briefing. I note and commend
the continuing commitment of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to the security of all Kosovars and to their inclusion in
the rebuilding of Kosovo. I would also like to
commend again Bernard Kouchner; his strong and
even-handed approach has helped UNMIK meet the
challenges posed by a very complicated Security
Council resolution in a very difficult situation in a very
difficult part of the world.
Resolution 1244 (1999) is very clear about the
power and authority the Council has vested in
UNMIK's leadership. We agree with the course they
are charting, and we have to be realistic about the
continuing problems that they will face. Rebuilding
Kosovo and implementing the resolution will take time,
patience and, most of all, commitment to success. It is
a tribute to UNMIK's strong leadership that municipal
elections will take place on 28 October. This will mark
an important step in the establishment of transitional
self-governing institutions, and it has our strong
support. Any delay in municipal elections will only
benefit Belgrade's desire to frustrate the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999), and will
deny responsible self-government to all in Kosovo,
including the Serb community there.

We welcome the recent commitments made at
Airlie House by Kosovo's political leadership,
including Serbs, to democracy, and to scrupulously
respect the election results and to accept the authority
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to ensure that all communities are adequately
represented in the new municipal governments. We
also welcome the commitment reaffirmed at Airlie
House to the goal of a multi-ethnic civil society with
security for all.

The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) has done a tremendous job organizing
the electoral registration, and we are encouraged to see
its efforts continuing to ensure that there are no
problems on election day.

Like others, we continue to be concerned about
the level of violence. There should be zero tolerance
for the violence that we continue to see in Kosovo. We
condemn the recent attacks directed against members
of the Democratic League of Kosovo, and other
episodes of violence from whatever source. We will
continue to insist, with all parties, that they reject any
and all forms of intimidation during the electoral
campaign.

On the smelter in Zvecan, let me say that, in our
View, the smelter posed an environmental and health
risk that was very well known and documented. Indeed,
UNMIK personnel working in that area had to be
redeployed after blood tests showed dangerously high
levels of lead in their blood after only relatively brief
exposure. This situation would not be tolerated by any
Government represented on the Council. The closing of
the smelter was conducted in an appropriate fashion,
with the interest of Serbs in Kosovo paramount;
workers continue to be compensated as the plant is
renovated and reorganized.

Resolution 1244 (1999) is a Chapter-VII
resolution. It conferred upon UNMIK and the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) the legal status necessary for them to
fulfil their respective mandates. UNMIK and KFOR
were therefore acting within their authority in issuing a
joint statement confirming their legal status and their
privileges and immunities, and UNMIK was within its
authority in enacting a regulation effectuating that
status in Kosovo.

Finally, let me add that I fully share the concerns
expressed by Ambassador Eldon about the detention of
the four United Kingdom and Canadian citizens, and
we fully support his call for Belgrade to release them
or charge them.

