Mrs. Miculescu (Romania) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by thanking the French presidency
ofthe Security Council for having convened this debate.
Romania associates itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union, but I would like to
add some remarks in my national capacity, which I will
keep brief in the interests of time.
The world is looking on in horror at the massacres,
beheadings, arson, rape, stonings, conversions at
gunpoint, the revival of slavery, mass expulsions and
forced migration being perpetrated against Christians,
Yazidis and Shia Muslims, including Shabaks,
Turkmens and others.

The strategy of the criminal gangs responsible, such
as the so-called Islamic State or Daesh, is simple, as
their beliefs exemplify barbarity. By destroying the rich
religious heritage and ethnic diversity that make up the
complex social fabric in the Middle East, as well as the
remains of a glorious past, they aim to totally subjugate
and manipulate all people within their reach. Their
actions are part of a campaign to erase diversity, and
it is being conducted in the name of Islam, with which
those savages have absolutely nothing in common.

Let us not forget the victims ofthe barbaric attempts
to hunt and potentially eradicate entire religious
communities from their historical lands. The tragedy
of the Yazidis is perhaps the largest-scale tragedy that
any one community has suffered since the emergence
of Daesh.

Christians have been a part of Syria since the
conversion of the Apostle Paul on the road to old
Damascus. The central role of Arab Christians in the
development of Arab civilization and culture, leading
to the Al-Nahda Arab renaissance of the nineteenth
century should not be ignored. Nevertheless, today
the very survival of Christianity in the Middle East is
in danger. Due to the limited time available, we can
only recall a few of the collective tragedies, such as the
violent expulsion of thousands of Armenian Christians
from the coastal town of Kessab one year ago, or
the recent cowardly murders, this time in Libya, of
21 Egyptians of the Coptic Christian faith.

We must urgently step up efforts aimed at preserving
the mosaic of religious and ethnic communities that
have enriched the Middle East for centuries. The
international community must do more to reverse the
trend in the region towards expelling or exterminating
people of different ethnic and religious backgrounds,
who are all under the terrible threat of an extremism that
is guided by narrow-mindedness and blind violence. We
encourage the United Nations to expand its activities in
that connection, primarily by raising awareness around
the world of such tragedies as the fate of undesired
minorities, including through tools that already exist,
such as the Alliance of Civilizations.

I would like to express the support of Romania
for the initiative of the Secretary-General to prepare
an action plan to be prepared by a panel of religious
leaders, as well as for France's announced plan to
convene a conference on the topic.

Faced with the imminent danger of sectarianism,
tolerance and inter-religious dialogue must be
encouraged and strengthened robustly by secular and
religious representatives - prerequisites for creating
and ensuring a peaceful environment based on mutual
respect. Such messages must also reach the younger
generations in war-torn areas, which are unfortunately
expanding, as the daily horrors evidence. Young
people must be gently turned away from the effects
of the culture of violence and reminded of the values
of tolerance and understanding that have enabled
millennia of coexistence in our shared space for the
benefit of all.

We would like to see more discussion on this topic,
at the national level in the countries affected, as well
as at the international level. The aim should be that
discrimination based on religion or ethnicity should be
not only prohibited in law but also clearly understood
as such by the majority of society. We must build on
the fact that the vast majority of Muslims denounce
extremist ideology and are themselves terrified by the
atrocities committed by such groups. But societies, in
particular in the countries affected, must speak openly
about how terrorism exploits the universal impulse
of young people to seek opportunity and justice, in
contrast to the marginalization, discrimination and
corruption they witnesses on a daily basis.

Meeting the economic and social grievances of
those people is the key issue. We must focus strongly on
education, especially in post-conflict situations and in
areas liberated from terrorism, so as to prevent further
atrocities in the future and to enable persons belonging
to ethnic and religious minorities to resume their places
in their societies and in their territories.

In conclusion, let me recall the words of the
legendary Secretary-General, Dag Hammarskjold, who
once said that the United Nations had not been created
to bring humanity to heaven, but to save humanity
from hell. To do so and to save the minorities under
threat in the Middle East from hell, we must follow our
consciences and show determination in stepping up
our efforts to that end, especially taking into account
the very complex and specific proposals made during
today's very important debate.

