Mr. Auviieirt (Estonia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this very important and timely meeting.

I am delivering this statement on behalf of Latvia,
Lithuania and my own country, Estonia. We would like
to align ourselves with the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.

First, let me reiterate that we strongly support the

agenda for children and armed conflict and the mandate
of the Special Representative, Ms. Virginia Gamba.
We also highly value the work of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We
welcome the signing ofnational action plans on children
and armed conflict. However, that should be viewed
only as the first step, as the successful implementation
of the plans is what matters most. We would like to see
progress on the ground.

We are pleased and encouraged by the findings of
the recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/509),
which shows that the number of children released
from armed groups and forces was - for the first
time last year - higher than number of children
recruited. We welcome the release of 40 boys by tribal
armed groups in Iraq, as reported by the Secretary-
General, and South Sudan's accession to the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, and
encourage the implementation of its provisions. This
trend should continue.

At the same time, we have learned with concern
that verified cases of killing and maiming of children
reached record levels since the creation of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism. We are especially concerned
about the alarming increase in the number of violations
attributed to State actors and international forces as
compared with 2017.

We unequivocally condemn all violations against
children and strongly urge for the cessation of such
violations and putting effective protection measures
in place. We should aim for the full elimination of all
grave violations. On sexual violence, let me stress the
importance of providing timely and effective support
services and gender-sensitive rehabilitation programmes
for child survivors. Prosecuting criminals and holding
them accountable is paramount in delivering justice
and preventing future crimes.

We fully support the inclusive and community-
centred reintegration of children associated with
armed forces or armed groups. Ensuring access to
quality education programmes and providing social
and psychological support to children is fundamental
for putting long-term viable alternatives to military life
in place. Children associated with parties to conflicts
should be treated as victims. Their rehabilitation and
reintegration should be the primary objective.

We welcome the collaboration between the United
Nations and local authorities in the area of Zintan in
Libya on the reintegration of children and engagement
with armed groups to end and prevent the recruitment
and use of children, which was mentioned in the latest
report of the Secretary-General. We welcome the good
cooperation of the Special Representative with the
European Union, including within the framework of
the Act to Protect campaign, as we encourage stronger
regional cooperation in different parts of the world.

We strongly support a comprehensive approach to
the children and armed conflict agenda and look forward
to strengthening the capacity of the United Nations in
this field. In that regard, we would like to express our
support for the highly valuable work of child protection
advisers. Monitoring and reporting violations against
children is essential in order to achieve progress and
prevent future crimes. We hope that the presence of child
protection advisers will soon be a common practice, not
an exception, in peacekeeping operations. It is no less
important to stress the need of predeployment training
on children's rights for peacekeepers in order to ensure
positive and qualified first contact with children
experiencing grave violations against them.

To conclude, let me express our full appreciation
for the work of grassroots organizations and activists.
We hope that the Security Council can make better
use of their insights and advice in future. In that
regard, we would like to thank today's civil society
briefers 4 Ms. Mariatu Kamara and Mr. Majok Peter
Awan 4 for their powerful statements based on their
own personal stories.

