Mr. de La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
As this is the first time my delegation is taking the
floor in a public meeting this month, at the outset I
wish you, Sir, all the best during your presidency for
the month of June. I also thank Ambassador Akram for
the manner in which he conducted the Council's work
last month, which we greatly appreciated.

First, I welcome the presence among us of
Chairman Bryant. On behalf of France, I take this
occasion to commend him on the remarkable effort he
is making for his country's recovery. We all know that
his task is great. I simply wish to tell him that today he
can count on my country's support, and on that of the
Council, I am sure.

I also thank Mr. Klein for his briefing on the
situation in Liberia, which we listened to with great
attention.

I must say that the information we have heard is
very encouraging. It is encouraging for three reasons.
First, it is encouraging because the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), now at a staffing level of
just over 14,000 persons, is today able to deploy over
the entire territory. Secondly, it is encouraging
because - and this is essential - as Mr. Klein has told
the Council, the disarmament process has been
resumed. The fact that 34,000 ex-combatants - if I
remember the figure correctly - have been disarmed
gives hope for new stability in Liberia. Finally, it is
encouraging because security sector reform is under
way.

Chairman Bryant mentioned the issue of lifting
the sanctions imposed on his country pursuant to
resolution 1521 (2003). In that connection, we note
with great interest the action taken by the Liberian
Government and UNMIL to restore State control over
natural resources. We encourage the Liberian
authorities to continue their efforts in that direction.
The Council will continue closely to follow the
progress made on that issue with respect to the criteria
set out in resolution 1521 (2003).

Significant progress has therefore been made.
However, to achieve lasting stability, Liberia must still
face three major challenges.

The first challenge is the lasting demobilization
of combatants, which comes up against two hurdles.
The first hurdle is to reduce the number of weapons in
circulation, and we are concerned by the difficulties
that seem to be encountered in recovering weapons.
The second hurdle is to reintegrate ex-combatants into
civilian life. That task is certainly the most difficult
one and will require a lasting effort by the entire
international community. France will participate
alongside its partners in the European Union.

The second challenge is the rebuilding of the
State and basic public services. That is essential for the
people of Liberia to benefit from the newly recovered
peace.

The third challenge is to hold free and transparent
elections in October 2005. In Liberia, as elsewhere,
credible elections are the sole guarantee of a successful
end to a crisis. The success of those elections and the
commitment of all parties to the democratic process are
the measure by which one will be able to judge the
solidity of the peace process in Liberia. As has often
been said in the Council, a lasting and solid peace
process in Liberia is a guarantee for peace and security
throughout the region.

In conclusion, I express our satisfaction at the
efforts for coordination among the United Nations
operations in West Africa. My country has always
urged such coordination. We have always believed that
the sharing of information and logistic resources, joint
efforts at the borders and coordination on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes are
indispensable for strengthening the effectiveness of
each operation. We hope that the United Nations
operations will continue on that path.

