Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): At the outset,
let me thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her
comprehensive briefing on the situation in Libya.

South Africa continues to support resolution
1970 (2011), which calls for a cessation of violence
towards civilians and mandates the ICC to investigate
war crimes and crimes against humanity. We remain
concerned over the ongoing fighting in Libya, which
is not conducive to finding a political solution that will
bring to an end Libya's long transitional period and lead
to the unification of the country's institutions, as well
as the holding of national elections. This is essential to
enhancing security, stability and living conditions for
the Libyan people.

On the humanitarian front, my delegation is
concerned over the deteriorating humanitarian
situation, especially as some humanitarian actors face
challenges that restrict their access to parts of the
country. We condemn the loss of civilian lives during
the violence in Tripoli and support the Secretary-
General's call for all commitments made under the
September 2018 ceasefire agreement to be adhered to
in order to maintain calm and avoid further violence in
the capital. We also call on all parties to fully respect
international humanitarian law and to ensure that all
possible measures are put in place to avoid conflict.

We call on all parties and stakeholders to recommit
to efforts towards building durable peace in Libya on
the basis of inclusive political dialogue as the only
viable means to achieve sustainable peace in Libya.
We echo the Prosecutor's preventive statement, issued
on 16 April, calling on all parties and armed groups
involved in the fighting to fully respect the rules of
international humanitarian law. This includes taking
all measures necessary to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure, including schools, hospitals and
detention centres.

It is of vital importance to also address the
conditions that give rise to terrorism and extremism,
including violent extremism, and to take the measures
necessary to address them so as to discontinue the
vicious cycle of conflicts on the continent. This would
further contribute to ensuring the safety, protection and
well-being of the population on the African continent.

