Mr. Harrison (United Kingdom): I should like,
through you, Mr. President, to thank Sir Kieran
Prendergast for his very useful and informative
introduction to our discussion.

We start from the basis that the United Nations
operation in Bougainville has been, and is, a notable
success. My delegation would like to repeat the tributes
that we have paid in the past to Ambassador Sinclair
and his team; we believe that the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) has been not
just a success but, perhaps, a model for other
operations throughout the world. The United Nations in
this case has made a real difference to the political
problems of Bougainville.

It is important not to jeopardize that success by a
precipitate end to the United Nations contribution in
Bougainville. But equally, we believe that it is very
important for us to start thinking about a clear exit
strategy that will define what is needed in the future
from the United Nations, as well as the period over
which it is needed. In this context, we are studying
carefully the aide-memoire that the delegation of Papua
New Guinea circulated yesterday, 20 November.

The peace process is clearly still at a vulnerable
stage. I think that Sir Kieran's phrase - he said that it
was "under some strain" - sums it up well. It is clear
that the United Nations work in Bougainville is
incomplete. It is important that the dire economic
situation in Papua New Guinea and the instability
elsewhere - for example in the southern highlands -
not put at risk the progress that has been made on
Bougainville.

It is also good news that the combatants have
agreed to work towards the deadline of 24 December,
and it is important for that deadline to be respected. We
remain concerned that weapons collection remains
some way from completion, although of course 100 per
cent elimination is probably impossible. Weapons that
have circulated to the southern highlands could just as
easily return. But we are pleased that UNPOB's focus
is now moving towards rehabilitation, and we have
been happy to switch a contribution of 25,000 pounds,
which was surplus to requirements for weapons
collection, to rehabilitation projects instead.

We have noted carefully the Secretary-General's
recommendation that UNPOB's mandate be extended,
and we support that extension. We also note the results
of the recent assessment mission. As regards the timing
of any extension, we have an open mind at the moment.
We believe that the issue needs further discussion. But
we think that a number of important issues will need to
be taken into account in considering the timing. The
first is, of course, the need for an exit strategy, to
which I alluded earlier. The second is a point raised by
Sir Kieran Prendergast about the time that UNPOB will
need in order to verify stage II and work further on that
aspect. The third is the elections that are due in June
next year but which may, indeed, be postponed. I think
that it will be important for Council members to
consider those and all other relevant issues before
coming to a decision on the exact timing.

