Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): The British
delegation welcomes the Secretary-General's report on the
situation in Liberia and supports his recommendations for
an adjustment of the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia to reflect the Abuja
Agreement. The adoption of this draft resolution should
help to maintain the momentum of the peace process.

The challenges and difficulties that lie ahead cannot be
underestimated, but the willingness of the factions to find
a peaceful resolution to the conflict, as demonstrated by the
Abuja Agreement, provides encouragement. The role of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) - in particular, that of its Chairman, President

Rawlings - has been crucial to this new impetus for
peace.

At the United Nations Conference on Assistance to
Liberia, held on 27 October, the United Kingdom
contributed £5 million to the United Nations inter-agency
appeal for Liberia and £50,000 for communications
equipment for the additional Ghanaian battalion to be
deployed with the ECOWAS cease-fire Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG), as well as pledging military training
assistance for Ghanaian armed forces. We urge others to
provide assistance to ECOMOG to enable it to carry out
its mandate. It is clear that without the necessary
resources ECOMOG will not be able to carry out the
tasks assigned to it under the Abuja Agreement.

The Secretary-General's report gives grounds for
cautious optimism, but it also notes serious violations of
the cease-fire and a worrying disinclination, on the part of
some factions, to disengage forces and begin the process
of demobilization and reintegration into civilian society.
The international community needs to be reassured that,
this time, the factions mean what they say.

In this draft resolution, as in previous resolutions,
the Security Council is demonstrating its willingness to
help the Liberians to help themselves. This conflict has
continued for too long. The Liberian people and their
neighbours in the region who have been affected by the
conflict have suffered for too long. It is now up to
Liberian parties to demonstrate their full commitment to
the peace process. The continued support of the
international community depends on this.

I should like to add a footnote. All debates such as
the one in which we are now engaged take place in the
context of the general objective of good governance and
respect for human rights, in Africa as elsewhere. In this
regard, it is with great regret that the British Government
has just learned, via a Reuters report quoting the News
Agency of Nigeria, that, despite widespread high-level
appeals for clemency, including one by the British Prime
Minister at the ongoing Commonwealth Heads of
Government meeting in Auckland, Ken Sara-wiwa and
eight other minority rights activists condemned to death
by the Nigerian authorities were executed by hanging
today at Port Harcourt Prison in south-eastern Nigeria. In
London, the British Government has stated that it is
appalled at this callous act. In Auckland, the British
Prime Minister is in close contact with his colleagues
about further steps.

 

