Mr. Bliss (Australia): I thank Mr. Feltman for his
briefing. We recognize the ongoing efforts that the
Secretary-General, Mr. Feltman and other colleagues
are making to resolve the crisis.

There is now overwhelming evidence that
significant numbers of Russian troops, armoured
personnel carriers, tanks and other equipment have
moved into Ukrainian territory. There are credible
reports that Russian combat soldiers equipped with
sophisticated heavy weaponry are operating inside
Ukraine. Large quantities of advanced weapons,
including air-defence systems, artillery tanks and
armoured personnel carriers, are being transferred
to separatist forces in eastern Ukraine. Russian
paratroopers have been captured in Ukraine, and
there are reports of funerals being held in Russia for
Russian troops killed in Ukraine. Yesterday there were
reports of some 100 tanks, armoured vehicles and
rocket launchers travelling towards Telmanove, south
of Donetsk.

In the past 48 hours, separatists have conducted
operations to seize the coastal town of Novoazovsk and
several villages inside Ukraine near the Russian border.
Reports that regular Russian armed forces are involved
are deeply concerning. The latest developments
indicate a new and even more dangerous escalation of
the crisis, which appears to be moving to a wider area of
Ukraine, including the southern land route to Crimea.
All of that points to the use of force by Russia against
Ukraine. That would be a flagrant breach of Ukraine's
sovereignty and a blatant violation of the Charter of the
United Nations.

The latest developments come against a backdrop
of other serious incidents, including the killing by
separatists of the Lithuanian Honorary Consul in
Luhansk, on 22 August; the parading by separatists of
captured Ukrainian soldiers in Donetsk on 24 August, in
blatant contravention of the prohibition on humiliating
and degrading treatment of prisoners of war, the Geneva
Conventions and customary international law; and a
Russian helicopter attack on a border post in Luhansk
oblast on 25 August, in which four border guards were
killed. Despite claims by Russia of non-involvement in
the conflict, we have the public statement of 28 August
by separatist leader Zakharchenko claiming that some
3,000 to 4,000 Russians have fought in separatist ranks
since the conflict began.

We are also deeply concerned about Russian
Foreign Minister Lavrov's announcement on 25 August
that a second aid convoy would be sent to Ukraine this
week, despite the fact that the first proceeded without
the agreement of the Ukrainian Government or the
participation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross. Australian Foreign Minister Bishop described
the aid convoy situation, on 24 August, as one in which
Russia showed flagrant and reckless disregard for
international norms and international law. Any further
aid convoys must be sent only with the agreement of the
Ukrainian Government.

The 26 August talks in Minsk had the potential to
provide a useful forum for finding a diplomatic way
to end the crisis, but at the same time that Russia was
engaging in those talks further escalation was occurring
in southern Ukraine.

Some immediate steps must be taken. Russia must
immediately withdraw its military equipment and
personnel from Ukrainian territory. Russia should
withdraw all support for the separatists and ask them
to lay down their arms so that the conflict can be
brought to an immediate end. Russia must also control
its border. That is the only effective way to prevent
troops and equipment from entering Ukraine and is key
to establishing a ceasefire, as has been said by other
speakers. Strenuous efforts must be made to engage in
political dialogue. That depends on Russia.

While the focus of the discussion has been on
developments in the past 48 hours, we must not
lose sight of the need for the full implementation
of resolution 2166 (2014). The Netherlands Mission
has just circulated to Council members a letter on
its response to the Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7
crash. Significant progress has been made by the
Netherlands in identifying the remains of the victims
and repatriating them to their own countries. The letter
also states that the independent investigation into the
cause of the crash is ongoing and that the Netherlands
remains fully committed to ensuring accountability for
the perpetrators.

Australia is working closely with the Netherlands on
the response to the crash and fully supports its efforts.
In order for those efforts to succeed, it is imperative that
all States fully implement the provisions of resolution
2166 (2014).

