Mr. Gatan (Philippines): At the outset,
Mr. President, the Philippines congratulates you on
Austria's assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of November, and thanks you for
convening this very important meeting to discuss
piracy in the territorial waters and even on the high
seas off the coast of Somalia. We also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Mr. Ould Abdallah, for presenting the Secretary-
General's report on piracy in Somalia (S/2009/590).
The Philippines is extremely alarmed and gravely
concerned over the resurgence of piracy, a detestable
crime condemned by the civilized world, committed
against innocent vessels and their officers and crew
members particularly in waters off the coast of
Somalia. This resurgence, carried on with blatant
disregard for the public outcry of the international
community against it, has resulted in the capture and
detention as hostages of many Philippine nationals on
board these vessels.

As the supplier of a third of the world's shipping
manpower, with over 270,000 Filipino seafarers aboard
international shipping vessels, the Philippines is
directly affected by piracy off the coast of Somalia. In
the first quarter of this year alone, 120 out of 300
hostages taken by pirates were from the Philippines,
the largest national contingent of the group. As of
5 November, more than 160 Filipino seafarers on board
various merchant vessels had been abducted by pirates
off the coast of Somalia since January. This month
alone, 16 Filipino seamen were abducted by these
pirates in a span of just one week. Piracy in the area
now constitutes a threat to the lives of many
Philippines nationals.

The Philippines joins the call for concrete efforts
from the international community to address piracy off
the coast of Somalia and to increase efforts to assist
seamen from all nations who have suffered as a result
of these heinous acts. The Philippines recognizes the
efforts undertaken by the Security Council to address
these acts of piracy in waters off the coast of Somalia,
as best evidenced by its adoption of resolutions 1816
(2008), 1838 (2008), 1846 (2008) and 1851 (2008).
The Philippines looks forward to further, bolder steps
to be taken by the Security Council to counter piracy.
Moreover, the Philippines expects that future actions
by the Security Council will take into full
consideration the safety and security of the lives of the
hostages.

The Philippines also fully supports efforts led by
the United Nations and concerned countries and
international organizations to assist in the stabilization
of Somalia, in partnership with the Government of
Somalia, and in finding a long-term solution to this
international crisis. The Philippines is doing its part to
help Somalia. During the African Union Summit held
in Tripoli on 31 August, President Gloria Macapagal-
Arroyo met with Somali President Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed and offered the Philippines' assistance
in training and strengthening the capabilities of the
Somali coast guard. As a result, the Philippines is
pleased to report that a high-level Somali delegation
led by the Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister of
Fisheries and Marine Resources will arrive in Manila
this month of November to discuss the details of this
capacity-building exercise. Somalia was also invited to
join some 80 representatives from 26 countries
participating in the capacity-building workshop on
regional cooperation against piracy and armed robbery
in Asia, held in Manila from 10 to 12 November. The
Philippines has also made a financial contribution in
support of the Somali security institutions.

In conclusion, the Philippines hopes that the
international community's attention and efforts to
address the clear and present danger of piracy off the
coast of Somalia will not wane, but instead intensify
with the goal of ending this scourge.

