Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I should
like to thank you, Mr. President, for calling this important
meeting today.

Before I talk about the draft resolution I would like
to make a brief comment about a tragic event that
occurred this morning in Banja Luka in Bosnia. I refer, of
course, to the car bomb attack on Zeljko Kopanja, an
important Bosnian Serb journalist, whose life is now in a
critical condition as a result. We are here today to talk
about similar outrages in Sierra Leone, but this kind of
cowardly attack on a brave journalist in Bosnia reminds
us that our work is never done and that in Bosnia, where
progress has been made, the forces of darkness are still
present. This is a direct effort to destroy the Dayton peace
process and the work of the United Nations. The attack
reminds us again that we have to work for peace
throughout the world.

With regard to today's meeting on Sierra Leone, I
want to begin by welcoming the statements made and by
welcoming the new Permanent Representatives of Nigeria
and of Sierra Leone to the United Nations where I, too,
am a relative newcomer - I am in my seventh week
here. I look forward to working with them closely. I was
greatly moved by their remarks and, of course, by those
of my friend, Mr. Otunnu, whose eloquent statement
could hardly be improved upon.

By adopting today's draft resolution on Sierra Leone,
the Security Council will be doing much more than
merely deploying another United Nations peacekeeping
force. We will be acknowledging the end of one of the
most brutal civil wars and the beginning of one of the
most well-deserved transitions to peace. We will be
embracing the historic accord signed in Lome, and
dedicating ourselves to its implementation.

Over the past nine years, the people of Sierra Leone
have been subjected to a horrible war. Half the population
remains internally displaced. Over half a million Sierra
Leonean citizens have become refugees. Many Sierra
Leoneans have lost their lives, their families and their
homes.

Today's vote is therefore important and timely.
Although three months have elapsed since the Peace
Agreement was signed, the situation remains fragile. In
fact, earlier this week there was another skirmish between
rebel factions. This reminds us again that the momentum
of the peace process could easily be lost without prompt,
strong, vigorous action by the international community.

Resolution of this conflict is a high priority for my
Government. The United States helped broker the
ceasefire and facilitate the peace process. Over the past

 

two years, we have provided more than $100 million to
meet humanitarian needs in Sierra Leone resulting from the
war. In addition, we have provided almost $16 million in
logistical and other non-lethal support to the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG).

We fully recognize that we would not be where we are
today were it not for the leadership of President Kabbah
and the spirit of compromise displayed by the former
combatants. Their willingness to put their differences aside
has made the possibility of peace real. In this context,
Foday Sankoh and Johnny Paul Koroma have critical roles
to play in ensuring that their followers implement the Lome
Agreement. We also recognize the enormous contributions
made by the ECOMOG West African peacekeepers, led by
Nigeria, and we commend ECOMOG's readiness to remain
in the field and to proceed with disarmament and
demobilization.

But of course most of the credit must go to the people
of Sierra Leone themselves, who displayed the necessary
mix of courage and conviction to bring their country out of
a terrible war.

We hope that the Lome Agreement succeeds. We are
prepared to provide appropriate support to that end. On my
trips to Washington to discuss the issue of United States
arrears, I have mentioned the Sierra Leone issue as coequal
in importance with East Timor and Kosovo in every
discussion with every member of Congress, and have
stressed to them that there is no double standard in the
United States concerning African peacekeeping - that
Sierra Leone is as important to us as Kosovo and East
Timor. I am gratified to say that the members of Congress
have not objected in the least to this attempt to raise the
profile and the importance of both Sierra Leone, which the
Secretary of State visited only two days ago, and Africa in
general.

We remain committed to justice and accountability.
We are working to help the Government of Sierra Leone to
establish a truth and reconciliation commission and a
human rights commission as called for in the Lome
Agreement. We support an international fact-finding
mission to assist the work and proceedings of the truth and
reconciliation and human rights commissions. And we
hope - we pray - that these commissions can bring
healing and reconciliation to Sierra Leone. We remain
committed to the pursuit of accountability. At the same
time, we recognize the need to allow the Peace Agreement
to bear fruit.

Earlier this week, Secretary of State Albright visited
Sierra Leone to show support for President Kabbah and
his democratically elected Government. She used her visit
to convey our national empathy with the people of Sierra
Leone for the suffering they have endured, and our strong
commitment to the restoration of peace and reconciliation.
Following her visit, Secretary Albright said, "I saw people
who had suffered unspeakable horror, yet who sought not
revenge, but renewal". It is that process of renewal that
we seek to encourage today.

We therefore fully support, with genuine enthusiasm,
this important draft resolution to establish the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone. We support it because
we are committed to working with Africans to make
African peacekeeping work.

