Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, on having organized this open debate on a very
important issue. Naturally, we express our indignation
at what happened in Mogadishu today.

The concept paper on the theme of the debate
(8/2013/334, annex) is, in general, both comprehensive
and very helpful. Of course, we approach the theme from
an African perspective, among others, because it has
been primary Africa that has been on the receiving end
of so much greed and shenanigans often, but not always,
associated with the exploitation of natural resources,
most particularly evident in extractive industries.
The British Government should be commended for its
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative.

The concept paper rightly indicates that extractive
industries are never the sole source of conflict. In fact,
one can go further and argue that extractive resources
are not or may not be the major source of conflict. The
concept paper makes two very apt assumptions. One
relates to the many examples of countries that have
enjoyed security and stability and, as the concept paper
says, impressive economic growth through the effective
management of their extractive industries. The second
assertion is that countries dependent on extractive
industries are vulnerable and susceptible to conflict
when they have weak governance and State institutions.

It may not be fair for Africa to always blame others
for problems that are at time of its own making, but
on the other hand no region of the world has been the
subject of so much abuse and all sorts of destabilizing
activities because of greed focusing on the continent's
natural resources. Is there a better illustration of this
than what has befallen the Democratic Republic of the
Congo since the time of Patrice Lumumba'?

I am proposing that, while all of the suggestions
made in the concept paper to ensure transparency and
accountability in this domain are valid and very helpful,
what would be yet more effective at the end of the day
would be what is done at the country level to strengthen
State institutions and democratic governance, as the
concept paper indicates. It is only by such actions that
the ownership by the people concerned can be realized,
without which no amount of work by the outside world
can be fully effective in ensuring that extractive
industries are not a cause of conflict. Even then, given
the fact that natural resources generate income, the
possibility of corruption and officials or their foreign
partners being tempted to seek to underhandedly gain
undeserved advantage may not be entirely avoided.

But there is perhaps no better solution than
appropriate internal democratic mechanisms for
ensuring vigilance and monitoring. In other words,
what is critical is what is done at the country level
in connection with good and democratic governance,
which allows space for grass-roots participation and
control. In fact, external initiatives that are too intrusive
may be seen as seeking to deprive rightful ownership
by resorting to a variety of methods.

Before I conclude, I should mention the fact that
this debate in our view would have been far more
useful if the theme had been broadened and not limited
to the extractive sector because the lack of careful,
balanced, fair and just use of natural resources also has
implications for peace and stability, not only within
countries but also in inter-State relations. This is
perhaps a theme which will have to be tackled in the
not-so-distant future.
