Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Since this is the first time I have taken the floor
in the Council this year, I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on the Dominican Republic's presidency for
this month. We are sure you will carry out your duties
with distinction.

We are grateful to Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, for his
briefing on the changes in the military and political
situation in Yemen in the light of the Stockholm
Agreement. We also thank Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock for his assessment of the humanitarian
situation, which makes it clear that Yemen and its people
are experiencing a terrible humanitarian disaster. It is
obvious that it is impossible to end a conflict of many
years' standing in the few weeks that have passed
since the start of the implementation of the Agreement,
which many of us helped the Special Envoy to conclude
in Sweden. We are not expecting instant results, and we
will continue to work with Mr. Griffiths and the parties
to the conflict in Yemen with a View to implementing it
as soon as possible.

The groundwork has been laid. The Redeployment
Coordination Committee, headed by retired Major
General Cammaert, has been established. The
Committee's meetings are not going very smoothly,
but they are taking place and the results can be seen in
the lower level of violence around the city and port of
Al-Hudaydah. Further discussions are being held on the
methodology for implementing mutual understanding
on the prisoner exchange and on de-escalation in Taiz.
We endorse the mobilization of the United Nations
presence in Yemen and the efforts to expand it. We
support the Secretary-General's initiative on setting
up a new mission to support the implementation of
the Al-Hudaydah agreement. We believe it will help
Mr. Griffiths with his mediation efforts, including in
terms of organizing a new round of consultations.

In our view it will be important to ensure the
Government of the Republic of Yemen and the
Ansar Allah movement maintain their resolve to
reach compromises on their existing disagreements,
including on the political issues that the parties have
barely begun to consider. Needless to say, much
depends on sticking to the agreements already reached.
It is essential that we all continue our collective and
bilateral efforts to support Mr. Griffiths' work on the
political front. However, we must also maintain our
parallel efforts to improve the humanitarian situation
in Yemen, which continues to deteriorate daily, as
Mr. Lowcock reminded us today. Millions of Yemenis
are starving, with no way to get essential medicines or
services, and are in need of assistance in one form or
another. The cost of rebuilding the country's devastated
infrastructure continues to rise incrementally.

Russia, like many other States Members of the
United Nations, including Yemen's nearest neighbours,
continues to make its contribution to assisting the
people of Yemen. However, we are doing it on a
non-discriminatory basis. Humanitarian assistance
must be provided to everyone in Yemen who needs
it, regardless of who controls the territory where they
live. We assume that this principle is guiding other
humanitarian partners in Yemen as well.

In conclusion, we want to once again draw attention
to the potential benefit that improving the overall
atmosphere in the region could bring to settling the
situation in Yemen and the other crises in the Middle
East and northern Africa. Policies of confrontation and
aggressive competition must give way to dialogue and
mutual understanding, including through the creation
of a unified security architecture. It is our shared duty
to help the stakeholders in the region get that process
under way. In our opinion, Russia's concept for security
and confidence in the Persian Gulf continues to
represent a sound basis for joint efforts in that regard.

