Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and the
other countries aligning themselves with this statement.

The European Union strongly supports United
Nations peacekeeping both in principle and in practice. Its
support rests on principle because the United Nations
brings with it unique legitimacy. This is combined with
its impartiality and professionalism, and the United
Nations is often the only hope for war-torn countries and
their citizens to find their way on to the path of peace
and stability. A recent comparative study by the RAND
Corporation on nation-building efforts has shown the
remarkable success rate of United Nations peacekeeping.
The authors conclude that the United Nations provides
the most suitable institutional framework for nation-
building missions that require fewer than 20,000 men.
They further conclude that the United Nations
framework provides for a comparatively low cost
structure, a comparatively high success rate and the
greatest degree of international legitimacy. From our
own experience, we share that assessment.

The practical support of the European Union for
United Nations peacekeeping is demonstrated by sheer
numbers. At present, the annual budget for
peacekeeping operations amounts to over $5 billion.
The European Union, collectively, is by far the largest
financial contributor and provides roughly 38.5 per
cent of the peacekeeping budget. EU member States
together also provide about 4,100 troops in the field.
Thus, it goes without saying that we too have a
particular interest that resources are deployed in the
most efficient and effective way. We are deeply
concerned about the recent allegations of fraud and
mismanagement in procurement for peacekeeping, and
we support all efforts to investigate those allegations.

In that context, we would like to express our
appreciation for the work of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services (OIOS), which has itself brought to
our attention these cases of possible fraud. Those found
guilty must be held accountable, with respect for due
process. We believe that stronger internal controls and
improved oversight must be put in place and that the
highest ethical standards must be applied to prevent
such instances from recurring. All departments
involved in the procurement process must ensure that
senior managers within those departments are seized of
the need to oversee the procurement process, ensure
compliance with relevant rules and regulations and be
accountable - and, of course, be seen to be
accountable - for their actions.

At the same time, we must not forget that it is
often under the most difficult circumstances and under
enormous time pressure that the United Nations is
called upon to set up peacekeeping operations. Without
delay, troops have to be deployed, equipment has to be
procured and the necessary infrastructure has to be put
in place. That is an immense task and we would like to
express our high appreciation for the outstanding
achievements of the Organization in this regard.

Since 1948, 2,248 United Nations peacekeepers
have lost their lives in the line of duty. Day after day,
United Nations peacekeepers all over the world are
providing essential services to Member States and their
populations. It is our collective duty to ensure that
sound management is practised at the United Nations,
including in the field of peacekeeping. It is also our
duty as responsible States Members of the United
Nations to ensure that the overall picture of
commitment, success and hard work on the part of
United Nations peacekeepers - who are mandated
their difficult tasks by the members of the Security
Council - is made known to the world.

