I express my appreciation for the organization of this high-level open debate. It provides an important occasion to reiterate once again our commitment to the full promotion and protection of human rights under all circumstances, including in peace operations. The Security Council bears particular responsibility in this area, as do peace operations. I welcome the briefings by Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, Minister of Defence of Germany; Michelle Bachelet, United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights; and David Shearer, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for South Sudan. This topic is vitally important as we consider prevailing circumstances, not only because of the persistent and protracted armed conflicts around the world but also in the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The pandemic has put health systems to the test and drawn attention to the vulnerability of certain groups that have disproportionately suffered socioeconomic difficulties, health-related problems and a deterioration in the enjoyment of their rights. That is why, on 22 June, Ecuador co-launched the joint statement in support of the Secretary-General's call for a worldwide ceasefire to both facilitate humanitarian access and serve as a first step towards lasting peace. Implementation is now essential with regard to resolution 2532 (2020), on COVID-19, adopted on | July, urging an immediate universal cessation of hostilities in all situations and calling on all parties to armed conflicts to implement a humanitarian pause for at least 90 days. What is the role of peacekeeping operations in facilitating the implementation of the right to peace? In this context, the protection of human rights is both an objective and a tool. Here, prevention is key. But it is also crucial that there be no impunity whatsoever. The protection of civilians, as discussed in May (see S/2020/465), and in particular the protection of the rights of children, as discussed by the Council in June (see S/2020/594), constitute the essential role of peace operations in terms of human rights. That is why joint protection teams have been established, with uniformed and civilian components, as well as mixed-gender engagement teams, with the effective participation by women. In this regard, the Constitution of Ecuador establishes the Armed Forces as an institution to protect and guarantee citizens' rights and freedoms. Human rights are considered to be part of the responsibilities of defence political leadership - including the promotion of gender equality policies and of practices conducive to coexistence and respectful of the cultural identity of contingents, as well as the effective application of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1889 (2009). We firmly believe that the effective way to establish and maintain peace is by strengthening the protection of and respect for human rights in conflicts, together with the full, equal and meaningful participation of women at all levels of decision- making and at all stages of peace processes and mediation efforts, including in the prevention and resolution of armed conflicts. The human rights situation continues to be of great concern not only because of the number but also because of the serious nature of violations in conflict areas, as reflected in numerous reports documenting situations in which rights are affected by State and non-State actors alike. Faced with these circumstances, peace operations must provide an integrated and comprehensive response to protect human rights. There is a direct link between the results of efforts to uphold, promote and protect human rights and the credibility of United Nations operations. We therefore condemn all acts of sexual exploitation, abuse and trafficking of women and children, including in humanitarian crises, by humanitarian workers, military, police and civilian personnel involved in United Nations peacekeeping operations, and we support the voluntary compact to prevent and address sexual exploitation and abuse, introduced by the Secretary-General. We welcome the efforts made by United Nations agencies and peacekeeping operations to implement a zero-tolerance policy in this regard, and urge them to continue taking all appropriate measures necessary to combat such abuses. We also condemn any intentional attack targeting personnel, facilities, materials, units or vehicles involved in humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping missions under the Charter of the United Nations, which is why Ecuador co-sponsored resolution 2518 (2020), on the security of peace operations personnel, in March. This year marks the seventy-second anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the seventy-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Charter of the United Nations. In this context, Ecuador reiterates its commitment to continuing to support the mainstreaming of human rights throughout all United Nation actions, including in the area of peace and security.
