Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate. I would also like to thank
Ms. Viotti, Judge Owada and President Meron for their
insightful and comprehensive briefings.

Today I will focus on two points included in the
concept note (S/2018/417/Rev.1, annex), namely, the
peaceful settlement of disputes and accountability.

First, on the peaceful settlement of disputes, the
Security Council and the International Court of Justice
are the only two principal United Nations organs
capable of making legally binding decisions. They have
different mandates, but they can work complementarily
and in a mutually reinforcing manner. However, they
both face challenges.

For the Security Council, the primary challenge is
implementation. Member States are legally obligated
to carry out Council decisions in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, but it is not always easy
for non-members of the Council to follow their content
closely. Without dedicated implementation, the actual
effects of even the best-crafted Council resolutions
will be limited. It is therefore incumbent on Council
members to explain the content of resolutions to the
wider membership through such efforts as briefings by
the Chairs of the sanctions committees. That will help
promote the implementation of resolutions by Member
States, thereby enhancing their effectiveness.

By contrast, judgments of the International Court
of Justice, which are binding on the parties, have seen
relatively good implementation, although not without
challenges. For the Court, the more fundamental issue
is jurisdiction. Japan attaches great importance to the
rule of law and has accepted the Court's compulsory
jurisdiction since 1958. We encourage others to do so as
well. To that end, it is imperative that the Court continue
to produce solid judgments and advisory opinions that
enjoy the confidence of States.
Turning to the issue of accountability, the Security
Council cannot do everything by itself. It can benefit
from coordinating with other institutions or mechanisms
and making full use of their resources. For example,
the Council has referred situations to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) twice, in Darfur and Libya. The
Council should at least follow up on non-compliance
in such referrals, as the ICC lacks its own enforcement
mechanisms. Even if the situation does not allow for
a referral to the ICC, the need for accountability for
the most serious crimes remains. In the case of the
use of chemical weapons in Syria, for example, an
accountability mechanism to identify those responsible
is strongly called for.

Before concluding, I would like to take this
opportunity to express our sincere gratitude to Judge
Owada for his service and dedication to upholding
international law as a Judge of the International Court
of Justice for the past 15 years.

Let me conclude by expressing Japan's continued
commitment to upholding the rule of law and the
peaceful settlement of disputes.

