Montenegro aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union (annex 38). In addition, as a member of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security, Montenegro joins the statement submitted by Canada on behalf of the group of 63 member States (annex 27). This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of landmark resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, which for the first time recognized women's leadership in achieving international peace and security and their contributions to conflict prevention, peacekeeping, conflict resolution and peacebuilding. Today the situation of women and girls in conflict-affected areas is further deteriorated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Therefore, their representation in the processes of building and sustaining peace and addressing the COVID-19 pandemic is more important than ever before. Montenegro is strongly devoted to the implementation of all resolutions on the women and peace and security agenda. The Government of Montenegro demonstrated its determination to address this issue at the national level by adopting, in 2019, its second action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), for the 2019-2022 period. This action plan clearly defines measures and actions for integrating gender perspectives in the defence reform processes, thereby ensuring the realization of three priorities, namely, increasing the participation of women in decision-making and peacekeeping processes, protecting women and girls in conflict zones and integrating gender perspectives and gender education in peacekeeping operations, as well as mechanisms for the implementation of the resolution 1325 (2000) and its accompanying resolutions. In addition, the Government of Montenegro is implementing its third action plan for achieving gender equality for this period, which defines activities for the further integration of resolution 1325 (2000) into the security sector. The overall strategic framework has been improved by bringing the army closer to the younger female population. In the forthcoming period, a multisectoral approach will be strengthened in order to ensure the realization of defined goals by addressing societal gender stereotypes that are not exclusively related to the security and defence sector, but rather affect all segments of society. Besides continuous implementation of policies on increasing the number of women in politics, public life and the security sector and combating violence against women and girls, Montenegro is focusing in particular on economic empowerment of women through the implementation of its action plan on the implementation of the Women's Entrepreneurship Development Strategy 2015-2020, which focuses on women in rural areas and marginalized groups. We are also fully dedicated to the effective implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform of Action, as we are aware that ensuring the promotion, protection and fulfilment of the rights of women and girls has positive catalytic implications for the development and progress of the entire society. We believe that, where women live free of violence, have equal access to education, health care and political and economic opportunities, societies are healthier, more prosperous and more peaceful. And that is our goal. As we are marking several anniversaries this year - the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the seventy-fifth anniversary of the establishment of the United Nations - there is a need for far greater implementation of all pillars of the women and peace and security agenda. Therefore, we should redouble our efforts to ensure the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in all aspects of peace and security, to ensure women's rights are promoted and protected and to fill the gaps in the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda.
