Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium would like to associate itselfwith the statement
delivered by the Head of the Delegation of the European
Union and would like to add a few comments in its
national capacity.

Belgium is one of the countries that has been most
affected by the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon.
It has also been one of the most involved in the fight
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
In that regard, we are very pleased to be able to take
part in today's debate.

The threat posed by ISIL and other terrorist groups,
not only in Syria but also in Iraq and throughout the
broader Middle East and the Sahel, as well as in other
parts of Africa and elsewhere, is indeed a reality and
extremely significant. It reminds us every day of the
appalling methods that terrorists use to threaten both
the international community and local communities
and of how this undermines international peace and
security.

Belgium remains firmly convinced that the United
Nations has a leading role to play in responding to these
threats, through international coordination of various
efforts and initiatives and through efforts to ensure
policy coherence. The United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, whose fourth biennial review was
concluded in June, should continue to guide our actions.

Belgium welcomes the adoption by the Security
Council of resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014), and
calls on Member States to take the steps necessary to
ensure their comprehensive implementation.

In that context, Belgium underscores the
importance of the role played by the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre in promoting the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Belgium welcomes and
supports the Centre's initiatives aimed at increasing
understanding of the foreign fighter phenomenon.

Prevention must be a major component of
our response to terrorism and violent extremism.
Resolution 2178 (2014) rightly calls for strengthened
international action to counter violent extremism. In
order to tackle the problem of foreign terrorist fighters,
the Belgian Government has adopted a new strategy
to prevent violent radicalization that is based on the
following principles: improve our understanding of
the radicalization process, promote social measures in
order to address the root causes of radicalization, and
build the resilience of vulnerable groups. The strategy
also involves efforts to increase awareness of the
phenomenon of radicalization at the local level.

A new unit responsible for preventing radicalization
has also been set up within the Ministry of the Interior.
It is tasked with supporting local strategies to counter
radicalization and promoting such efforts. Indeed, we
must focus our efforts at the local level - be it local
authorities or civil society - in order best to wage the
fight against the phenomenon of radicalization.

Finally, the fight against the financing of terrorist
groups should form an integral part of a wider counter-
terrorism effort. Belgium recently participated in a
number of discussions on how to more effectively
fight terrorist financing, and we would like to mention
several points in that regard as part ofthose discussions.

First, we must fully implement existing United
Nations sanctions regimes. With regard to the financing
of terrorism, resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014)
provide us very useful guidance.

Secondly, the exchange of information at the
international level and other levels is also necessary
in order to identify those who contribute to terrorist
activities and to enable us to take action against such
individuals and groups.

Thirdly, terrorism and terrorist groups must be
cut off from the international financial system, and to
that end our financial institutions must very rigorously
apply the principles of transparency and due diligence.

