Mr. Dunn (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Zachary Muburi-Muita for his briefing this
morning.

The United States recognizes the importance of
and the challenges involved in forging effective
partnerships to carry out peace and security missions in
Africa. We thank both the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) for their efforts to save lives,
protect civilians, mediate conflicts and bring peace to
the continent.

Building the capacity of the African Union is
critical to ensuring effective joint efforts with the
United Nations in Africa. The United States fully
supports the Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme,
which details the steps that both organizations need to
take in order build such capacity. We urge both
organizations to continue to work towards realizing
those common objectives.

The 2008 Prodi report (see S/2008/8l3) and the
2009 follow-on report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/470) serve as essential guides to enhancing
United Nations-AU cooperation in the fields of peace
and security. The United States supports the vast
majority of the recommendations in those reports. We
have been encouraged by the progress in
implementation. With regard to the Prodi report, I
would like to make four points.

First, we applaud the United Nations Secretariat
and the AU Commission for creating and convening
the Joint Task Force on Peace and Security.

Secondly, the effective leadership of the United
Nations Office to the African Union in coordinating
United Nations agencies in the peace and security
cluster will be essential to realizing our mutual goals.
That is especially urgent given the cooperation on
resolving the conflicts in Somalia and the Sudan.

Thirdly, there is more to be done in working out
clearer mechanisms for United Nations organizations
to partner with African Union counterparts.

Fourthly, we welcome the AU's work on building
early-warning conflict prevention and conflict
resolution capacities. The United States has made
efforts to train and equip parts of the AU Commission
to help accomplish those objectives.

The United States looks forward to further
African Union work to develop priorities for the
African Standby Force that include training in the areas
of the protection of civilians, human rights, and women
and children in armed conflict. The Department of
Field Support (DFS) can show continuing leadership in
assisting the AU to develop a logistics capacity. We
encourage the DPS to continue its good work
supporting the AU in mission support, procurement and
logistics.

Some of the most important recommendations
found in the Prodi report concern the financing of AU
peace support operations. Funding mechanisms for
AU-led peace support operations authorized by the
Security Council should be simple and should promote
accountability. The United Nations and the African
Union should work together to improve accounting
capacities, organizational transparency and internal
oversight.

The United States fully supports the enhanced
sustainability, predictability and flexibility of financing
of the AU's peace and security capability. We again
call upon the United Nations and the AU to implement
the recommendations of the Prodi report as an initial
step in achieving such objectives.

