Mr. Savua (Fiji): It is my honour to address the
Security Council on behalf of the members of the
Pacific Islands Forum group of countries that are
Members of the United Nations, namely Australia,
Kiribati, the Federated States of Micronesia, the
Marshall Islands, Nauru, New Zealand, Palau, Papua
New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Island, Tonga, Tuvalu,
Vanuatu and my own country, Fiji.

At a time when the international agenda is very
crowded with urgent and important issues, we are
gratified to see that the concerns of our region are not
being neglected. Although Bougainville may seem
remote to some, this does not diminish the importance
of the effort to build sustainable peace there after a
prolonged and costly conflict.

The good news is that much has been achieved.
We are now at the closing stage of the peace process.
This is also, however, a potentially dangerous stage.
Care must be taken to ensure that the momentum built
up over the past years is not dissipated, that the hopes
of the people of Papua New Guinea and Bougainville
for peace are not disappointed, and that development
and re-establishment of a normal life for Bougainville
are not delayed.

We have looked closely at the Secretary-
General's report and note many positive elements and
also an exposition of possible obstacles. This
exposition of possible obstacles needs to be matched
with a rigorous exposition of solutions. More
important, the real significance of the perceived
obstacles also needs to be weighed carefully and in the
light of the assessment the parties themselves.

Time is of the essence. This is the year that we all
want to close, once and for all, the dark chapter of the
conflict in Bougainville. The parties to the peace
agreement want to press on. The Government of Papua
New Guinea wants to press on. The contributors to the
Peace Monitoring Group - Australia, New Zealand,
Fiji and Vanuatu, and in the early stages, Tonga -
want to press on to the goal of peace. This Peace
Monitoring Group is an example of regional efforts in
resolving conflicts, peace-building and peace
maintenance within their region in partnership with the
United Nations, the European Union, the United
Kingdom, Japan and the United States.

What we look for from the Secretariat is also
what the Security Council asked for in December: a
clear and practical programme to enable us to finish
stages II and III weapons disposal and to move on to
reap the full benefits of peace. In extending the
mandate to December 2003, the development and re-
establishment of a normal life for Bougainville are now
delayed.

With the benefit of such a programme we can be
confident that the peace process can conclude
successfully this year, not least because the parties are
determined and committed. The Peace Monitoring
Group, having been in Bougainville for five years, will
remain for three more months. The United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville needs to use this time
wisely and with a due sense of urgency, so that it
finishes all the mandated tasks for which it needs the
Peace Monitoring Group's support. The countries of
the region remain committed to doing all we can to
assist.

