Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): It is our pleasure
to welcome High Representative Valentin Inzko
back to the Security Council and to thank him for
his comprehensive briefing and report (8/2016/395, annex). As this is my first statement on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina after Ukraine assumed its
non-permanent membership in the Council, I would like
to assure Mr. Inzko of our full support for his activities
as High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement.

Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later on behalf of the European Union (EU).

First and foremost, we congratulate the Government
and the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina on their
application to join the European Union. Ukraine hopes
that historic decision will provide additional impetus
for further progress under the General Framework
Agreement for Peace. Ukraine welcomes the readiness
of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
advance the reform agenda. We look forward to the
conclusion of a final agreement between the EU and
Bosnia and Herzegovina on the adaptation of the
trade provisions of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement.

Ukraine also praises the efforts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's Government aimed at the activation
of the country's NATO Membership Action Plan.
We support close cooperation between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and NATO as an important factor of
security in Europe. In that regard, we hope for the
quickest-possible resolution of the issue of immovable
defence property as the precondition to the country's
Membership Action Plan.

Our meeting today is taking place at an important
moment for Bosnia and Herzegovina. A little more than
20 years ago, the General Framework Agreement for
Peace was reached at Dayton. A lot of work has been
done, but yet after 20 years of peace we are still seeing
serious political divisions inside the country.

As a positive sign of efforts to find a way to bridge
the differences, we note the decision of Republika
Srpska authorities not to hold the referendum on the
State judiciary. However, the absence of an appropriate
decision on the subject by the Republika Srpska National
Assembly is a worrying sign. I would like to underscore
that any referendum that contradicts the provisions of
the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina and of the
Dayton Agreement is illegitimate.

Ukraine shares the concerns of High Representative
Inzko with regard to certain statements by Republika
Srpska officials calling for that entity's secession from
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We strongly condemn any
provocative actions that could undermine the progress
under the Dayton Peace Agreement and the stability
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I once again reiterate our
strong support for Bosnia and Herzegovina's territorial
integrity, which is guaranteed by its Constitution
and by international law, including the Charter of the
United Nations.

Ukraine believes that more efforts could have
been made to achieve more sustainable progress on the
5+2 agenda. We hope that, during the next reporting
period, we will see long-awaited developments
towards meeting the set of objectives and conditions.
We believe that special attention should be paid to the
issue of prospective defence property, in particular
the registration of specific properties located on the
territory of Republika Srpska. Other areas where
progress would be highly welcome, in addition to
implementing the Sejdic-Finci judgment, include the
issues of the publication of the 2013 census results, the
proper functioning of the coordination mechanism on
EU matters, the implementation of the Constitutional
Court's decision on Mostar and delivering on
outstanding International Monetary Fund requirements.

Finally, I would like to underscore that, given
the information we heard today from the High
Representative, it is very important to overcome
political differences in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to
achieve tangible progress in implementing the necessary
reforms, as well as the 5+2 agenda. Achieving all five
objectives and the two conditions as quickly as possible
would be the best way forward.

In our View, as we enter the third decade ofthe peace
process in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Council has an
obligation to provide all necessary political support to
ensuring the country's further peaceful development.
It is of utmost importance that any attempt to encroach
on Bosnia and Herzegovina's independence, unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity be resolutely
addressed.

