Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Kubis, for his informative briefing
today. I ask that he continue to convey to the stafff of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and to the members of the United Nations
country team the deep gratitude of the United States
for the critical work they do in the face of considerable
challenges. We also wish to thank Ambassador Tanin
for his participation in this meeting.

Today we are seeing the final steps in the
preparations for a united and sovereign Afghanistan
that will secure its rightful place in the community of
nations. We commend the Afghan people as they manage
three significant transitions - security, political and
economic. The United States will continue to support
Afghanistan through this critical period, as we jointly
agreed in our strategic partnership agreement and
committed to at the Tokyo and Chicago Conferences.

Afghan security and police forces continue to
grow stronger and more capable. Afghanistan reached
milestone 2013 earlier this week and is now in the lead
for security nationwide, with the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) moving into a supporting role.
We welcome the endorsement, in Brussels on 5 June,
by NATO and ISAF defence mininsters of the detailed
concept for a non-combat NATO mission to train,
advise, and assist the Afghan forces post-2013.

As we look to Afghanistan's political transition,
next year's election will be a historic opportunity to
achieve a unifying moment when power is peacefully
transferred to a newly elected President. That will
reflect the success of the Afghan people in conducting
a credible, inclusive and transparent election. We
look forward to the establishment of a broadly agreed
elections legislative framework as soon as possible. The
implementation of legislation that establishes a credible
process to appoint the leaderhip of the Independent
Election Commission, guarantee the role of women and
puts in place a capable and impartial dispute-resolution
mechanism is the essential foundation for the credibility
of the election.

We support the Afghan-led peace process,
recognizing that reconciliation is the best way to
end violence and to secure a unified and sovereign
Afghanistan. With President Karzai, we continue to call
upon the Taliban to join an Afghan political process.
As President Obama has said, the opening of a Taliban
office in Qatar is an important first step. While there
may be bumps in the road, the fact that the parties have
an opportunity to talk and discuss Afghanistan's future
is very important.

With regard to the events related to the opening of

the office this week, last January President Karzai and
President Obama jointly called on the Government of
Qatar to facilitate an office in Doha for the purposes of
negotiations between the Afghan High Peace Council
and the authorized representatives of the Taliban. The
United States supports the opening of the political
office of the Afghan Taliban for that purpose. As we
made clear yesterday, we do not recognize the name
"Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan" and are pleased that
Qatar has clarified that the name of the office is the
"Political Office of the Afghan Taliban" and has had
the sign with the incorrect name in front of the door
taken down. We have underscored that the office must
not be treated or represent itself as an embassy or other
office representing the Afghan Taliban as an emirate,
Government or sovereign.
The United States believes strongly that no
nation can achieve sustainable peace, reconciliation,
stability and economic growth if half the population is
marginalized. The United States will continue to stand
strongly with Afghanistan's women to protect advance
their hard-won gains. Furthermore, Afghanistan's
economic transition will ensure that the security and
political transitions both succeed.

Critical reforms are still necessary to achieve
economic prosperity and to integrate Afghanistan into
the regional economy. We welcome President Karzai's
continued commitment to effect those reforms and
will work with all stakeholders to achieve that goal.
We also welcome Afghanistan's continued engagement
with its neighbours. The third ministerial conference
on the Istanbul Process, held on 26 April in Almaty,
was encouraging and we commend China for its offer
to host the 2014 conference.

The United Nations must play a central role as
Afghanistan goes through those three important
transitions. Most critical is UNAMA's leadership
in continuing to provide support to ensure that
the 2014 Afghan presidential election proceeds as
planned. UNAMA's support for regional diplomacy
and the political process, in coordination between
the Government of Afghanistan and donors, in
implementing the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework will also be a key part of the preparations
as Afghanistan looks towards 2014.

