At the outset, I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Shearer and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their very informative briefings. I will talk about three issues: first, the political and security situation; secondly, the worrisome increase in violations of the cooperation agreement with the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS); and thirdly, the exploitation of natural resources. In his most recent report (S/2020/1180), the Secretary-General acknowledges the gradual progress that has been made in the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, but overall, we have witnessed a deadlock on many fronts. The most recent report of the Panel of Experts on South Sudan (see S/2020/342) confirms that security arrangements remain at a standstill. No Governor of Upper Nile has yet been appointed. We hope that the conference to be held in Juba from 16 to 19 December on peace, reconciliation, healing and unity among the people of Upper Nile can contribute to progress in that regard. Political momentum has eroded, owing to party fragmentation, political exclusion and defections. In addition, very little progress has been made on the issue of accountability mechanisms. The hybrid court for South Sudan has still not been established. This is very disappointing and also deeply worrisome. In his report, the Secretary-General rightly states that there is a clear link between the delay in implementing the peace agreement and the violence in the country. The section on the security situation is once again a long one, thanks to many appalling incidents and despite the fact that major flooding has reduced the level of violence. And it is civilians who continue to pay a heavy price for the violence. The continued increase in the number of kidnappings of civilians, including women, girls and boys, in particular by the National Salvation Front and other armed elements, is just one example. We urge all parties to recommit to the full and inclusive implementation of the peace agreement. We encourage UNMISS to continue to support the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement and the peace process, and call on it to continue to protect civilians, including by establishing temporary operational bases. Belgium is deeply concerned about the sharp increase in the number of violations of the cooperation agreement between the authorities and the Mission. Denying access to UNMISS patrols is totally unacceptable. We call on the Government of South Sudan to guarantee unimpeded access to UNMISS to enable it to conduct all its mandated duties, in line with its international obligations. We are also extremely concerned about the continuing high levels of violence against humanitarian actors and the obstacles being created to humanitarian assistance. In 2020 alone, nine humanitarian workers were murdered. The Panel has been able to determine that the South Sudanese Army and the National Security Service have regularly denied humanitarian access to conflict areas, for example to Warrap in August of this year. That is unacceptable. The right to receive assistance is a humanitarian imperative and an absolute right for all South Sudanese citizens. Lastly, I would like to touch briefly on the exploitation of natural resources in Southern Sudan. In its most recent progress report, the Panel of Experts believes that there is a high probability that the mining sector, which is increasingly mechanized, will attract the greed of armed groups. The Panel is already reporting that armed groups are blocking access to mining and gold-panning sites. The lack of access makes it difficult to investigate either the activities of groups at those sites or their impact on the local community. Belgium therefore supports the Panel's recommendation that UNMISS be asked to report on areas of insecurity and investigate violent incidents against civilians related to the illegal exploitation and trafficking of natural resources.
