Mr. Faki Mahamat (spoke in French): I am pleased
to address the Security Council for the second time in
less than three months in the context of a high-level
debate on issues of importance to Africa. I regret that
constraints related to the preparations for the Summit
of the African Union, to be held this weekend, have
prevented me from being with the Security Council in
person. I thank President Obiang Nguema for having
invited me to this debate, which marks the beginning
of the Equatorial Guinean presidency of the Security
Council. I wish every success to this presidency, which
is representative of Africa as a whole.

At a time when our continent is stepping up efforts
to promote peace and security, it is necessary that
we consider all sources of insecurity and instability.
Mercenarism clearly constitutes one such challenge
that must be addressed. The choice of this topic
therefore represents a concrete contribution to realizing
the goal of the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative.
The African Union looks forward to the outcome of
this debate.

Unfortunately, the history of our continent is
replete with examples of mercenary involvement
in destabilization activities, including coups d'etat,
interventions in armed conflicts and attempts to
take control of the natural resources of the countries
concerned. As early as the 1960s, when our countries
were working to consolidate their independence, some
were faced by this phenomenon. The consequences
have been devastating in terms of violence, human
rights violations and additional threats to the security
and stability of the countries in question. That situation
clearly poses a serious threat to the independence,
sovereignty, territorial integrity and harmonious
development of African States. In the light of that
situation and the serious concerns to which it has
given rise, the Organization of African Unity adopted
its Convention for the Elimination of Mercenarism in
Africa in 1977. The Convention entered into force in
April 1985. It enabled the establishment of continental
norms concerning mercenary activities, while at
the same time encouraged a number of cooperation
initiatives at the continental level.

Despite those efforts, the scourge of mercenarism
continues to persist. In that regard, it is worth noting
the continued destabilization activities involving
mercenaries. The most recent example, in fact, concerns
Equatorial Guinea, where an attempted coup d'etat
involving a number of foreign mercenaries was foiled
a few months ago. I take this opportunity to reiterate
the African Union's solidarity with Equatorial Guinea
on the heels of that destabilization attempt. Similarly,
the sometimes porous nature of African borders and
the transnational nature of the security challenges
facing the continent have encouraged the mobilization
of foreign fighters to serve as mercenaries in conflicts
tearing apart some countries.

Another such development is the emergence of
private security companies. Clearly, this is often a
matter of legal entities that transact with Governments,
but their existence and proliferation nevertheless pose
challenges that warrant special attention. In that regard,
the second Africa Forum on Security Sector Reform,
held in October 2018 by the African Union Commission,
recommended the revision of the 1977 Convention for
the Elimination of Mercenarism in Africa, with a View
to adapting it to developments since its adoption and
providing it with an implementation and monitoring
mechanism. More specifically concerning private
security companies, the Forum recommended the
development of a continental regulatory and supervisory
framework. The African Union Commission is currently
working on the follow-up to those recommendations
and, to that end, will consult various international
partners, including the United Nations.

Today's debate provides us with an opportunity
to identify practical measures that can help end the
scourge of mercenarism once and for all. It is clear
that we must strengthen the international instruments
related to this phenomenon. The aim here is to expedite
the signature and ratification of existing instruments,
as well as to ensure their effective implementation. I
note with concern that the International Convention
against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training
of Mercenaries has been signed and ratified by only a
limited number of United Nations Member States. It
is equally important to strengthen cooperation among
States, including in the areas of intelligence and
prosecution. Without effective coordination, our work
will not be effective.

Likewise, it is crucial to provide increased
assistance so that States can strengthen their capacity to
confront the scourge of mercenarism more effectively.
More precisely, focus must be placed on security sector

governance and, in the case of countries emerging
from conflict, on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes. With regard to the latter, we
can never sufficiently stress the risks posed by the
failure to complete such processes.

Lastly, I underscore the fact that the fight against
mercenarism must be part of the overall context
of promoting peace and security on the continent.
Experience has shown that mercenaries often operate in
conflict areas. The African Union is actively engaged
on that front in the framework of its Silencing the
Guns by 2020 campaign. I welcome the United Nations
support for those efforts, in particular the commitment
of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres.

The African Union is determined to play its full
role in the fight against the scourge of mercenarism
and to mobilize its member States to that end, but this
struggle against a phenomenon that is transnational in
nature cannot succeed without the full cooperation of
other international actors. I therefore renew my call for
increased international cooperation and support.

