Mr. Viinanen (Finland): Finland congratulates
the people of Somalia on the historical steps taken in
recent months. We give our support to the new federal
institutions and political actors in Somalia. The goal of
the political process is clear: to pave the way for general
elections and a functioning multiparty system.

Finland has constantly underlined the importance
of Somali ownership of the political process. Decisions
on Somalia's future rest with the Somalis. The Somali
political leadership must be accountable to the Somali
people.

The United Nations Political Office for Somalia and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Somalia, Mr. Augustine Mahiga, have played a
key role in the transition process, and we thank them
for their tireless work. The reconstruction work calls
for a strategic and comprehensive approach. We look
forward to the results of the strategic review of the
United Nations presence in Somalia.

The transition period has come to a successful
conclusion, but the peace and reconciliation work
continues. An inclusive peace process leads to
sustainable peace. The full and effective participation
of women is one of the key issues for the new political
era in Somalia. The agreement on a 30 per cent quota for
women representatives in the new Parliament is a major
achievement. The role of Somali elders and traditional
leaders as constructive contributors to furthering peace
has also been vital, and will remain so. Finland has
supported the inclusion of Somali elders and religious
leaders in the peace dialogue and we will continue
to emphasize their central role in the post-transition
period as well.

Like other speakers, we would like to acknowledge
the efforts, achievements and sacrifices made by the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the
Somali security forces and other stakeholders. Despite
their achievements, the security situation in Somalia
is fragile. Al-Shabaab has become weaker, but it has
not vanished. International partners should continue
to capitalize on this opportunity to consolidate the
security situation in Somalia.

We all agree that improved security is a prerequisite
for normalizing living conditions and promoting
development in Somalia, and that includes dealing
with piracy off the coast of Somalia. Finland has
supported the work of combating piracy, among other
things by participating in the European Union Naval
Force Operation Atalanta and by supporting the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime's programme for
combating maritime piracy in the Horn of Africa.

We should not forget the role of the Somali diaspora.
The political developments in Somalia have shown us
how an active diaspora and able individuals can make
a difference. In Finland, we emphasize the role of the
Somali diaspora and its participation in coordinating
development. Finland is currently assessing ways of
further supporting Somalia in its development needs.

Now that the transition period has ended, we are
embarking upon a new era. Finland has stood side by
side with Somalia in the past, and it can count on our
support now and in the future.

