Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Burundi, Mr. Michel Kafando, for today's
briefing on the latest developments in Burundi,
and to thank Ambassador Jurg Lauber, Permanent
Representative of Switzerland to the United Nations
and Chair of the Burundi Configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, and Ambassador Fatima
Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, for sharing the views of
the African Union and the Burundi Configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, respectively.

The United States is deeply concerned by the stalled
status of the inter-Burundian political dialogue led by
the East African Community (EAC), particularly by the
manner in which the talks broke down. We express our
deep appreciation to former President Benjamin Mkapa
of the United Republic of Tanzania for his continuous
efforts as the facilitator of the dialogue, which have
been critical and trying to advance discussions on
strengthening political stability in Burundi.

That work remains unfinished and we will need
new regional champions. The United States urges the
Government of Burundi, the EAC and the guarantors
of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement
to renew their commitment to finding consensus on a
2020 elections road map and preparing a free and fair
electoral process that will allow all Burundian voters
to participate in choosing their leaders. We urge the
Government of Burundi to engage with these partners
and view the Government's attendance at the EAC
Heads of State Summit earlier this month as a potential
sign of progress.

Burundi's 2020 elections are a unique opportunity
that must not be missed. Despite our concerns about
the dialogue, the United States continues to welcome
President Nkurunziza's announcement that he would
not seek a fourth term and will support his successor.
A peaceful transition of power based on an inclusive
electoral process will signal to the international
community a renewed commitment to democracy and
political stability.

In our View, a peaceful transition would become
more likely if the Kayanza road map were expanded
to include the input of all stakeholders, including
women and youth, opposition and ruling party leaders,
civil society representatives and prominent political
activists, and if steps were taken to ensure that all
eligible candidates are allowed to contest for the
presidency. We welcome the Government of Burundi's
recent steps on political party registration, which
demonstrated that commitment.

Long-term political stability, however, cannot
be achieved without respect for human rights. The
United States is deeply concerned by the Government's
decision to close the Burundi office of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
We fear that the further deterioration of respect for
human rights will isolate the Government of Burundi
in both regional and international bodies, which does
not bode well for prospects for peace and security in
the region. The United States urges the Government of
Burundi to address persistent and reliable reports of
illicit arms transfers, combatant recruitment and armed
group activity in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo that are tied to Burundi.

We are particularly disturbed by reports that the
Burundian military and the ruling party's youth militia
have been active in South Kivu. We are also concerned
about tensions between Burundi and Rwanda and
reports of cross-border attacks by armed groups in
these countries and the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. No one wins from a proxy war in the
Great Lakes.

The United States urges all parties to refrain from
the use of violence and to respect territorial integrity.
We encourage more cooperation among United Nations
institutions working in the region, particularly the
Office of the Special Envoy for Burundi, the Office of
the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We call on this
Council to support dialogue in the region and believe
that regular briefings to the Council are essential to
address rising tensions.

More than 58,000 Burundian refugees have returned
since the outbreak of violence in 2015. Food insecurity,
poverty and their harassment by local officials to join
the ruling party present major hurdles to voluntary
repatriation for the nearly 350,000 Burundi in refugees
who remain displaced. The United States encourages the
Government of Burundi to continue collaborating with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to facilitate the voluntary, dignified and
safe repatriation of its nationals, whose inclusion in the
political process will strengthen and further legitimize
the 2020 electoral process.

So many Burundians are desperate for basic
services, but the Government's October 2018 suspension
of some international non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) continues to affect important programmes
assisting the Burundian people. While the majority of
NGOs have been reinstated, approximately 20 remain
suspended and a handful have left the country. We
urge the Government to lift all remaining suspensions
to ensure the continuation of vital services to the
Burundian people and to allow these NGOs unhindered
access to deliver services.

Finally, we understand that the Government of
Burundi objects to being included on the Council's
agenda. We would like nothing more than to remove
them from it. But the United States is deeply concerned
by rising regional tensions, which are not just a
war of words but of bullets, as well as by Burundi's
increasing diplomatic isolation and deep domestic
political divides. It would be irresponsible to disengage
before 2020, and we urge our colleagues on the Council
and our Burundian counterparts to put their collective
effort into increasing productive dialogue and reducing
the likelihood of violence on Burundi's path to peace,
security and development.

