Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): On behalf ofthe Malaysian
delegation, I wish to thank Mr. Linkevieius, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania, and Lithuania for
convening this timely debate on the important issue
of the protection of civilians, particularly journalists,
in situations of armed conflict. We believe that his
presence here today demonstrates the great importance
he attaches to the issue, and we commend Lithuania's
leadership in taking this agenda forward.

We are pleased to have co-sponsored andjoined the
consensus on resolution 2222 (2015), which the Council
has just adopted.

My delegation thanks Mr. Jan Eliasson, Deputy
Secretary-General; Mr. Christophe Deloire from
Reporters Without Borders; and Ms. Mariane Pearl
of the Daniel Pearl Foundation for their respective
briefings, to which we have listened with much interest.

In our view, resolution 2222 (2015) makes a
positive contribution towards strengthening existing
international norms and standards on the protection of
civilians, particularly journalists operating in situations
of armed conflict. Malaysia take this opportunity
to honour those brave souls who have risked life and
limb - and in some cases have paid the ultimate
price - while pursuing their calling, that is, shedding
light on the human dimension of conflicts, including
the underlying causes and the narratives ofthose caught
in circles of violence.

We underscore that in situations of armed conflict,
the responsibility to ensure the protection of civilians,
includingjournalists, rests on the parties to the conflict,
without regard to whether such conflict occurs at intra-
or inter-State level. Indeed, such responsibility on the
part ofthe parties to a conflict is clearly enshrined in the
applicable international instruments on international
human rights law, international humanitarian law
and international criminal law. We view with serious
concern the increasing trend of journalists being
deliberately targeted by parties to a conflict. The
statistics are all the more troubling as they seem to
indicate that journalists are being deliberately targeted,
particularly by non-State actors, including terrorist
groups and affiliated individuals.

Just over a week ago, on 20 May, reports emerged
about the abduction and subsequent execution of
journalist Feras Yasin by Daesh, in Mosul, Iraq. Scarcely
a month earlier, on 27 April and also in Mosul, the body
of Thaer Al-Ali, Editor-in-Chief of the newspaper Rai
al-Nas, was found. He, too, was abducted before being
executed, also by Daesh. Their crime? They shed light
on atrocities committed by the group.

All the more chilling are the recent and ongoing
atrocities committed by Daesh and its affiliates in
cynically manipulating their acts of the torture,
mutilation and murder of j ournalists - including James
Foley, Kenji Goto and Steven Sotloff - as propaganda
tools in pursuit of questionable political goals. Against
such developments, the international community and
the Council must stiffen their collective resolve towards
ensuring that no more journalists will suffer the fate of
those brave individuals.

The prevalence of a culture of impunity and
the absence of rule of law, good governance and the
attendant institutions of law and order are among the
key factors that negatively affect the safety and security
of civilians in conflict situations, includingjournalists.
We fully subscribe to the principle that where violations
and abuse of civilians occur, the perpetrators must be
held accountable, including through punitive action.

In that regard, we note with concern the Secretary-
General's report (A/69/268), which, inter alia,
underscored the absence of accountability for attacks
against journalists. The figures cited are worrying.
In this year alone conflict situations around the world
have claimed the lives of at least 13 journalists. Since
1992, 377 journalists and media professionals have
lost their lives due to violent conflict or while on a
dangerous mission. Malaysia suffered its first casualty
some three years ago when Mr. Noramfaizul Mohd Nor,
a cameraman traveling with a humanitarian convoy in
Somalia, was killed in a crossfire incident.

Malaysia reaffirms that the role played by
journalists in situations of armed conflict is crucial and
indispensable. Taking a broader perspective, journalists
also play a positive role in contributing to the protection
of civilians, including by reporting on alleged atrocities
or documenting violence in the search for justice for
the victims. Bearing in mind the risks that these brave
individuals assume in extracting information from
situations of violence and conflict and ensuring that
such information reaches those in a position to address
the situation - including this Council - necessitates
a corresponding response to promote their continued
safety, security and well-being while operating in such
harsh conditions.

In the context of situations of violent and armed
conflict, journalists perform a critical role through
their exercise of the right to freedom of expression and
opinion. As we have all seen, manyjournalists have paid
a steep price, and many will continue to pay unless all
concerned parties take clear measures to ensure their
safety and security in such situations. My delegation
believes that the Council must continue to advocate for
the safety and protection of journalists in situations of
armed conflict. Malaysia remains fully seized of and
committed to that undertaking, alongside other Council
members.

