Mr. Feltman: The situation in the Central African
Republic has deteriorated greatly since the most recent
United Nations briefing to the Security Council (see S/PV.7069). The attacks by the anti-Balaka against
Bangui on 5 December triggered a period of heavy
unrest in the capital and in the interior of the country.
In Bangui alone, more than 750 casualties have been
confirmed, and the death toll outside Bangui is likely
to be substantial.

According to the latest information, approximately
2.2 million people in the Central African Republic need
humanitarian assistance, that is, close to half of the
population of the country. One in every two inhabitants
of Bangui has sought refuge outside their homes. Their
number is estimated at approximately 513,000, of whom
100,000 are at a makeshift camp at the airport.

Killings in Bangui and in the rest of the country
continue every day, and the population remains divided
along religious affiliation. Access to residential
neighbourhoods in Bangui is controlled either by
"anti-Christian" or "anti-Muslim" checkpoints,
manned by armed civilians. Similarly, localities outside
Bangui - such as Bossangoa, Bouar, Bozoum and
Paoua, among others - witness atrocities on a daily
basis, including direct clashes between Christian and
Muslim communities. The danger of escalation into
sustained violence along religious lines remains real,
with the potential for long-term danger to the country.

Several countries, including Cameroon, Chad,
C6te d'lvoire, Mali, the Niger, Nigeria and Senegal,
have repatriated tens of thousands of their citizens, the
vast majority of whom are Muslims. That is the first
time in the history of the Central African Republic that
people have felt obliged to leave the country for fear for
their lives on account of their religion.

The quick deployment by the African Union
(AU) and France, respectively, of the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA) and Operation Sangaris prevented
the situation from degenerating into higher levels
of conflict and atrocities. The speed at which both
forces attained operational level and their subsequent
deployment have changed the security dynamics in
Bangui, with visible patrols being undertaken by both
forces. As MISCA continues to work towards reaching
its authorized strength of 6,000, its presence will be
increased outside of Bangui, thus contributing to the
improvement of the security situation in the countryside.

We greatly appreciate the role of African States and
France in the committing troops to the Central African
Republic. I would like, at this stage, to pay tribute to
the African and French soldiers who have fallen while
performing their duties in the name of peace. The role
played by the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS) and by its individual member States to
bring stability to the Central African Republic should
also be commended.

Currently, we are working with the African Union
on the organization of the donors conference that the
Council requested to support MISCA. It will be held on
1 February at Addis Ababa on the margins of the AU
Summit. We count on the generous support of Council
members and other States and organizations.

The events of 5 December dealt a serious blow
to the transitional authorities, and to the Head of
State of the Transition in particular. The inability of
the transitional authorities to curb widespread Seleka
human rights abuses and violations against Christian
populations over the past year contributed to the gradual
transformation of local self-defence groups - the
anti-Balaka - into a full-blown rebellion. As a result
of its predominantly Muslim composition, Seleka
abuses against the Christian populations in the Central
African Republic were quickly interpreted as a religious
conflict pitting Muslins against Christians. The
international commission of inquiry to be established
in accordance with resolution 2127 (2013) is a most
welcome development that will certainly look into
those and other abuses and human rights violations.

On the other hand, the frustration of Muslim
communities in the Central African Republic is
the result of years of marginalization by successive
Governments since the country's independence, more
than 50 years ago. For instance, while the Muslim
community represents an estimated 20 per cent of the
total population of the Central African Republic, no
Muslim holidays are observed officially by the country.

I would like to commend the Forum of Religious
Leaders for their laudable efforts and sacrifices and for
their proactive approach in trying to appease tensions
among communities. The Forum brings together the
Archbishop, the Imam and a Pastor of Bangui. They
need support as a matter of urgency to be able to carry
on with their efforts.

ECCAS Heads of State have proposed an inclusive
national conference, which should serve as a forum
for all the national actors to share their frustrations,
identify the country's challenges and, hopefully, agree
on the way forward, including preparing for elections
and determining a common set of priorities for the
post-transition period.

Concerning the elections, some progress was
made with the adoption of a new electoral code and the
swearing in of the seven-member National Electoral
Authority, which brings together representatives of
civil society, the political parties and the Government.
The United Nations mission on the ground - the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the
Central African Republic - is providing technical and
logistics support to the National Electoral Authority.
We will soon deploy an electoral needs assessment
mission. Conditions conducive to holding elections,
however, remain elusive. The systematic looting of
all local administrations and the destruction by the
ex-Seleka of all types of civil national registries means
that reconstituting the voters lists would require a
massive effort.

The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) of all armed groups should constitute one of the
top priorities. We must learn from our past experiences
in the Central African Republic and from the several
DDR programmes carried out there. We must ensure
that the conditions conducive to such an exercise are
present, including the requisite amount of funding.
A DDR process implemented in accordance with
internationally accepted standards is critical. It will
pave the way for holistic security sector reforms and
contribute to laying the foundations for lasting peace.

Allow me now to say a few words about the
humanitarian situation, which has deteriorated at an
alarming rate. All Central Africans have been affected
by the crisis. As I mentioned at the outset, nearly
half of the population needs humanitarian assistance.
Persistent violence has forced one fifth of the population
to flee their homes. That number has more than doubled
since 5 December. More than 935,000 people are now
sleeping outside or in temporary spaces. In Bangui, half
of the population has sought refuge at one of 55 sites
for internally displaced persons. More than 100,000
people are seeking security at the airport alone. Those
displaced urgently need protection and shelter, as well
as access to water, health care, food, basic supplies and
sanitation and hygiene services.

Non-governmental organization (NGO) partners
and staff of United Nations humanitarian agencies,
funds and programmes have remained in the Central
African Republic to deliver assistance in what is a very
dangerous and unpredictable environment. The increase
in violence last month has exacerbated the needs.
Working closely with civil society and religious leaders
from all communities, NGOs and United Nations staff
are tirelessly providing medical care and delivering
supplies to hospitals, health centres and dispensaries at
internally displaced person sites.

On 11 December, the United Nations activated a
system-wide level 3 emergency response. That allows
us to send our most experienced and skilful staff,
release emergency funds and mobilize relief supplies
and pipelines. Since then, a senior humanitarian
coordinator at the level of Assistant Secretary-General
has been deployed to strengthen the humanitarian
response in the country. Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator Valerie Amos allocated $10 million from
the Central Emergency Response Fund to support relief
efforts in the Central African Republic. United Nations
agencies have also ramped up their responses.

Despite the tremendous efforts of humanitarians
on the ground, needs continue to outpace the response.
Violence and insecurity have forced many to flee into
forests and out of reach of aid. A lack of funding has
also constrained the response and threatens to further
inhibit humanitarian operations unless funding is
urgently received. For example, without additional
contributions, the World Food Programme food pipeline
for the Central African Republic will be 90 per cent
depleted in February.

The humanitarian country team has developed a
lOO-day plan for priority humanitarian action, which
is part of the broader 2014 response strategy. The plan
requires $152 million to rapidly scale up life-saving
assistance and protection. Last year's humanitarian
appeal for the Central African Republic was one of the
most underfunded appeals globally, and the competing
needs worldwide are by no means less burdensome this
year.

I cannot conclude my remarks without making
reference to protection issues, notably those affecting
women and children, who always bear the brunt in
conflict situations. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the Special Advisor of the
Secretary-General for the Prevention of Genocide,
Mr. Adama Dieng, and a representative of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict conducted a joint assessment
mission to the Central African Republic from 17 to
21 December. The joint mission called for urgent action
to protect civilians, in particular women and children,
and to prevent the country from plunging into full-
scale sectarian conflict. The United Nations has also
undertaken missions to places such as Bria, Bouar,
Paoua, Bossangoa and Bambari. Through a concerted
effort in the Central African Republic, we are finalizing
support packages for the communities there. The same
is being done for children in armed conflict.

Women and children constitute the most vulnerable
group in society, and are therefore disproportionally
affected by the dire humanitarian situation. Women
and peace and security questions, as outlined in the
seminal resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent related
resolutions, have always guided our actions in the
search for solutions in the Central Africa Republic. I
am pleased to see that the donor community is paying
increased attention to the Central Africa Republic,
which, we hope, will result in desperately needed
additional resources.

The violence and the atrocities in the Central Africa
Republic must stop. Those in positions of authority or
influence must do more to end violence and halt grave
violations against civilians, including children. Attacks
against humanitarian personnel and the use of civilian
spaces such as schools and hospitals for military
purposes must also end. I ask the Council to again
remind all parties to the conflict oftheir responsibilities
under international humanitarian and human rights law
and to ensure that all those responsible for violations
are held to account.

There is a very real risk that the crisis could spread
beyond the country's borders and further destabilize
the region. The United Nations, under the leadership of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Central Africa Republic, will continue to do its best
to prevent the situation in the Central Africa Republic
from unravelling further and human rights abuses and
violations from reaching unthinkable levels; ensure
humanitarian aid for the most vulnerable; and return the
country to constitutional order. Here at Headquarters,
the Deputy Secretary-General regularly chairs a senior
action group to consider how best to respond to the
multifaceted crisis in the Central Africa Republic. This
is the first case for the Secretary-General's new Rights
Upfront agenda.

In conclusion, let me note that it is our collective
responsibility to act now, before it is too late.

