Mr. Mladenov: It is indeed an honour to brief the
Security Council today on behalf of the Secretary-
General.

This is the fourth time I have addressed the Council
on the devastation inflicted on the people of Iraq by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). On behalf
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), I would like to thank the Security Council
for its continued interest and unity in expressing
support for the people and the Government of Iraq, as
well as for making it possible for our Mission to fulfil
its mandate. The Council's consistent calls for inclusive
political engagement, timely elections and a process
for forming a Government have not gone unheeded. Its
condemnation of the violence and human rights abuses
has been welcomed by Iraqis. Finally, its consistent
pronouncements, most recently through the adoption
of resolution 2170 (2014), continue to encourage the
people of Iraq by letting them know they are not alone.

Iraq's transition has been painful and scarred by
much violence. Its people, however, have shown an
unmatched ability to persevere, despite the difficulties.
Most recently, amid a rapidly deteriorating security
environment, they came out to vote in a competitive
election that was followed, finally, by a peaceful
transfer of power. As Iraq's new Government of
national unity is moving to restore security to large
parts of the country, it is also seeking to strengthen
the relationship between the ethnic and religious
communities and to develop inclusive policies that
contribute to social peace and cohesiveness. It is also
looking to the international community for support.
Today, as Iraq faces life-threatening danger from
the advances of ISIL, its people look to the countries
represented here - the members of the Security
Council, their neighbours, allies and friends. They look
to the international community and the United Nations
for collective measures aimed at removing this threat to
peace in Iraq and the rest of the region.

Since the beginning of the year, ISIL and its
affiliated armed groups have captured large parts of
northern and western Iraq. They have gained access
to substantial amounts of weapons and financial and
natural resources. Their networks, spanning the globe,
reach out in order to recruit foreign fighters in their
battle to dismantle the Iraqi State. Months before
Mosul fell into ISIL's hands, the provinces of Anbar
and Ninewa had become fertile ground for this terrorist
organization. Throughout this period the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq observed and underscored
the organization's evolving strategy of terror, which
continues to systematically undermine the legitimate
authorities through kidnappings, assassinations and
violence. It seeks to use the discontent among some
communities to turn it into bitterness and violence. It
is using its consolidated control over extended territory
in both Iraq and Syria, combined with an ideology of
hatred, fear and nihilism, to present a clear danger to
the very existence of a unified Iraqi State. It is a threat
to the region and to international security.

In recent weeks, the combined efforts of targeted
airstrikes, Iraqi security forces and Kurdish Peshmerga
operations have enabled some areas to be brought back
under the control of the legitimate authorities. They have
been instrumental in saving thousands of lives from
imminent death on Mount Sinjar, in the town of Amirli
and elsewhere. They have protected the city of Erbil;
they have safeguarded key infrastructure, including the
Mosul and Haditha Dams, and they have halted ISIL's
advance towards the capital, Baghdad. Despite those
successes, however, ISIL forces have most recently
been able to take control of key towns in Salahadine
province. But I am encouraged to report that in the face
of this growing threat, cooperation and coordination on
security between the Federal Government of Iraq and
the Kurdistan Regional Government has substantially
increased.

Iraq is facing an escalating emergency, with as
many as 1.8 million people displaced since January.
About 850,000 of them have sought refuge in the
Kurdistan region alone. Just in the past fortnight, an
additional 10,000 families from Diyala province have
been displaced from their homes. The humanitarian
crisis is not just in the north of the country; tens of
thousands of people have fled to the south, where
many are being hosted by families and religious
institutions. The pressure on local communities across
the country is growing, since the continuing influx
has created a massive shelter crisis. With winter fast
approaching, immediate and critical measures must
be taken. Furthermore, since more than 2,000 schools
are currently providing shelter to internally displaced
persons (IDPs) throughout the country, the start of the
school year has already been delayed by a month.

In response, the United Nations has mounted a
massive humanitarian effort across Iraq to provide
food, shelter, water, sanitation and health assistance.
We continue to face immense challenges in reaching the
estimated 650,000 people who are still in the areas of
active conflict. I would like to take this opportunity to
call on the Government of Iraq to formulate a national
strategy to address the displaced people's situation, as
well as to immediately restore the payment of salaries
and essential social services throughout the country.
The Government's efforts must be encouraged and its
financial commitments to remedy this humanitarian
catastrophe must be recognized. The United Nations
stands ready to provide additional help in improving
the coordination and delivery of services.

On behalf of the entire United Nations family, I
would like to thank those Member States that to date
have responded to our call for assistance and followed
through with generous support to the United Nations
humanitarian effort. I would also like to recognize the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which has contributed some
$500 million ofthe total $712 million given so far for the
United Nations effort in Iraq. Over 60 per cent of that
substantial donation has already been spent on tents,
food and other items for the hundreds of thousands of
internally displaced persons. Having said that, I have
to note with growing concern that available funding for
humanitarian operations will be exhausted before the
winter and additional support will be needed.

The current crisis has had a devastating effect on
the respect and protection of human rights in Iraq. The
United Nations estimates that, since January, there have
been some 25,000 civilian casualties, including at least
8,500 killed and more than 16,000 wounded. On behalf
of the Secretary-General and the entire United Nations
team in Iraq, I extend my deepest condolences to the
families of all civilian casualties across Iraq and to the
victims of terrorism. Minority communities, including
Christians, Yazidis, Shabaks, Turkmen, and others,
have been particularly targeted by ISIL, which has
systematically and deliberately sought to cleanse them
from territories under its control, perpetrating acts that
may amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity
and possibly genocide.

The United Nations Mission in Iraq continues
to investigate reports of violations and abuses of
international humanitarian and human rights law. Our
teams have conducted over 500 interviews with victims
of and witnesses to those violations. As a result of
those investigations, the United Nations has verified
systematic and widespread human rights violations
committed by ISIL and associated armed groups, along
with violations and abuses committed by armed groups
supportive of the Government and some committed by
the Iraqi security forces. A public report was published
in July, while a second one is currently in preparation.
Due to the gravity of the crimes committed by ISIL,
I welcome the decision of the United Nations Human
Rights Council to dispatch amission to Iraq to investigate
alleged violations and abuses of international human
rights law and humanitarian law.

The fall of Mosul forced people to understand that
it was not just the survival of their country that was at
stake, but the very existence of their communities. All
Iraqis, no matter what ethnic or religious community
they belong to, stand to lose if they fail to cooperate
against the growing threat of terrorism, radicalism and
extremism. Today there is a growing understanding
that if any security plan is to succeed, it needs to be
broadly accepted by all. There is agreement among
key decision-makers that security cannot be provided
without full respect for the Constitution, the rule of
law, international humanitarian law and human rights
standards.

The conditions that breed discontent and violence
in Iraq need to be addressed as a matter of priority
so that disaffected communities, particularly those
currently located in conflict areas, can be brought back
into the democratic process. The Iraqi Constitution
remains the guiding framework for legitimately
resolving all grievances. Reforms that allow for better
service delivery, policies that contribute to social
peace and development, the devolution of authority,
fair revenue-sharing among provinces, efficient public
services, measures to combat pervasive corruption and,
perhaps most importantly, the strengthening of the rule
of law and democratic accountability will all allow the
country to move forward.

Transitional justice and reconciliation are impossible
without addressing the human rights violations of the
past and the present. Left unresolved, past grievances
or abuses of human rights will undermine any attempt
to resolve outstanding constitutional, legal or policy
issues. I am pleased to report that, since its appointment,
the Government has taken important steps and made a
strong beginning for its collective work. I very much
welcome Prime Minister Al-Abadi's recent orders
to suspend Iraqi air force strikes in civilian areas,
including in ISIL-controlled areas, and his public
commitment to the protection of civilians. I urge the
Government of Iraq to fully uphold that commitment.
As Commander-in-Chief, Prime Minister Al-Abadi has
also taken the initiative to restructure the leadership of
the Iraqi armed forces. Those decisions are encouraging
steps towards meeting the demands for reform.

I further welcome the Council ofMinisters' decision
to establish a reconstruction fund to rebuild the areas
damaged by military operations. The United Nations
stands ready to assist in that respect. The United Nations
stands ready to assist in this respect. I am also pleased
to report that the Council of Ministers has initiated the
process of drafting a law for the creation of a national
guard. This will allow for the devolution of authority
and will strengthen local engagement in the provision
and management of security.

In his most recent address to Parliament, the
Prime Minister committed to resolving the outstanding
budgetary disputes between the federal Government and
the Kurdistan region. I encourage the Iraqi Government
to swiftly move forward on restoring subsidies, starting
in September, to the provinces of Dohuk, Erbil and
Sulaymaniyah. The federal Government and the
Kurdistan Regional Government should move quickly
to reach agreement on the outstanding payments. And
finally, it is time for the pervasive issues of revenue
and budget sharing to be resolved in line with the
Constitution. As always, the United Nations in Iraq
stands ready to continue to facilitate that process.
All members of the international community should
continue to work closely with the Government of Iraq
and the Kurdistan Regional Government and extend
to Iraq the security, humanitarian and development
assistance it needs.

The stakes are very high for both the people of
Iraq and the region. Iraq and all its regional neighbours
have an unprecedented opportunity to restart positive
bilateral relations based on mutual interests and
partnership. That cooperation should be open and
inclusive of all neighbours who can contribute to
addressing the challenge of ISIL. The recent adoption
of resolution 2170 (2014), the Arab League Resolution
7804, the Jeddah Communique, the Paris Conference
on Peace and Security in Iraq and the recent NATO
discussions all strengthen international support for
Iraq in its time of need. The United Nations stands
ready to support Iraq and the region by coordinating
the political, social, humanitarian and financial efforts
needed to address the current crisis.

To conclude, let me be very clear. ISIL is a scourge
that has brought untold sorrow to the people of Iraq and
Syria. It has shown contempt for equality, fundamental
human rights and the dignity and worth of the human
person. It not only ignores but also shows disdain for
international law, and its perverse ideas of justice
are evidence of its deep reaction against the progress
humankind has made over centuries. That threat, grave
as it is, can be addressed if Iraq, the region and the
world work together on the basis of the framework
of the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

