Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): It is a great honour for me
to address the Security Council for the first time as the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon. Please allow me
to begin, Mr. President, by commending the excellent
work of your presidency this month. Kazakhstan's
efforts to promote dialogue and the peaceful resolution
of conflicts has been exemplary. I would also like to
congratulate the new non-permanent members of the
Security Council and wish them the best of luck in
their endeavour. Our deep appreciation also goes to the
Permanent Mission of Japan for its presidency of the
Council last month. Finally, I would also like to thank
the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process for his briefing.

Peace in the Middle East seems more remote
than ever. The gaps between the parties are vast and
growing, and the Arabs and Palestinians feel that
the core principles of peace are being abandoned.
Jerusalem remains the most sensitive of the long-
established final status issues. Yet Israel's claim of
exclusive control of Jerusalem and the United States
recognition of Jerusalem as its capital have Virtually
foreclosed the peace process for the Arabs. That buries
the hope for any just, comprehensive and lasting peace.
It is making our people despair, and desperate people
do desperate things.

I would like to add my voice to that of the
representatives who spoke about the importance of
funding the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. Lebanon hosts
hundreds of thousands of Palestinian refugees, and
leaving them without education means leaving them
without a future.

Lebanon, which paid the heaviest price for the lack
of peace during multiple Israeli invasions, understands
the gravity of the situation when all the roads to peace
are blocked. Lebanon has always supported a peace
based on the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
principle of land for peace, the two-State solution and
the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002 in Beirut. A failure by
the international community and this organ - which
represents the will of this community - to reaffirm the
core principles of peace could plunge our region into
more conflict, with dire global implications.

In Lebanon, especially in the south, people are
subjected daily to Israeli violations of our airspace and
our maritime and territorial integrity, in violation of
resolution 1701 (2006). Last week, we received Israel's
unilateral stated intention to build a wall, not only along
the Blue Line but in sensitive occupied areas. That will
once again threaten to destabilize the situation in the
south and could lead to conflict. Those provocative
actions systematically reflect Israel's total disregard of
its obligations under resolution 1701 (2006).

If Israel is interested in maintaining stability and
security, there is an easy way - withdraw from the
occupied Lebanese territory, put an end to persistent
violations of Lebanon's sovereignty and remove the
source of tension. We urge the United Nations and the
Council to prevent further Israeli provocations. The last
thing the Middle East needs now is miscalculation that
might lead to conflict. My Government has reaffirmed
its steadfast commitment to the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) in its entirety and remains
resolved to work with the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon and through the Tripartite Mechanism to
expedite the delineation of the Blue Line, especially in
sensitive areas.

The Lebanese Government requested the good
offices of the Secretary-General in 2016 and has
encouraged those efforts ever since. We appreciate the
work of his Special Coordinator to resolve the issue
of delineating the maritime border between Lebanon
and Israel and their exclusive economic zones, in
accordance with the principles of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations. The non-resolution
of those issues will remain a source of conflict and will
threaten peace and security.

Despite the economic, social and security
challenges facing the country, the heavy burden of
hosting over 1 million Syrian refugees and the conflict
in Syria, Lebanese leaders are committed to holding
parliamentary elections in May 2018. They are also
fully engaged with the international community
to consolidate Lebanon's stability through three
conferences: the Rome II conference, to reinforce the
capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces, the cornerstone
of Lebanon's stability and the spearhead in the fight
against terrorism; the Conference du Cedre, to be held
in Paris under France's leadership, in order to uphold
and revitalize the Lebanese economy; and, lastly, the
Brussels conference to help Lebanon cope with the
refugee crisis. Those efforts are essential to protecting
and preserving Lebanon as a model of coexistence in
the region and preserving its stability.

We are not bound to a vicious circle of wars and
violence in the Middle East. With the invaluable
assistance of the Council, our region can transcend the
dark reality of conflict and finally realize the long-
awaited peace.

