Mr. Licharz (Germany): At the outset, I would like
to thank Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Michel
Kafando for his work and express deep appreciation
for his efforts, including his latest consultations with
leaders of the region in an effort to revitalize the
inter-Burundian dialogue led by the East African
Community. I wish President Kafando every success in
his future endeavours.

When one is at the end of the list of speakers, there
are a few advantages. One is the advantage of being
able to be brief, as colleagues have already addressed
the same speaking points. The second advantage is
that, when colleagues quote a report of the Secretary-
General, one can double check.

In that regard, I would like to return to what our
colleague from the Russian Federation said. He quoted
the report (S/2019/837) in saying that the overall security
situation has not deteriorated, and he was right. At the
same time, our colleagues from Belgium and Poland
cited attacks on members of political parties. I would
like to recall that they included acts of vandalism and
Violent attacks against offices of the opposition party
Congres national pour la liberte. One of its offices
was set ablaze in Nyabiraba, resulting in casualties.
Numerous other such incidents are addressed in the
report and were mentioned by colleagues.

In reading those findings, one cannot be but
worried that the unresolved political crisis and the
continuing volatile security situation in Burundi are
resulting in tensions that risk endangering regional
peace and stability. We are therefore of the opinion
that the Security Council needs to retain Burundi on
the agenda.

The 2020 elections will be crucial. Only the
inter-Burundi dialogue can lead to a road map that sets
the path leading to free, fair and inclusive elections.
That is essential for building trust among the population
and long-term stabilization. We therefore call on the
Burundian authorities to show clear commitment in that
regard. In that regard, I would like to revisit a sentence
in your statement, Madam President. You said that
there should be no no-go areas for political activities
and parties, and I would like to stress that point.

The crisis in Burundi can be resolved only with
regional actors. We therefore encourage them to take on
a constructive role in creating new momentum leading
to negotiations and dialogue. We are very concerned
about the deteriorating human rights situation and the
ongoing humanitarian crisis in Burundi. We encourage
the Burundian Government to cooperate with the
relevant international human rights mechanisms
and humanitarian actors to increase humanitarian
access and facilitate the transparent assessment of
humanitarian needs.

We appeal to all parties involved to respect the
principle of a voluntary safe and dignified return in
accordance with the tripartite agreement signed by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Burundi and Tanzania.

In conclusion, I would like to thank Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, under
the leadership of Ambassador Lauber, for its efforts to
improve the socioeconomic situation. Germany will
fully support those efforts.
