Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Pakistani presidency of the Security
Council for its timely initiative in holding this important
debate on a comprehensive approach to counter-
terrorism. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
insightful briefing and express our appreciation to the
Secretariat and the relevant United Nations entities for
their contribution to counter-terrorism activities.

Azerbaijan knows about the scourge of terrorism,
and not from hearsay. My country has repeatedly
been a target of terrorist attacks. The activity of well-
known State-sponsored international terrorist groups,
the ideology of which is based on historical, racial and
religious prejudice and hatred, is a serious threat to
Azerbaijan's national security and to the security of our
region as a whole.

It was not a coincidence that Azerbaijan decided to
focus on the issue of combating terrorism as a central
theme of its presidency of the Security Council last
year. On 4 May 2012, Azerbaijan organized a high-
level meeting of the Security Council on strengthening
international cooperation in the implementation of
counter-terrorism obligations (see S/PV.6765). As an
important outcome of that, a presidential statement
was adopted (S/PRST/2012/17). In his address to the
Security Council, the President of the Republic of
Azerbaijan, Mr. Ilham Aliyev, underlined

"We must all join our efforts to combat
terrorism. The nature of terrorism today and
its increasing connection with other threats to
international peace and security require close
international cooperation among States, including
through the establishment of a more coordinated,
coherent and systematic United Nations approach"
(S/PV6765, p. 23).

The President of Azerbaijan also outlined the
concrete threats and challenges faced by my country
and provided a comprehensive analysis and assessment
in that regard.

My Government has continually taken
comprehensive measures to fully implement its

respective international obligations and to contribute
to the global fight against this scourge. We strongly
support and actively work for more strengthened
international cooperation to that end.
It is pertinent to mention that, in furtherance of our
efforts, on 18 and 19 March, Azerbaijan will host an
international conference on strengthening cooperation
in preventing terrorism, co-organized by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Islamic
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
The conference will bring together Heads of State
and Government, ministers, heads of international
organizations, prominent persons and members of
civil society and academia. Its objectives include
initiating an in-depth and forward-looking exchange
of views on challenges to and opportunities for
countering terrorism, reviewing the ways of promoting
international cooperation and, most importantly,
generating concrete ideas and project proposals for
providing technical assistance to national authorities
with a View to strengthening their capacities.

With its changing nature and character, terrorism
poses a serious threat to international peace and security
and to the political independence, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and social and economic development of
all States. Today, when our world continues to suffer
from terrorism and terrorist acts, in their frequency
and magnitude, claim the lives of innocent people
and undermine peace and security, a comprehensive
approach to combating this scourge through concerted
and coordinated international actions remains vital.

The international community, including through
United Nations efforts, has achieved tangible results in
countering terrorism. At the same time, a number of
critical areas continue to require our constant attention.
I would like to emphasize some of them.

Conflict-affected territories, especially those
under foreign military occupation, often provide fertile
ground for terrorists and other non-State actors, who
use terrorism as a means of achieving their illegal
goals. The accumulation of armaments and ammunition
in those territories beyond international control and the
risk of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and related materials to non-State actors pose a serious
threat to regional and international peace and security.

While recognizing the significance of addressing
all conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism, in
line with the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, we stress the need to intensify conflict-
resolution efforts on the basis ofthe generally accepted
norms and principles of international law, particularly
those relating to respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and inviolability of the internationally
recognized borders of States.
The full implementation of international legal
obligations by all States is fundamentally important.
However, it is not sufficient to simply mention that
objective. A large number of States encounter capacity
gaps in implementing their respective obligations.
Addressing that perennial problem should remain at
the core of international counter-terrorism efforts. We
appreciate the role of the relevant United Nations entities
in facilitating technical assistance to Member States.
At the same time, in order to respond effectively and
in a timely manner to the various security challenges
posed by terrorism, it is essential that Member States
themselves strengthen their cooperation through
bilateral and multilateral mechanisms on the issue of
capacity-building assistance.

The war on terrorism cannot and must not be used
to target any religion or culture. That principle must be
part and parcel of any counter-terrorism strategy. All
States should be united in supporting various initiatives
on intercultural and interreligious dialogue, such as the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations and the culture
of peace initiative. Strengthening cooperation within
those initiatives will serve to prevent misconceptions,
defamatory manifestations and deliberate labelling of
religions and contribute to the efficiency of counter-
terrorism efforts.

As a responsible member of the Group of Friends
of the Alliance of Civilizations, Azerbaijan is actively
engaged in promoting interreligious and intercultural
dialogue. We therefore recently organized a number
of high-profile and action-oriented events, including
the World Summit of Religious Leaders and the World
Forum on Intercultural Dialogue.

In conclusion, we welcome the draft presidential
statement to be adopted later in today's meeting. It is
aimed at developing counter-terrorism cooperation
under the auspices of the United Nations. Azerbaijan
will continue to contribute to that work through
international cooperation based on strict adherence to
the norms and principles of international law.

