Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): At the outset, my
delegation wishes to extend its warmest congratulations
to the President and his country on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
also appreciate the insightful briefings that we received
this morning from various persons, including the
statements by the representatives of Israel and the State
of Palestine, as well as the Deputy Secretary-General.
My delegation welcomes the continued focus by the
United Nations, particularly the Security Council,
on this very important topic. Let me express my
delegation's profound appreciation for the opportunity
accorded to Member States to debate the pressing
matter of the situation in the Middle East, which is
taking place against the backdrop of rampant violence
in that region.

Botswana attaches great importance to the
fundamental principle of self-determination for peoples
under foreign occupation. It is for that reason that we
remain deeply concerned that, despite the sustained
efforts of the Security Council, the Palestinian people
continue to be denied their inalienable right to self-
determination and independence by the occupying
Power, Israel. Botswana continues to believe that
there is no alternative to the two-State solution, which
implies the coexistence of Israel and Palestine, living
side by side, as two sovereign States. That cannot be
overemphasized.

Botswana joins the international community in
deploring the continuing human rights violations in
the Middle East, especially in the interactions between
Israelis and Palestinians, in which thousands continue
to lose their lives, while many remain displaced with
no homes, no access to the basic necessities of life
and no hope for the future. We call for an end to the
horrific situation that innocent civilians continue to
endure, which has resulted in millions seeking refuge
in neighbouring countries. The living conditions to
which the Palestinian people continue to be subjected
are appalling and dehumanizing.

In his briefing to the Security Council on
15 September 2015, the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
said that

"the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has left an indelible
scar on the people and landscape of the region.
Frustration, fear and violence have continued to
spiral, undermining belief in finding a way out of
the impasse" (S/PV7521, p. 2).

In the light of that statement by Mr. Mladenov, my
delegation wishes to encourage the parties to the
conflict to return to the negotiating table and resume
the long overdue talks and to approach the talks with a
spirit of compromise and mutual respect, with a view
to reaching a just, lasting and mutually acceptable
solution. Nonetheless, we note and welcome the
continued efforts of the Secretary-General, the Middle
East Quartet, the Security Council and all those who
continue to be committed to the peace process for their
relentless efforts to see a peaceful end to the conflict.
It is my delegation's belief that those efforts require the
full support of the international community.

In conclusion, let me reaffirm Botswana's strong
support for the right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination. We remain hopeful that someday their
plight will become history. Both the Israelis and the
Palestinians should give proof of their will and desire to
shape their future and end this long, drawn-out conflict.

