As mandated by paragraph 11 (g) of resolution 1844 (2008), I have the honour to brief the Security Council in my capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992), concerning Somalia, covering the period from 10 June 2020 to 28 October 2020. During the reporting period, Committee members met twice in the "informal informals" format via closed video-teleconference. On 14 September, members met to hear a presentation by the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts on Somalia on the Panel's final report (see S/2020/949) and to share initial views on the recommendations contained therein. In addition to the submission of the final report to the Committee on 4 September, the Panel also submitted four monthly updates to the Committee since the most recent briefing (see S/2020/529). On 9 October, Committee members met to hear briefings by the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). The Panel of Experts also participated in those briefings as an observer. In her remarks on 14 September, the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts highlighted a number of issues, including the Panel's relations with the Federal Government of Somalia, Al-Shabaab financing, sanctions listings, the arms embargo and the improvised explosive devices components ban, the charcoal ban and the humanitarian situation in Somalia. I would like to emphasize that, during the informal discussion, Committee members welcomed the continued development in the Panel's relations with the Federal Government of Somalia and praised the high quality of the Panel's report, in particular the section on Al-Shabaab finance analysing the group's revenue sources, storage and transfer methods and illegal taxation systems. The Council received the report on 28 September. I will therefore not go into further detail regarding the findings contained therein. The report is expected to be issued shortly. The Panel made 23 recommendations. Committee members agreed to take note of the nine recommendations addressed to the Council and further agreed to take actions pursuant to the 14 recommendations addressed to it by the Panel. The Committee is in the process of taking actions on those recommendations. The OCHA briefing of 9 October focused on the delivery of humanitarian assistance in Somalia and on any impediments thereto. The Deputy Director, Operations and Advocacy Division, pointed out that humanitarian needs in Somalia remained high due to protracted conflict, political and economic instability and recurrent climatic shocks. The triple threat of floods, the coronavirus disease and the worst desert locust upsurge that Somalia had experienced in decades had aggravated the humanitarian situation by worsening pre-existing vulnerabilities, disrupting positive gains in socioeconomic activities, impacting livelihoods and straining the health-care system. She also underlined that the humanitarian exemption provided for in paragraph 22 of resolution 2498 (2019) was essential to facilitating the delivery of humanitarian assistance and asked for it to be renewed. The UNODC briefing covered its work in response to resolution 2498 (2019). UNODC provided insight into the trafficking of improvised explosive device components, the maritime trade and Al-Shabaab's revenue system, and the charcoal trade. The Head of the Global Maritime Crime Programme highlighted key efforts to disrupt Al-Shabaab activities, which included liaising with key Member States over their awareness of, and engagement in, the disruption efforts, strengthening the regional maritime law enforcement capacity and improving maritime domain awareness through the use of technology, such as satellite imagery. I will now summarize the statistics with regard to arms embargo exemption requests and notifications. The Committee received three advance delivery notifications pursuant to paragraphs 11 and 13 of resolution 2498 (2019) from the Federal Government of Somalia and four advance delivery notifications pursuant to paragraphs 11 and 14 of the same resolution from the supplying Member States. The Committee further received four post-delivery notifications pursuant to paragraph 16 of the resolution, submitted by the Federal Government of Somalia. Lastly, the Committee received two advance delivery notifications from a supplying Member State in accordance with paragraph 17 of the resolution. On 3 August, the Committee adopted an implementation assistance notice (IAN) aimed at providing guidance to all Member States on the implementation of the improvised explosive device components ban and informed all Member States accordingly. The IAN is available on the Committee's website. Finally, I would like to report that, upon review of information previously submitted to the Committee by its predecessor, the Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group, regarding General Sadak Omar Mohamed, the Panel of Experts has clarified that no evidence of affiliation to Al-Shabaab was found and that General Sadak is not the subject of current investigations by the Panel.
