Ms. Moscicka-Dendys (Poland): At the outset, let
me thank Russia for convening today's timely debate on
issues of great importance to international peace and
security.

History teaches us that people will not consent
to live under an authoritarian regime indefinitely,
tolerating lawlessness, accepting brutality and giving
up all ambition for a better life. The experience of
Poland and other Central and Eastern European
countries, once under foreign - Soviet - rule, are the
best proof that illegitimate regimes cannot last forever.

The Arab revolutions did not create a terrorist
threat. However, they created a political vacuum that
provides conditions permissive to violent extremism
and terrorism to thrive and gain ground. The longer
the crises in the Middle East and North Africa persist,
the more polarized and violent their societies become.
Daesh and Al-Qaida feed on exactly those processes.

In the light of that situation, we must ask ourselves
how to de-escalate conflicts, taking into account
the number of external actors involved and their
contradictory interests. Repeating the mantra of the
need to find a political solution will not help. Nor
will a security response alone be sufficient to address
the challenges posed by foreign fighters, terrorism
and extremism. We should work on a comprehensive
response that addresses some of the root causes, such as
economic and social inequalities, and that guarantees the
enjoyment of fundamental human rights and freedoms.
Without a broad, inclusive solution comprised of both
political and development elements, the attainment of
lasting peace in the region will not be possible.

In elaborating a peaceful solution to the conflicts
in both the Middle East and North Africa, we should
not forget about diversity, citizenship and equality,
common values such as tolerance, peace and stability,
respect and acceptance of others, solidarity and identity.
We need to enhance capacities to prevent and combat
violent extremism through the promotion of a culture
of democracy, dialogue and human rights. The role of
women, who constitute a large segment of society and
who are mostly in charge of basic education, should
also be emphasized in that regard.

We are of the View that there should be greater
emphasis on the prevention of terrorism by examining
and addressing the conditions conducive to its spread.
The most important issue will be to curb recruitment
by terrorist groups. In order to meet that objective
we should primarily concentrate on ensuring a stable
future for youth.

It is important to recognize that, from an ideological
point of view, promoting a process of deradicalization
is first and foremost the right and obligation of Arab
and Muslim countries. His Majesty King Abdullah
II spoke about that in the European Parliament last
February. Education, the promotion of a culture of
peace and respect for others, and appreciation for the
role of Christians in the Middle East as an integral part
of the world's civilization are the main elements for
consolidating the efforts His Majesty proposed. Some
valuable projects have already been initiated in that
regard. Let me mention just a few.

A good example of a new way of thinking was
the convening of the Global Forum on Youth, Peace
and Security in August in Jordan. The Amman Youth
Declaration adopted at that meeting is the first of its
kind to address youth and peacebuilding issues. It
calls for the full engagement of youth and youth-led
organizations in issues of peace and security. The
driving principle is to create a space for meaningful
intergenerational dialogue with common understanding
and respect, in order to prevent violence and extremism.

Another example worth mentioning is Hedayah,
the international center established in December 2012
in Abu Dhabi, with a strong focus on countering violent
extremism through dialogue, training and research.
Hedayah addresses timely subjects such as combating
foreign fighters and countering violent extremism
through education.

Poland supports international efforts to fight
terrorism and radicalization. We value close
cooperation with the United Nations, the European
Union and our strategic partners in that regard. We
have a long-standing tradition of advocating for change,
in particular as a result of our own recent successful
political and economic transformation. Poland is ready
to share its own experience.

Last but not least, I must refer to another issue linked
to growing extremism, which is the destruction of world
cultural heritage. I take the opportunity of speaking
in this Chamber to once again strongly condemn the
barbaric acts of destruction of world heritage that have
been taking place in the Middle East and in Africa.
Damage to the cultural heritage of anyone means
damage to the cultural heritage of all humankind. Such
acts are war crimes and their perpetrators must be held
accountable for their shameful deeds.

I would like also to convey Poland's strong support
for UNESCO's action to safeguard cultural heritage
in both Syria and Iraq, particularly bearing in mind
the unprecedented support of 137 States for the joint
statement on the destruction of cultural heritage,
delivered by Poland on behalf of a cross-regional core
group during the twenty-eighth session of the Human
Rights Council of the United Nations. UNESCO builds
international support for the protection of heritage in
areas where it is threatened by extremism. However,
a new strategy on how to reinforce the organization's
action for the protection of culture in the event of armed
conflict is indispensable.

To conclude, let me underscore that only through
our joint and unwavering commitment will we be able
to achieve a vision of a world free from the scourges of
terrorism and violent extremism. Poland stands ready
to continue its engagement in international efforts to
achieve that important goal.

