Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russia has voted in support of this Security
Council resolution to extend the mandate of the
Multinational Force in Iraq.

We note that the resolution's authors took into
account our main concern set forth during the
discussions on the document. Our first concern is the
security of accredited diplomatic personnel in Iraq, and
next the reaffirmation that the presence of foreign
troops in the country will be limited and temporary.

At the same time, we regret that the resolution in
no way reflects our proposal on the importance of
continuing the political process in Iraq, the foundation
of which was laid at the conferences in Cairo and
Sharm al-Sheikh. We will continue to consider these
initiatives to be timely, particularly from the standpoint
of the military and political situation currently
prevailing in Iraq and the importance of finding a
viable formula for national dialogue.

We must recognize that the situation in Iraq
continues to be complex. At the moment, signs of
improvement are not being seen. In spite of all of
efforts made by the Government of Iraq and by the
Multinational Force, the growth of violence and
terrorist activity is not being stopped. The inter-ethnic
confrontations between the various religious groups
have reached extremely dangerous levels and have
taken over a large part of the country.

The continuing division of Iraqi society,
particularly of the Arab part of it, is a major threat for
the future of Iraq. The restraint, patience and self-
control that the people of this country have shown in
these difficult times are not unlimited.

Today, the near-unanimous view is that it is a
priority to achieve national reconciliation and
consensus. It has been recognized that, if that problem
is not solved, it will be impossible to save the country
from this crisis and create the necessary conditions to
preserve its territorial integrity, its security and its
economic restoration.
06-63159

We believe that, without effective follow-up by
the international community in reaching a settlement in
Iraq, the country's politicians will have difficulty in
overcoming the inertia caused by mutual distrust. In
this context, what is required is constructive interaction
on the part of Iraq's neighbours, the leading countries
in the region, as well as the League of Arab States.

For our part, we are prepared to participate
actively in preparing and implementing any initiative
that would help further rapid stabilization of the
situation in Iraq.

