The President (spoke in Spanish): 1 shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

Bolivia thanks the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, for
his briefing on the special report (S/2017/437) of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
the Secretary-General of the United Nations on the
strategic review of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) .

Bolivia welcomes the recommendations contained
in the strategic review. We believe that the proposed
adjustments to UNAMID duly reflect the gradual
evolution of the situation on the ground over the past
year. Moreover, the new focus will allow us to adapt
UNAMID to the current needs of the population
of Darfur. It is worth recalling that the last strategic
review was undertaken in 2013, when the situation was
quite different from what it is today. Operation Decisive
Summer, implemented in 2014, led to a sharp reduction
in the level of hostilies between the Government of the
Sudan and armed rebel forces, who at the time had a
very active presence in the Sudan. With the exception
of the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid, their
capacities have been significantly reduced over the past
few months. We have seen no significant clashes take
place since September 2016.

Such improvements in the security situation will
allow us to refocus the mandate of the Mission not
only on peacekeeping but also on peacebuilding tasks,
as suggested in the report. Focusing on peacebuilding
will allow UNAMID to help strengthen the State's
institutions, train and develop the police, strengthen the
rule of law and advance the political process through
the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur, and in particular through support for the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel, which is
responsible for the implementation of recommendations
on the Sudan. It will also allow UNAMID to address
the root causes of the conflict, which is a priority in
efforts to achieve stable and lasting peace in the region,
which for years has suffered the grave consequences
of the conflict in Darfur, in which civilians have been
affected most.

On that point, as outlined in the strategic review,
the protection of civilians will revolve around the
action plan of the Jebel Marra task force. Bolivia
naturally believes that it is important to protect the most
vulnerable in armed conflicts. To that end, we look
forward to close coordination with the Government
on that initiative. The composition and mandate of the
Jebel Marra task force must take its suggestions and
concerns into account.

However, while we appreciate the aforementioned
improvements, the humanitarian situation of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees remains a source
of concern. According to the most recent report of the
Secretary-General, there are approximately 2.6 million
internally displaced persons, who are exposed to
various forms of violence. Women and children are the
most affected.

In implementing the suggestions arising from the
strategic review, the Government has an opportunity to
demonstrate that it is capable of protecting all civilians
across the entire country. We hope that progress will be
made in the plan for the voluntary return of internally
displaced persons and in the initiative for a volunteer
cessation of hostilities. We trust that the Government,
in line with the progress it has made, will lend the
support necessary to UNAMID to fully comply with
its mandate, granting it the necessary access to do so,
and guarantee support for humanitarian workers so that
they can meet their responsibilities.

To conlude, it is important to highlight the fact that
ifthe United Nations country team is to fulfil the duties
conferred upon it, the support of the international
community is crucial.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.

