The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Ghana.

Ghana takes pride in having voted for the draft
resolution authorizing the expansion of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) into Darfur.
UNMIS has the mandate, experience and capability to
make a positive difference in the lives of the suffering
people of Darfur.

As many as 16 African countries are already
participating in UNMIS. This further underscores the
close cooperation that has always existed between the
African Union (AU) and the United Nations in the
promotion of peace and stability in Africa.

Although the resolution is not a magic wand that
will change the situation in Darfur overnight, its
adoption nonetheless is timely and gives the Sudanese
Government an opportunity to cooperate with the
United Nations in seeking a peaceful and negotiated
settlement of the crisis in Darfur.

We share the view that the adoption of this
resolution, which also aims to highlight the gravity of
the situation on the ground despite the signing of the
Darfur Peace Agreement, still leaves the door open for
effective cooperation between the Government of the
Sudan, the United Nations, the AU and other
international actors in finding a lasting solution to the
cr1s1s.

On the other hand, if the Sudanese Government
persists in conducting military operations in Darfur,
that would be a clear breach of the commitments
undertaken under both the Darfur Peace Agreement and
previous Security Council resolutions.

Ghana believes that, by voting in favour of the
resolution, we have fulfilled a duty to the suffering
victims of war in Darfur and, indeed, to all of Africa.

Our vote - that of a founding member of the
African Union - also reaffirms one of the cardinal
principles enshrined in article 4(h) of the Constitutive
Act of the African Union, which recognizes the right of
the Union to intervene in a member State in respect of
grave circumstances, namely war crimes, genocide and
crimes against humanity.

In adopting that principle, the AU member States
set themselves the highest standards of accountability
in governance. But, more importantly, they assumed
the responsibility to protect the victims of war on the
continent. Clearly, the situation in the Sudan merits
some form of international engagement that is timely,
meaningful, well-coordinated and effective.

It is for those reasons that we have reservations
about the inclusion in the draft text of explicit language
that implies that the Government of the Sudan can take
all the time it wants before allowing the United Nations
to deploy in Darfur, or even refuse to do so, regardless
of the cost in human lives. Several observers have
repeatedly expressed concern about the alarming
situation in Darfur. They cannot all be wrong.

Once again, therefore, we call on the Government
of the Sudan to heed the voices of its own suffering
06-48422
people and of the international community, because,
from all indications, we have not acted swiftly enough.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 11.05 am.
11
