Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General. We thank Mr. Qazi for his presentation this
morning and Ambassador Sanders for hers on behalf of
the Multinational Force in Iraq (MNF).

The security situation in Iraq is serious.
Addressing this situation is the top priority for the
Government of Iraq and for the MNF. But military
effort is not sufficient to guarantee security. It must be
underpinned by a political solution involving genuine
reconciliation. We can do even more to support the
Prime Minister's efforts aimed at bringing the different
parts of Iraq together, so as to give effect to the will of
the Iraqi people as expressed in their democratic
elections.

Therefore, we strongly support Prime Minister
Maliki's National Reconciliation Plan, which provides
a framework for political dialogue and disarmament.
We also commend the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI) to promote this
plan.

As set out in the Secretary-General's report, a
United Nations-facilitated meeting of Iraq's political
parties would offer a useful opportunity for dialogue.
Such a meeting might be set up in concert with a
meeting of Iraq's neighbours to further the
reconciliation process.

The United Nations plays a significant role in the
reconstruction of Iraq and in helping Iraq to find the
political solutions it needs to guarantee its security. We
appreciate the difficult circumstances UNAMI works
under and we fully support its efforts. We encourage
the United Nations to pursue further steps to improve
the security of UNAMI, and to pursue those steps with
partners as necessary, including through discussion
with the European Union, so that the United Nations
can play its full role in Iraq.

We believe that the continued significant
presence of UNAMI is vital to help Iraq continue to
make progress in the political process. We urge United
Nations Members to contribute further funding to the
United Nations Security Trust Fund so as to enable the
continued presence of UNAMI.

We support the legal assistance given by UNAMI
to the Council of Representatives with regard to the
establishment of the Independent High Electoral
Commission of Iraq. Once the draft law has been
passed, technical and timely support from UNAMI to
build the Commission will be a substantial and
important step towards the success of the provincial
elections in 2007 and a referendum on the
constitutional review.

We welcome the intention of the United Nations
to provide strong support to the constitutional review
process and an eventual referendum on the status of
Kirkuk. The wider experience of the United Nations in
this field underlines its importance as an independent
mediator and its ability to present technical and
impartial advice to the Review Committee and the
subcommittees.

We appreciate the role that the United Nations
has taken as a co-chair of the International Compact.
The Compact provides an opportunity for the wider
international community and the Government of Iraq to
focus on political, security and economic reform. We
welcome the United Nations approach of providing
targeted institutional and operational capacity-building
support, including the work of the UNAMI Human
Rights Office on establishing a national human rights
commission. That will help the Government of Iraq to
deliver on its commitments.

We welcome the emphasis placed by the
Secretary-General on regional dialogue. It is important
that all of those who are engaged in Iraq's transition -
but particularly those in the region - live up to their
responsibilities by supporting the Iraqi Government
and ensuring that Iraq is able to proceed down the
democratic and non-sectarian path. We welcome Iraq's
commitment to the International Compact, made by
Prime Minister Al-Maliki in the Baghdad Coordination
Group on 10 December, as well as his commitment to
the political, economic and security strands. We
commend the proposed discussions between Iraq and

its neighbours, with the participation of the Secretary-
General's Special Representative, who, of course,
continues to have a key role to play in and for Iraq.

