Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Allow me to
begin by reiterating to you, Mr. President, and to other
members my warmest congratulations on acceding to
the Security Council. I am pleased at the prospect of
what I am certain will be a fruitful collaboration.

I am pleased also to present the latest report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali
(S/2015/1030) and the activities of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). I welcome the presence here of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali, Mr. Abdoulaye
Diop, and I would like to express to him once again the
deep appreciation of my Department for the excellent
relations between his Government and MINUSMA.

Since the most recent consultations, held in October
last, the situation in Mali has evolved considerably. The
joint efforts of the Malian authorities, the signatory
parties, the international mediation and MINUSMA,
inter alia, have enabled us to strengthen the dynamic
of dialogue and coordination among the Government,
the Coordination des mouvements de 1'Azawad and
the Platform coalition. Indeed, the Government has
launched a series of confidence-building measures,
inter alia, the release of persons detained as a result of
the conflict, and the meeting held on 23 September last
year between President Keita and the representatives of
the armed groups of the Coordination and the Platform,
which helped to ease the situation between the parties
and led to an effective cessation of the hostilities.
The rapprochement between the Coordination and
the Platform has also helped to create an environment
more conducive to the effective functioning of the
mechanisms for monitoring the Agreement - the
Comite de suivi de 1'accord (CSA) and the Commission
technique mixte de securite - which have met four
times since the last Council meeting on this item (see S/PV.7528).

Allow me to highlight in that regard the
particularly important role played by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mongi
Hamdi, who facilitated the rapprochement between
the two movements, particularly during the Bamako
meeting on 23 September. In addition, under his
leadership, MINUSMA has continued to assist the
support and monitoring mechanisms of the Agreement.
In addition to backing the secretariat of the CSA, the
Mission has placed experts at the disposal of each of
its subcommittees to support their work. The Force
Commander, who chairs the Commission technique
mixte de securite, has played an equally important role
in advancing the implementation of the cantonment,
including through the identification of sites, the
activation of joint patrols and the establishment of the
operational coordination mechanism.

I am confident that the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Annadif, who is also
present in the Chamber, will work to maintain the
good offices and support of MINUSMA for the peace
process.

While the monitoring bodies may be functional,
that has not yet fully translated into tangible progress
towards the implementation of the Agreement. The
process has continued to encounter often significant
delays. There has been positive progress with the
validation of 11 cantonment sites, the launch of
construction works for two of them - work on the
third will begin in four days once the site has been
demined - and the adoption ofdecrees on 29 December
establishing the national commissions on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and on integration.
Regrettably, only one mixed patrol has been conducted
to date, on 14 November, and none since. Another
positive measure was the inauguration of the Truth,
Justice and Reconciliation Commission, but we remain
concerned that other political and institutional reforms
that underpin the peace agreements are yet to be
implemented.

These delays, if not addressed as soon as possible,
bear the potential to unravel the hard-won confidence
built to date between the signatory parties, as illustrated
by the concerns expressed by the Coordination and
the Platform in the latest meeting of the CSA, on
17 and 18 December. We welcome in that context
the consultative meeting of the members of the CSA
to be convened at the ministerial level in Algiers on
18 January, and hope that it will contribute to addressing
these scheduling concerns and set new timelines for
implementing outstanding reforms.

The first priority in that regard, I believe, should
be the introduction of the interim administrative
arrangements on which the resumption of basic services
to the populations in the North depends. We understand
that the parties have agreed in principle to establish
temporary councils at the regional and local levels, and
it is our hope that the Government and the Parliament
will ensure that these structures are established as soon
as possible. Moreover, it is important for the parties to
prepare for the local elections, which Council members
will recall were postponed in October, and to revise the
electoral law, as also provided for in the Agreement.
In the long term, the Government will have to turn
its attention to institutional reforms, starting with the
creation of the the two new regions of Taoudeni and
Menaka, and initiate the necessary consultations on the
institutional reforms related to decentralization.

The Malian Government and Parliament must
continue to take the lead in advancing the implementation
of these reforms in a consistently inclusive and
consultative manner. In this regard, we welcome the
announcement by the Government that the national
committee of coordination for the implementation
of the peace agreement will include representatives
designated by the signatory parties. We call on the
movements to designate their representatives to these
structures without delay, as time is of the essence if we
wish to advance on the key processes of cantonment;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration;
and security sector reform. If all of this is to gain
momentum, the work of the recently created national
commission on integration will be crucial, and it is our
hope that we move forward to that end.

One lesson from the past six months is that
the various pillars of the Agreement are extremely
interrelated, and their implementation will therefore
need to take place in a parallel and synchronized
manner. MINUSMA will continue to play its full role in
exercising its good offices in building trust between the
parties and advocating inclusivity in the peace process.

However, as we all know, there will be no lasting
peace in northern Mali without the provision of peace
dividends to the most vulnerable. In that regard, it will
be recalled that the major meeting of international
partners in Paris in October pledged over (53.2 billion for the reconstruction and development of Mali. Some
progress has already been made on the ground, notably
in the field of education, thanks to the good cooperation
between the Government and the humanitarian actors,
including for the symbolic reopening of the schools. In
the three northern regions, 89 per cent ofthe schools that
were operating before the crisis are again functional,
but we note that in the areas most affected by insecurity,
one in five schools remains closed due to the absence of
teachers, materials, facilities and infrastructure.

Since June, MINUSMA has scaled up its support
for communities in the north by 30 per cent, supporting
36 new quick-impact projects at a cost of approximately
$1.3 million. New projects include the provision of
drinking water in the Kidal region, equipment for health
centres in Kidal and Mopti, the refurbishment of social
care centres in Gao and social reintegration projects for
women, young people and internally displaced persons
in all the major municipalties ofthe north. But we must
continue to do more, and we hope that the Government
and the movements will soon finalize a development
development strategy for the north, in accordance with
Agreement and the commitment made at the Paris
conference.

If I insist so strongly on the urgent need to
address these challenges at the political, security and
humanitarian levels, it is essentially because the peace
process in Mali remains fragile and faces enormous
hurdles. Recent months have shown the determination
of extremist groups to derail the peace process.
Members are no doubt aware of the statements issued
in October and December by the leaders of the terrorist
group Ansar Dine condemning the peace process,
denouncing the armed groups signatories the Algiers
Agreement, and threatening to step up attacks against
France and its allies. That is the expression they use,
which is meant to cover both the Malian Government
and MINUSMA.

Extremist groups have continued to intimidate
people and attack the Malian armed forces, Operation
Barkhane and MINUSMA, not only in north Mali
but also in the centre and south of the country.
Armed groups that are themselves signatories of the
Agreement have also been targeted. For example, I
would mention what happened on 24 and 25 December
when Ansar Dine caused 15 casualties among the ranks
of the Mouvement national de libe'ration de l'Azawad,
including Bilal Ag Cherif's own brother. It is clear
that it is the peace process itself that is at issue. The
Council had not failed to note that the attack against
the Radisson Blu in Bamako occurred while the Comite
de suivi de l'accord was holding meetings in Bamako,
and that the hotel was the precise location of where
the Algerian delegation - Algeria is the Chair of the
CSA - was staying.

Our convoys and camps also remain prime targets
for extremist groups. During the period covered by the
report, the Force suffered no less than 28 attacks, in
contrast to the 20 attacks registered in the previous
three months. On 28 November, a clear night, in fact
a moonlit night, six rockets hit our base, killing two
of our peacekeepers and a contractor. Faced with this
situation, it should be known and said that two thirds
of MINUSMA's personnel - with 94 per cent of the
authorized military staff deployed - are employed
solely to protect MINUMSMA's installations and
convoys. Hardly a day goes by without improvised
explosive devices damaging our armoured vehicles,
which are already in short supply, thereby reducing the
Mission's ability to fulfil its mandate. Despite repeated
appeals, we still are finding it difficult to set up the
combat logistics battalion that would partly solve this
problem.

In those circumstances, it must be reiterated,
it is urgent to implement all the provisions of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation. Only the
operationalization of joint patrols and quartering could
possibly reverse the security dynamic, and even if, it
should always be remembered, the roots of the conflict
are political, there will be no lasting solution without
the political and institutional reforms envisaged in the
Agreement.

