Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): First
of all, allow me to thank Foreign Minister Bassole and
Mr. Abou Moussa, Principal Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for their
statements. I also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Cote d'Ivoire.

Belgium would like to reiterate its full support to
the Ouagadougou political Agreement, whereby, some
seven months ago, the parties to the Ivorian conflict
were able to give new impetus to the stalled peace
process. We should recognize the determination and the
political courage of former belligerents who have been
able to leave the past behind and identify the
conditions for finding a way out of the crisis.

The Agreement would also not have been
possible without the facilitation of Burkina Faso and
the personal involvement of its President, Mr. Blaise
Compaore, and of Foreign Minister Bassole, who is
with us today. My delegation would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate Burkina Faso, a friendly
country that we will soon be able to welcome to this
table as a member of the Security Council.

Despite positive developments over the past few
months, we are well aware that the peace process in
Cote d'Ivoire remains fragile, and we are concerned at
the considerable delays in the implementation of the
Agreement. As stated the fourteenth report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation in
C6te d'Ivoire (UNOCI) (S/2007/593), which was

presented to us this morning by the Principal Deputy
Special Representative, Ivorians must take up their
responsibilities and ensure a speedy and complete
implementation of the key provisions of the
Agreement. That refers in particular to the
identification operations, which should lead to
irreproachable elections; the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; and the disarmament
of the militias.

I would also like to state that, like other
delegations, Belgium is concerned about the persistent
allegations of human rights violations, especially with
regard to women and children, as described in the
report of the Secretary-General and in other sources.
However, we do recognize that progress has been made
since the Ouagadougou Agreement.

I cannot conclude my brief statement without
welcoming the announcement of the appointment of
Mr. Choi Young-jin as the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Cote d'Ivoire. He will be
taking over at an opportune time, as Mr. Bassole stated,
to give a new impetus to the peace process in Cote
d'Ivoire. Finally, I would like to thank Mr. Moussa for
the excellent work carried out during the interim
period.

