Mr. Hume (United States of America): The United
States is pleased to join with other members of the Security
Council in support of this draft resolution, which
inaugurates a new phase in United Nations involvement in
Angola's peace process. We wish the new United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) success in
overseeing the accomplishment of the remaining tasks of
the Lusaka Protocol, foremost among them the
normalization by peaceful means of State administration
throughout the national territory.

The establishment of this new Mission is a tribute to
the success of its predecessor, the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), which, with its
7,000 troops, upheld the ceasefire, safely disarmed and
demobilized more than 60,000 combatants, and brought
relative peace to Angola after decades of brutal conflict.
We extend our thanks to the personnel of UNAVEM. III
and to the troop contributors for a job well done. We also
express our gratitude to the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Maitre Beye, for his tireless work.

On the occasion of the inauguration of this new
United Nations Mission, the United States calls on the
Government of Angola and on UNITA to complete the
process of peace and national reconciliation. We urge the
Government of Angola to exhibit restraint as the peace
process enters its final phase. We have been concerned by
troop movements and by ceasefire violations in the north-
eastern provinces, and we call on the Government of
Angola to desist immediately from unilateral military
actions outside the Lusaka framework. Procedures for the
normalization of Government control are clearly defined
in the Lusaka Protocol and must be followed.

We also believe that agreement regarding national
symbols would contribute to the national reconciliation
process. We urge UNITA fully and immediately to
complete the political and military tasks it agreed to in
Lusaka. It will have our support to the extent that it does
so. We understand UNITA's security concerns and intend
to stay engaged in ensuring that both parties abide by
their mutual security guarantees, but it is long overdue for
UNITA to declare, to disarm and to demobilize its armed
elements and to bring UNITA into the mainstream of a
peaceful political process.

Finally, we urge President Dos Santos and Mr.
Savimbi to meet in Angola immediately and regularly
until a solution has been reached to all outstanding issues.
The international community wants to stop expending
scarce and precious resources providing troops to stand
between armed factions. We want to turn those resources
to reconstructing roads and bridges, hospitals, schools and
other elements of the infrastructure Angola will need to
achieve the prosperity it deserves and can attain.

