The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Russian Federation.

I wish at the outset to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,

Mr. Goran Svilanovic, and to thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2000/1196). My thanks go
also to Mr. Annabi for his presentation of that report.

The change in the leadership of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) to take place in January 2001 provides a
good opportunity for an impartial assessment of the
Mission's achievements and shortcomings, and to
identify ways and means to rectify the errors permitted
by the previous head of UNMIK. The Mission's
principal activities involve consistent implementation
of resolution 1244 (1999) in its entirety; it must permit
no modification of those endeavours, no matter what
the pretext.

It is no secret that, as in the past, that Security
Council resolution is being implemented partially and
unsatisfactorily, despite the efforts being made by the
international presences. In that connection, we view it
as essential that the Security Council and the
Secretary-General ensure tighter control over the
activities of UNMIK. The situation is absolutely
intolerable; the plans of the head of UNMIK, including
on matters of principle, were often made known to the
Security Council, its members and the United Nations
at large only through the mass media.

It is imperative immediately to establish
constructive cooperation among UNMIK, the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) and the Yugoslav authorities on all
matters connected with the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999). Here, I am speaking, inter alia,
of settling the question of the status of the international
presences through the signing of corresponding
agreements with Belgrade, ensuring conditions for the
return to the region of refugees and displaced persons,
and preparing a timetable and conditions for the return
to Kosovo of Yugoslav military and Serbian police
personnel. Finally, we need at least the start of a
political process that will lead in the foreseeable future
to a comprehensive settlement of the Kosovo problem.

It is inadmissible that the formula for the future
political status of Kosovo should be determined by
some self-anointed task force headed by UNMIK,
which has no Security Council mandate whatsoever for
such an activity. Despite our repeated requests, the
Security Council remains unaware of what the task
force is doing. The new head of UNMIK, Mr. Hans
Haekkerup, whom we wish success and good luck,
should take a lesson from the unfortunate history of his

S/PVAZA')

 

predecessor - when UNMIK connived with the
separatist sentiments of the leaders of the Kosovo
Albanians. Only the balanced and principled position
of the international presences can halt the unremitting
wave of extremism and separatism, both in Kosovo and
in other parts of Serbia, including the Presevo Valley.

We consider that the head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, in close
cooperation with KFOR, should enact measures for the
true completion of the process of demilitarizing the
Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), rather than its
completion merely on paper; these should make it
impossible for post-KLA structures to actively
influence the political situation and should prevent the
illegal flow of weapons to those structures. Such
measures by UNMIK and KFOR would be a key
precondition for ensuring the safety of minorities in
Kosovo and for creating the necessary conditions for
the return of refugees and displaced persons.

Only after such a process of return becomes
irreversible will it be possible, with the direct
involvement of Belgrade, to formulate the parameters
of Kosovo's autonomy within the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. Then it will be possible to address the
question of preparing for general elections. We are
convinced that the Security Council should decide on
the time frame for such elections taking thorough
account of all those factors.

To force general elections at an earlier date-
which the outgoing head of the Mission was attempting
to do - would only strengthen the mono-ethnic
character of Kosovo, stir up nationalist feelings in
heavily Albanian areas in southern Serbia and
exacerbate the crisis in the ground safety zone of the
Presevo Valley. All of this poses the threat of a fresh
upsurge of tension in the Balkans. It is a matter of
urgent necessity now to eliminate the consequences of
the provocative actions of Albanian extremists in the
ground safety zone, and to prevent their resumption, as
called for in the statement by the President of the
Security Council of 22 November 2000
(S/PRST/2000/35).

KFOR has taken concrete steps to thwart
provocative attacks by Albanian fighters in the region,
but that is clearly not enough. I recall the declaration
issued by the governments of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and Serbia on principles for the defence of
the Government and the national interests of the

Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in connection with the
escalation of Albanian terrorism in Kosovo and in the
ground safety zone. We should thoroughly consider the
measures for the urgent withdrawal, detention and
disarmament of Albanian terrorists operating with
impunity in the ground safety zone.

UNMIK and KFOR should ensure that the work
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia committee on
questions relating to Kosovo and Metohija can be
carried out in safety and without interference.
Conditions should be created that will be favourable to
the holding in Kosovo of the 23 December elections to
the Serbian parliament. We hope that, as outlined in the
report of the Secretary-General, UNMIK and KFOR
will take the measures necessary to ensure security
with a view to thwarting the attempts of Kosovo
Albanian extremists to use those elections to
destabilize the situation in the region.

Nor can we fail to be concerned at certain reports
and at statements by some Kosovo Albanian leaders
who are considered to be moderate. Here, I am
thinking, inter alia, of the interview given by Ibrahim
Rugova to the weekly Der Spiegel, in which he said
that the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) is
already acting as a "private army of the Albanians" in
Kosovo. And as for UNMIK, Mr. Rugova said that the
Mission would be able, for a long time to come,

"to remain in the region to provide assistance
during the transition to independence, but with a
reduction in personnel".

It is obvious that such statements contradict the
decisions of the international community and should
meet with a proper response from the international
presences.

The Security Council should promote the speedy
conclusion of the process of reintegrating the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia as a full-fledged member of the
world community. That would constitute real support
for the efforts of the new leadership of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to bring about democracy and
reform in Yugoslav society on the basis of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Yugoslavia and
of respect for the rights of all the peoples that live
there, in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).

S/PV.4249

 

The statetnent by the President of the Security There are no l'urther speakers on the list. The
Council. which we expect to issue shortly. should be a Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
concrete step towards resolving these issues. of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

I now resume my functions as President of the The meeting rose at 1.20 pm.
Security Council.
