Ms. Bird (Australia): I should like to join
others in thanking the Secretary-General for his
report on Afghanistan (S/2016/532), the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for his statement,
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Nicholas Haysom for his briefing. Australia is deeply
grateful to Special Representative Haysom for his
astute leadership, dedication and outstanding four years
of service to the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and Afghanistan. We wish him
every success in his new role as Special Envoy for the
Sudan and South Sudan.

We also take this opportunity to welcome and
congratulate Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto on his
appointment. Mr. Yamamoto has served with distinction
as Deputy Special Representative, and we look forward
to working with him.

Over the past three months, the security situation
in Afghanistan has deteriorated, with armed clashes
increasing in 2016. Terrorist attacks orchestrated by the
Taliban have continued to inflict enormous harm. These
include attacks against the media, the Government
and judicial officials, killing and injuring hundreds of
innocent civilians. We condemn in the strongest terms
the brutal and reckless tactics of the Taliban in targeting
civilians. We also express our condolences for the
terrorist attacks yesterday in Kabul and Badakhshan.

The Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
have proven resolute in response to sustained pressure,
and we honour their sacrifices. We also extend
our gratitude to United Nations personnel and the
international coalition for their tireless work to support
the Afghan people. Australia reaffirms its commitment
to Afghanistan and to assisting in defending its people
against the insurgency.

In the coming months, the international community
will meet in Warsaw and then Brussels to recommit
to Afghanistan and chart the way forward to the year
2020 and beyond. In Warsaw, Australia will join
international partners in committing to support the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, and in
Brussels we will do the same to support Afghanistan's
reconstruction and development. We encourage the
Government of Afghanistan to use this opportunity,
created by the international community's collective
support, to redouble efforts to implement its reform
agenda. There remains much to do, particularly in
countering corruption.

We welcome the Government of Afghanistan's
support for gender equality, including steps towards
addressing violence against women and implementing
the national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000).
Full implementation of the action plan and the law
on the elimination of violence against women must
be priorities.

The protection of children is also paramount. We
welcome the recent progress made in preventing child
recruitment by the Afghan National Army and the
Afghan National Police. We urge the Government to
increase the oversight of child recruitment by the Afghan
Local Police and to take further steps to implement the
recommendations contained in resolution 1612 (2005).
We further urge the Government of Afghanistan to
work pragmatically towards parliamentary and district
council elections being held as soon as is practicable.

Finally, let me express Australia's appreciation for
the role that UNAMA plays in guiding and coordinating
international efforts in Afghanistan. We look forward
to continued cooperation with UNAMA and with the
Government of Afghanistan.

