Mr. Owada (Japan): The Government of Japan is
deeply concerned about the recent deterioration of the
situation in Kosovo, which, tragically, has resulted in a
mounting death toll. Japan strongly condemns both the use
of excessive force by the Serbian police against civilians in
Kosovo and the use of violence, especially acts of
terrorism, by the Kosovo Liberation Army or anyone else
as a means to achieve political goals. My delegation
recognizes that the current situation in Kosovo poses a
threat to international peace and security in the region and
that the further spread of violence there might lead to the
destabilization of the entire Balkans.

Against this background, the draft resolution before us
is intended to send a clear and concerted message by the
Security Council that the parties concerned must stop this
Violence in Kosovo in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and begin the process of finding a solution to the serious
political and human rights problems there. We are
convinced that this draft resolution, which includes a
decision to impose an arms embargo against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, including Kosovo, will be, upon its
adoption, an effective instrument to prevent the further
spread of such Violence.

The basic position of Japan on the problem of Kosovo,
which I believe it shares with the rest of the international
community, is that neither the repression of the human and
political rights of the Albanian population in Kosovo nor
the separation and independence of Kosovo is acceptable.
My Government urges the authorities in Belgrade and the
leadership of the Albanian community in Kosovo to
immediately enter into a substantive dialogue without
precondition, so that the citizens of Kosovo may enjoy a
sufficient degree of autonomy with meaningful self-
administration, as well as complete respect for their human
rights within the border of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. Japan is of the View that the participation of an
outside representative or representatives will be important
in order to ensure that such a dialogue can be promoted in
a meaningful way.

The Government of Japan fully supports the efforts of
the relevant international organizations and other bodies,
especially the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and the Contact Group, in their cooperation
for the resolution of the crisis in Kosovo. My Government
urges the authorities in Belgrade to fully cooperate with the
OSCE and to take steps to implement without delay the
actions set out in the statement of the Contact Group of 9
March 1998. While my delegation recognizes that some
positive steps have been taken by the authorities in
Belgrade during the past few weeks, such as the
declaration of 18 March by the President of the Republic
of Serbia and the signature on 23 March of an agreement
to implement the 1996 Education Agreement, further
progress must be made without delay by the authorities of
both the Republic of Serbia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. At the same time, the Government of Japan
calls upon all elements of the Albanian community in
Kosovo to immediately accept the dialogue and to
categorically denounce terrorist activities and external
support for such activities.

For these reasons, my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution now before us, which sets out in a
balanced manner all these points that I have emphasized
as important.

I should like to close my statement by expressing the
readiness of the Government of Japan to actively
participate in the efforts of the Security Council and of
the international community as a whole to assist in the
peaceful resolution of the crisis in Kosovo.

