Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to express our
appreciation to Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question, which was, as
always, very helpful. We appreciate how difficult it is
for Mr. Mladenov to discharge his responsibilities in
the mission that he has been called on to carry out,
but he has continued to pass the test in terms of the
integrity with which he fulfils his obligations. We pay
tribute to him for his efforts.

The peace and security situation in the Middle East
is getting more complicated by the day. Even though the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has been defeated
and lost much of its territory, fighting still continues
unabated in Syria. In fact, in many ways, the whole
complex set of issues surrounding Syria - while the
country and its people are being devastated - often
appears bigger than Syria alone. Whether it is the Syrian
or the Yemeni crisis, there are no political solutions in
sight, and those situations remain a source of despair
for ordinary people. The humanitarian situation in the
region is appalling, and the need for international support
is enormous. The use of chemical weapons - even if
we have yet to decisively attribute responsibility and
therefore establish accountability - is becoming a
serious challenge undermining international norms.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which has been
overshadowed by other crisis situations in the region,
is now once again drawing international attention, as it
should. The recent situation in Gaza is a source of great
concern, and, unless efforts are made to de-escalate the
situation, it is bound to further complicate the peace
and security situation in the region. One would, of
course, have to be heartless not to be affected by the
loss of lives. There is a great need to do everything
necessary politically to prevent the situation in Gaza
from getting out of hand. We must take the Special
Envoy's words seriously. He said earlier with a heavy
heart that Gaza is ready to explode, words that should
indeed be heeded.

We are, of course, deeply concerned by the dire
humanitarian situation in Gaza, and every possible
effort must be made to facilitate critical humanitarian
solutions and revitalize Gaza's economy. In addition,
we should consider the need to enable the Palestinian
Authority to exercise full control over Gaza based on the
Cairo agreement. We believe that progress on that issue
will not only improve the economic and humanitarian
situation, but will also advance Palestinian unity,
which hopefully could provide impetus for the peace
process. Although the signing of the agreement was
very welcome, not much progress has been made in
terms of its implementation, and that, coupled with
the restrictions on access, continues to exacerbate the
humanitarian situation.

Ethiopia's position on the Israeli-Palestinian dispute
has always been unambiguous and very transparent. As
much as we support the right of Israel to exist in peace
and security, we also support the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people to self-determination and the
right of Palestine to exist as a free and independent
State. Accordingly, Ethiopia fully supports the goal
of two States living side by side in peace and security
as the only viable option for resolving the Israeli-
Palestinian dispute. We believe that that is not only in
the best interest of both Israel and Palestine, but it will
also significantly advance peace and security in the
Middle East region.

However, it seems to us self-evident that, lately,
moves have been made and actions have been taken
that might not contribute to making progress toward
resolving the outstanding issues on the basis of the
two-State formula. Such actions not only increase
frustration and mistrust, but are also undermining the
very viability of the two-State solution. The removal
of those long-standing obstacles is imperative in order
to create the necessary conditions for progress in
negotiations between the two parties aimed at achieving
a comprehensive, just and lasting solution on the basis
of mutual trust and a spirit of compromise, a solution
that ensures Israel's security and Palestine's aspirations
for statehood. That is what the situation calls for, and
it is also in the best interest of the two parties, as well
as that of the international community as a whole. The
latest tragedy in Gaza makes it obvious that the demand
for justice will never disappear as long as there are
objective facts on the ground that call for it.
That is why we supported the call for the
intensification and acceleration of international and
regional efforts aimed at achieving a comprehensive,
lasting and just solution. Indeed, the resumption of
negotiations requires the full support of all partners,
and all should play their part in order for any meaningful
progress to be achieved. In that context, it is incumbent
upon the Council to discharge its responsibilities and
support such efforts for the sake of peace between the
Israelis and the Palestinians and peace in the broader
Middle Eastern region. No doubt, at the end of the day,
the responsibility for making progress toward lasting
peace and mutual accommodation, based on justice and
fair play, falls on the two parties.

