Mr. Verdier (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, let me congratulate the delegation of the
Netherlands on the way in which it guided the work of
the Security Council in March. We very much welcome
the fact that Peru is presiding over the work of the
Council, and we wish it every success. We thank you,
Sir, for convening today's debate. We also thank Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing
earlier today.

Argentina aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti and would like to add the following
brief remarks.

Argentina welcomes the most recent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/241), which refers in
particular to the development of a benchmarked exit
strategy. Since the inception of the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH),
we have stressed the fact that, above and beyond
pre-set deadlines, the transition of the Mission to a
United Nations presence of another kind must be based
on the gradual fulfilment of its mandate in response
to the situation on the ground. That would prevent
the Mission's premature withdrawal, which could
jeopardize all efforts made in the past 14 years. We also
understand that the Mission should review the transition
process in close cooperation with the Government of
Haiti, while respecting its principles and priorities
and taking into consideration the principle of national
responsibility in the peacebuilding process.

Argentina underscores the fact that, when
developing exit strategy benchmarks, it is important to
harmonize the Mission's initiatives with the relevant
elements ofthe United Nations Development Assistance
Framework 2017-2021, while taking into account Haiti's
efforts to achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, in particular Sustainable Development
Goal 16.

Argentina highlights the progress made in
implementing the Mission's important mandate,
including assisting Haiti consolidating rule-of-
law institutions, strengthening and fostering the
professional development of the Haitian National
Police and promoting and protecting human rights in
the country, in spite of myriad ongoing challenges. In
that regard, we underscore the efforts made by Haitian
authorities, together with MINUJUSTH, to achieve
lasting stability and improve the country's future.
For example, considerable progress has been made in
the fight against cholera, which should continue with
the aim of eradicating the disease. We thank Special
Envoy Josette Sheeran for marshalling the resources
necessary, in particular through the Haiti Cholera
Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund, to which our
country contributed.

In addition to continuing its bilateral cooperation,
Argentina will continue to provide trained police
personnel to the Mission, to the extent possible and
based on specific requirements stipulated in the
Secretary-General's transition strategy and the strategic
development plan of the Haitian National Police for
2017-2021. We take note of the re-establishment of the
country's armed formed forces in line with the sovereign
decisions taken by the Haitian Government on security-
and defence-related issues. We are confident that it
will not jeopardize the effective implementation of the
strategic development plan of the National Police.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Argentina's
commitment to the Haitian people and to acknowledge
the work of the police and civilian personnel of
MINUJUSTH in fulfilment of its noble mission
of assisting Haiti on its path to sustainable peace
and development.

