Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Allow me first of all,
Mr. Minister, to thank you for presiding over the work
of the Security Council today. We were also very
appreciative of your personal presence during the open
debate on small arms and the meeting on regional
approaches to conflict management in Africa. Your
personal contribution has been invaluable and
underscores the commitment of Colombia to global
disarmament and international peace and security.

Let me also express our heartiest congratulations
to Ambassador Valdivieso on the professional and
exemplary manner in which he guided the work of the
Council in both informal and formal meetings, making
the Colombian presidency a very successful one
indeed.

The easy-going qualities that usually characterize
the month of August at the United Nations, and in the
Security Council in particular, gave way to some very
important debates in the Council under the Colombian
presidency. Indeed, we had very useful informal
consultations on the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and on Liberia, as well as an important and
urgent public meeting on the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine.

We regret, however, that despite the very wide
participation and the intense debate on the latter issue,
the Council was unable to agree on an outcome
document. That is indeed very unfortunate given the
gravity of the situation on the ground. We really have
to address this issue in the future.

We commend you, Sir, for including in the
programme of work for the month of August a number
of issues that have required the continued attention of
the Council. Issues pertaining to the situations in Sierra
Leone, East Timor, Burundi, Kosovo, Afghanistan and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo were discussed,
and the Council was updated on the latest situation in
those countries. Indeed, my delegation favours such an
approach, where the change in presidency is seen as the
continuation of a process aimed at advancing the
Council's action on various issues rather than as a
specific, separate and isolated event.

We support the idea of new approaches and new
topics that can improve our working methods and
enrich our deliberations. That is why we would like to
place on record our appreciation to you, Sir, for
holding the open debate on small arms, which followed
closely the United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. The open debate was a very good opportunity
to focus our discussions on some specific aspects of the
proliferation and circulation of small arms and light
weapons insofar as they have an impact upon the
initiatives of the Security Council in the field of
conflict prevention and resolution. We are pleased that
our discussions led to the adoption of a presidential
statement earlier today.

We now look forward to the report of the
Secretary-General on ways and means by which the
Council may contribute to addressing the question of
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in
situations under its consideration.

I also wish to commend you, Sir, for the initiative
of organizing the meeting on regional approaches to
conflict management in Africa, held at the Princeton
Club. That meeting proved to be extremely interesting
and most useful. The participation of members of
academia and others allowed for an open, candid and
frank discussion on the subject, which would not have
been possible in this Chamber or in our own
consultation room. The meeting provided us with new
perspectives on approaches to conflicts in Africa,
which we hope the Council will take into account in its
future decisions.

We also appreciate the opportunity, which the
Colombian presidency provided, for a very fruitful
discussion on a comprehensive approach to the
problem in Afghanistan. We hope that a consensus will
emerge on the necessity to address this problem in a
holistic manner.

The informal meeting that we had yesterday
afternoon enabled Council members to be briefed on
the exchange of views between some Council members
and the Open-ended Working Group on the Question of
Equitable Representation on and Increase in the
Membership of the Security Council and Other Matters
related to the Security Council, which took place on 13
June 2001. That briefing led to some very passionate
discussions among members, which we hope will
continue in the future. The topics discussed yesterday
included simple issues such the speakers list and
important ones such as the question of the transparency
and accountability of the Security Council. It is indeed
very important that we create a culture of learning
through self-criticism in the Council, which would
make our work more effective and would enhance our
credibility vis-a-vis the broader membership of the
United Nations.

I also wish to thank you warmly, Mr. President,
for the Colombian hospitality that we have enjoyed
throughout August. The coffee and sweets provided by
the Colombian mission helped stimulate and sweeten
the deliberations in the Council. We are grateful for
that.

Finally, I wish to express our sincere thanks and
appreciation to the whole staff of the Colombian
Mission, and in particular the coordinator, Ambassador
Franco, for their very hard work and professionalism in
making the Colombian presidency a success.

