Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for taking the initiative to organize this
important debate on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
and for providing a valuable concept paper (S/2010/9)
to facilitate the discussions. Nigeria is pleased to have
the representatives of various international
organizations, whose activities have greatly inspired
world peace and security, share their perspectives with
us. In particular, I appreciate the presence of the
Secretary-General and his very useful contribution to
this debate. Let me also acknowledge the presence of
the Deputy Secretary-General, Mrs. Asha-Rose Migiro,
at this forum.

Let me take this opportunity to express Nigeria's
solidarity with the Government and people of Haiti
over the tragic earthquake that took place yesterday.
Our thoughts and prayers are with all the victims of
that disaster, including the United Nations personnel.

This debate is coming right on the heels of the
commencement of the Year of Peace and Security in
Africa, as declared by the African Union. The
proclamation of 2010 as the Year of Peace and Security
in Africa was made against the backdrop of the sober
acknowledgment of the scourge of conflicts and the
shortcomings and errors in resolving them.

Nigeria is particularly pleased with the depth of
cooperation that exists between the United Nations and
the African Union, and welcomes the intention to
consider further steps to promote closer cooperation
between the two organizations. We note with
satisfaction that, since the cooperation began,
significant strides have been made in conflict
resolution, peacekeeping, post-conflict peacebuilding
and economic reconstruction in numerous African
countries. That is in consonance with one of the key
objectives of Africa's Year of Peace and Security,
which is to create a momentum for a more enabling
social and political environment to emerge in Africa by
the end of this year. In that connection, we recall the
historic meeting of the Security Council in Nairobi,
Kenya, in 2006 and its positive contribution to the
signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement on the
Sudan.

While emphasizing the need to consolidate those
gains, Nigeria believes that regional bodies like the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) should assume leadership,
with the international community lending the requisite
support for the maintenance of regional peace and
security. Those organizations are better placed in terms
of geographical proximity, political and cultural
familiarity with local conditions, and shared
experiences with regard to regional peace and security
initiatives.

Indeed, the response of ECOWAS to the
situations in Guinea, Guinea-Bissau and the Republic
of the Niger is illustrative of that potential. Thus, we
would like to emphasize the need for the United
Nations to intensify such regional initiatives and to
accelerate its efforts to implement the United Nations-
African Union Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme
for the African Union. More strident efforts are also
required to operationalize the African Union Standby
Force and the Continental Early Warning System.
Nigeria recognizes that there are competing
demands and needs not only in Africa and with regard
to peace and security, but also in other regions and on
myriad issues. Therefore, we believe that it is
important to consider the following: first, prioritize
actions; secondly, adopt innovative approaches; thirdly,
assess impact and sustainability; and fourthly, promote
the complementarity of roles in the promotion of peace
and security.

This will require greater partnerships,
inclusiveness and purposeful leadership. We believe
that there is scope in the cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union to incorporate
these vital elements. Our best intentions would,
however, amount to nothing if we failed to provide
adequate, flexible and predictable funding for
peacekeeping operations in Africa.

It is also necessary to coordinate efforts between
the United Nations and regional organizations. Indeed,
the integration of Africa into the international financial
and trading system as a partner is imperative. We admit
that the continent cannot go it alone in its quest to
achieve sustainable development. Nigeria strongly
supports closer collaboration between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
and we would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your draft presidential statement. Nigeria endorses
it and we hope that it will be adopted at the end of this
debate.

