Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea):
Mr. President, let me begin by commending you for
your leadership in the Security Council this past
month. I would also like to thank Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello for his useful briefing. We also welcome the
presence of Senior Minister Ramos-Horta and the
briefing he has given us.

In the process of helping East Timor achieve
independence, we have witnessed several landmark
events. Following the successful completion of the
Constituent Assembly elections last August, we now
have a number of other critical tasks before us, such as
the presidential elections in April and the independence
celebrations in May.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute to the staff of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and the East Timorese people for their hard work in
preparing those political processes. We hope that the
East Timorese people, despite some reported rivalries
among political groups, will once again demonstrate
their capacity for democracy by smoothly adopting a
Constitution and holding peaceful and democratic
presidential elections.

We are eager to witness and participate in the
historic celebration of a new nation's independence,
and my delegation fully endorses the Secretary-
General's recommendation to extend UNTAET's
mandate until that time.

Regarding the restructuring of UNTAET, we
welcome the detailed downsizing plan that will
continue to be implemented until independence, as well
as the general picture that has been painted of the post-
UNTAET mission. In accordance with the plan, the
Republic of Korea's military battalion successfully
completed its one-and-a-half-year mission in the
eastern area and was recently redeployed to the
Oecussi enclave. The Korean battalion will do its best
to ensure the security of the new mission area and to
promote the development of the area together with a
Japanese engineering company, which is expected to
arrive there soon.

With respect to the United Nations mission in
East Timor after independence, we fully agree with the
Secretary-General's basic assessment that the
continued assistance of the international community
will be required, considering the still weak security
environment of East Timor and its fragile
administrative and economic foundations. In keeping
with the East Timorese people's efforts to become self-
reliant in the shortest possible time, a gradual exit
strategy for the United Nations peacekeeping mission
should be planned and implemented in a way that will
not diminish all the progress that has been achieved up
to now. We hope that the planners can work out a
downsizing programme that strikes a good balance
between the United Nations assessed contributions and
the roles of bilateral and multilateral donors. We look
forward to seeing another report of the Secretary-
General before the termination of the UNTAET
mandate, containing further specific proposals for the
mandate and structure of the successor mission of
UNTAET.

Before concluding, I would like to emphasize two
points. First, a slackening of resolve among donors or
the overly speedy disengagement of the international
community in East Timor would be detrimental and
must be forestalled. Secondly, the long-term viability
and progress of East Timor will very much depend on
its relations with its neighbours and other regional and
international friends.

We will continue to follow the developments in
East Timor with great optimism and anticipation. The
Government and the private sector of the Republic of
Korea are committed to developing strong political and
economic ties with the democratic republic of East
Timor.

