Mr. Mawe (Ireland): We warmly welcome your
initiative in scheduling today's debate, Mr. President.
It provides a timely opportunity for considering the
evolution of regional partnerships in support of United
Nations peacekeeping. My remarks will focus on two
main areas - cooperation between the United Nations
and the European Union (EU), and United Nations-
African cooperation.

At the outset, I should say that Ireland aligns itself
with the statement made by Mr. Popowski on behalf of
the EU and its member States

Under-Secretary-General Ladsous recently described
peacekeeping as being in a time of partnerships.
Certainly, the collective enterprise that is peacekeeping
involves the cultivation of a network of different
partnerships - partnerships between Member States,
the United Nations system, host Governments and,
increasingly, regional organizations. The growing
participation of regional and subregional organizations
is a significant development, and was the theme of
a successful seminar hosted by Ireland during our
presidency of the EU last year.

In our eyes, greater regional participation is a
very welcome development. It is a concrete expression
of the sharing of a collective security burden. More
regional involvement can mean that more local and
regional expertise and understanding can be made
available. It can mean greater regional ownership,
responsibility and commitment to addressing security
challenges. Some regional organizations offer the
potential for responding rapidly; others provide critical
niche capabilities, and through its participation in EU-
and NATO-led missions, Ireland has seen first-hand
the success of regional partnerships in peacekeeping
from both perspectives. But it is essential that a
commensurate capacity exist or be created to ensure
that mandates delivered by regional organizations are
delivered effectively. That is why, to give just one
example, predictable and sustainable financing is so
crucial to ensuring the success of African Union (AU)
peace operations. The real challenge in nurturing
strategic partnerships remains the delivery of political
and operational results.

Ireland is a long-time and prominent supporter
of closer EU-United Nations cooperation in peace
operations. In terms ofinternational peace and security,
for us that is the paramount strategic partnership. The
exit of many European States from the International
SecurityAssistance Force offers theprospectofabroader
European return to United Nations peacekeeping. As a
Member State that has maintained a consistent presence
in United Nations peacekeeping operations, we are
pleased to encourage and facilitate this development
in any way we can. That is one reason why, this
month, my delegation convened a panel discussion
on command-and-control arrangements in United
Nations peacekeeping. It was designed to showcase
the improvements that have been made in recent years,
while also exploring ways to address some outstanding
challenges, including ensuring high-quality leadership,
improving mission planning, ensuring accountability
and minimizing national caveats. And so we could not
agree more with the message of the President's concept
note (S/2014/478, annex) for today's debate, to the
effect that effective command and control of operations
underpins both their success and their credibility.

Turning to Africa, today there are many ways in
which African organizations, regional and subregional,
can contribute to peace operations. Two notable ones are
through high-intensity operations and surge capacity.
African willingness to pursue high-intensity operations
in Africa is incontrovertible. We have seen the
commitment of South African, Tanzanian and Malawian
troops in the decisive Force Intervention Brigade of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. And we readily
acknowledge the sacrifice of the soldiers of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), including troops
from Uganda, Burundi, Kenya, Djibouti and Ethiopia.
AMISOM. has stayed the course when a force from
outside the region might well not have done so. It also
undertakes tasks, such as offensive and counter-terrorist
operations, that the United Nations does not do. But we
also acknowledge that AMISOM, as a contingent-led
mission, poses particular coordination challenges, and
that the presence of the two missions, United Nations
and AU, demands heightened coordination if political
and strategic coherence is to be achieved.

Given the evident political commitment, African
rapid-response or surge capacity also clearly holds
promise. The development of African regional standby
brigades is a welcome initiative, particularly in a
frustrating context in which others have proved very
reluctant to use their own rapid-reaction capabilities.
But we must also be honest enough to recognize some
important general constraints. While missions from
the region offer the promise of greater acceptance,
they can also pose a risk of partisanship. Regional and
subregional organizations, either because of a lack of
resources or the absence of collective will, have also at
times shown themselves unable to act decisively.

We strongly support all efforts to enhance
cooperation between the African Union, the European
Union and the United Nations. Effective AU-EU-
United Nations triangular cooperation will be critical
to successful peacekeeping operations in future years
in Africa. On the specific issue of planning, we also
agree strongly on the need to improve joint planning.
We welcome the progress made in this area between
the AU and the United Nations in Somalia; the joint
planning between the Economic Community of West
African States and the AU on Mali; and the current
coordination between the AU and the United Nations on
the transfer of authority in the Central African Republic
between the African-led International Support Mission
in the Central African Republic and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic.

Nationally, Ireland makes a significant contribution
to the training of African security forces, both through
participation in EU missions in Somalia and Mali and
on a bilateral basis, in which we have helped to train
Ugandan police in community policing and the South
Sudanese police in conventional munitions disposal,
landmine clearance and specialist search awareness.
We also provide training for modest numbers ofAfrican
military and police personnel at our United Nations
training school in Ireland. And we are pleased to
support the elaboration of United Nations standards for
peacekeeping operations as part of the United Nations
military units manuals project, and to provide expertise
for the Working Groups on military police and special
forces.

We are certainly in a time of partnerships; indeed,
we have been for quite some time now. We can expect
that partnerships will feature as a prominent theme
in the review of peacekeeping announced by the
Secretary-General on 11 June. Ireland looks forward
greatly to making a positive, meaningful contribution
to the review, be it in support to a particular area of
policy development or in some other way. And we look
forward to continuing to make our contribution to
various peacekeeping partnerships.

