Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I thank the
Rwandan presidency for having organized today's
meeting. We thank the Permanent Representative of
Bangladesh, Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul Momen,
and appreciate his dynamic and successful stewardship
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in 2012. We
also thank the Permanent Representative of Croatia,
Ambassador Ranko Vilovie, for his briefing and wish
him success in his role as Chairman of the PBC for
2013.

Peacebuilding has become an integral part of
the United Nations architecture for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Embedding
peacebuilding tasks in early phases of United Nations
interventions and missions fosters stability and prevents
relapses. Last year, the Security Council's thematic
meetings and the PBC's own work led to coherent,
efficient and predictable responses by the United
Nations to peacebuilding in the countries emerging
from conflict.

The efforts of the Council and the PBC are focused
on the following three concepts: first, prioritizing
targeted areas of post-conflict peacebuilding to focus
on security sector reform, the rule of law, local capacity-
building and economic revitalization; secondly, forging
a coherent and seamless response to conflicts by refining
the nexus between peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
while drawing on comparative advantage of the various
United Nations entities, with a view to ensuring stable
transition, consolidation and sustainable peace; and
thirdly, sharpening the emphasis on development
aspects to move post-conflict peacebuilding towards
recovery and socioeconomic development.

By virtue of its unique composition, the PBC is
well placed to advise the Security Council on policy
developments, institutional consolidation and country-
specific engagements with respect to post-conflict
peacebuilding. For the Security Council, the advisory
role of the PBC is pertinent in the context of both
specific situations and thematic issues.

There is a need to harness the PBC's role in the
work of the Security Council, particularly while
conceiving peacebuilding mandates. In January, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2086 (2013), which
underscored the centrality of the PBC as an advisory
and resource mobilization body for peacebuilding. The
resolution identifies priority areas of peacebuilding in
a multidimensional peacekeeping mandate. It clarifies
and reinforces the relationships between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. The resolution helps build stronger
partnerships for a collective response to challenges to
peacekeeping, peacemaking and peacebuilding. While
steering resolution 2086 (2013) in the Council, we were
guided by our experience as a founding member of the
PBC and a leading troop contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping.

Since the creation of the PBC in 2006, we have
learned the value of aligning the strategic framework
of peacebuilding with respective national priorities
and policies. All peacebuilding endeavours should
be under complete national ownership and tailored
to local requirements. The gender perspective is very
important in peacebuilding. Lasting peace will remain
elusive without improving the conditions of women and
other vulnerable segments of society. For a long-term
economic recovery and social cohesion, women's access
to health, education and entrepreneurship is essential.

We value the work of the country-specific
configurations of the PBC. Those configurations are
taking important initiatives in resource mobilization
through international financial institutions (IFIs) and
non-United Nations sources of funding. The success
of a country-specific configuration is ensured by its
ability to fine-tune its contributions as dynamics of
a post-conflict situation evolve. We support regular
interaction among the respective configurations, the
PBC Organizational Committee and the Security
Council so that lessons learned may be shared and
coherence promoted.

Post-conflictpeacebuilding should instil confidence
and provide tangible benefits to the countries on the
agenda. Peacebuilding assistance must be distinct from
classical models of development assistance, both in
terms of target sectors and conditions attached to the
funding. As funding for peacebuilding increasingly
taps into international financial institutions, we
should remain sensitive to the distinction between
peacebuilding and development needs.

The engagement of IFIs with peacebuilding does
not diminish the importance of the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF). The catalytic role of the PBF in attracting other
sources of funding makes it an essential component of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture.

Pakistan has been contributing to the PBF. We
agree with the apt characterization of contributions to
the PBF as an "investment in peace". Member States
and the Secretariat need to provide the PBF with the
resources and operational flexibility to make it more
efficient. Besides finances, peacebuilding initiatives
require adequate human resources. The Secretary-
General's initiative on civilian capacities is important
in identifying expertise to be tailored to specific needs
in the context of for post-conflict peacebuilding.

The civilian capabilities process should stand up
to intergovernmental scrutiny and avoid duplication
of roles, and it must be compliant with United
Nations rules and procedures. As a member of the
Organizational Committee of the PBC, we reiterate our
strong commitment to and support for United Nations
peacebuilding endeavours. We share the hope that our
collective peacebuilding efforts will benefit conflict-
affected peoples in different parts of the world.

