Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
High Representative Valentin lnzko for his objective
briefing and presence here today. We express our
deep appreciation for him personally and lend our full
support to his Office in maintaining stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

We recall that the High Representative has
been equipped by the international community with
instruments commensurate with his responsibility:
the Bonn powers, which should be used if the situation
requires. We also reiterate that there are clear conditions
set by the Peace Implementation Council for the closure
of the Office of the High Representative, namely, the
5+2 agenda. Although those are well within the realm
of possibility, they have regrettably not yet been met.

To start our assessment of the current situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina on a positive note, we commend
the continued support of the political leadership of the
country for European integration, as evidenced by
the submission of over 650 responses to the European
Commission questionnaire. It is a genuine sign that
the European course is strong and remains unchanged
after the elections. We believe that it would also be
beneficial if the same level of united commitment were
shown with respect to fulfilling the conditions for
the activation of the membership action plan, so that
the stability to come with the European integration is
eventually anchored in transatlantic security.

Many of the pertinent issues will be voiced in a
common European Union statement to be delivered
later during this meeting. Poland fully aligns itself
with that statement. Allow me, however, to underscore
the following issues that are of particular concern and
deserve to be raised in this forum.

Seven months after the elections in Bosnia and
Herzegovina there is still no Government, neither State
nor Federation. We call on the political parties to forge
ahead with the Government formation with a sense
of urgency. It is of the utmost importance to set aside
minor political considerations and implement the will
of the people by creating a strong executive. Every day
that the provisional measures are prolonged, the trust of
the electorate further erodes.

Moreover, there are unrelenting threats to the
territorial integrity of the country posed by both
words and actions. In fact, the distinction between
words and actions is often rendered meaningless. The
repeated open calls for secession are actions, in and of
themselves, that defy every letter of the Dayton Peace
Agreement and pose a direct threat to peace, as does
defying State institutions and the judiciary and usurping
the prerogatives of the central Government by entities,
in addition to the creation of de facto armed forces by
organizing police reserves with long-barrel arms. We
have seen in history what such a mix of pernicious
rhetoric with under-the-radar armaments may lead to.
We know how it may end if unchecked.

There is also the issue of the rule of law. It is a
prerequisite for citizens' trust in State institutions and
the mortar that holds the societal structure together.
Political elites, if they wish to be worthy of their
name, must do everything in their power to uphold
and promote the rule of law, stamp out corruption and
fight organized crime. They cannot act and be seen as
defenders of narrow vested interests.

Lastly - and I want this point to reverberate
especially strongly - we find the continuous attempts
to rewrite history unacceptable. The recent decision
of the Republika Srpska to appoint a commission to
reopen the interpretation of the events of the Srebrenica
massacre is only latest such example. Let it be stated
clearly: there is no room for reinterpretation. Survivors
have been heard and evidence gathered, studied and
accepted. Perpetrators have been brought to justice
by international and domestic courts. The shedding
of responsibility is corrosive and closes the door
to reconciliation.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that Poland is vitally
interested in seeing Bosnia and Herzegovina as a
united, prosperous and modern democratic country,
strongly anchored in Euro-Atlantic structures. We have
been with Bosnia and Herzegovina since the beginning,
and we will continue our active support as we have
done thus far.

