Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General not only for
his very sobering briefing, but also for all his work on
Libya. Through him, we would pass on our thanks to
his team.

The first point I would like to make is to strongly
condemn the escalation of violence in and around
Tripoli that has caused many casualties and endangered
the lives of innocent civilians. That does not help the
Libyan people, and it also does not help the cause of
Libya's stability. While the results of the mediation
efforts reached yesterday in Tripoli by the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) are very
welcome, we hope that they will help us to de-escalate
the violence and ensure the protection of civilians.
However, I think from what the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General said, it is very clear that
there is a lot more to be done and that there are a lot of
underlying factors that really need to be tackled.

I want to set out our very strong support for the
Special Representative. We need a durable cessation
of hostilities in Tripoli. That is a critical step to
advancing the political process, in accordance with
the United Nations action plan. We call on all parties
to cease hostilities and immediately abide by the
ceasefire agreement brokered by the United Nations.
We reiterate our support for the Presidency Council
and the Government of National Accord as they work
with the United Nations to promote reconciliation and
a Libyan-led political process. That is underscored
even more by the events in Tripoli. A more inclusive
political statement would help bring greater stability to
Libya. That is a truism, but the whole point of truisms
is that they are correct. The Secretary-General's
report (S/2018/780) of 24 August on UNSMIL rightly
highlights the need for progress on the implementation
of the United Nations action plan.

I also want to express the United Kingdom's support
for elections this year. Elections are an important part
of Libya's transition, but it will be necessary to ensure
that sufficient political security and that technical
preparations be made, so that they have the effect of
uniting Libya. It will be important to ensure that a
robust legal framework is in place and that there is
sufficient political consensus to avoid exacerbating
existing divisions in Libya.

The counter-terrorism threat is, of course, a very
important issue, but Ijust wanted to register our concern
at the humanitarian situation in Derna, to emphasize
the need to allow humanitarian access for the civilian
population, and to say that those responsible for human
rights abuses will need to be held to account. Based on
that, we have a number of action points that we would
like to call for today.

The first call is on all Libyan parties to refrain from
actions that undermine the ceasefire announcement,
jeopardize the security of civilians or set back Libyan
efforts to advance the political process. The second
is to call on the House of Representatives to deliver
progress on a constitutional basis for the elections.
What we heard from the Special Representative about
the problem was frankly dismaying. Failure to sort that
out will cause further stagnation and the only people
who will lose are the Libyan people. We call on Libya's
leaders to work together to address the suffering of the
Libyan people while the election preparations are under
way. They urgently need to agree economic reforms and
unify Libya's economic institutions to ensure a more
equitable distribution of wealth across the country. We
also encourage progress on the Prime Minister's request
to enhance transparency in the Central Bank of Libya.

Finally, I should like to say a word about oil. We
welcome the resolution of recent events in the oil
crescent, and we welcome the fact that Libya's National
Oil Corporation is continuing its vital work on behalf of
all Libyans. The priority now is to repair infrastructure,
honour contractual obligations and, having lifted the
state of emergency in eastern Libya, to restore oil
exports and production.

It is very important that the Council remain in very
close touch with the Special Representative, given the
situation on the ground. We are very happy to do that
if Council members would find it helpful. We are also
ready to circulate a draft press statement.

