Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We thank the delegation
of the United Kingdom for requesting this meeting,
and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for
his briefing. We also express our appreciation to
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners
for their selfless service in Yemen under extremely
difficult circumstances.

The humanitarian crisis in Yemen remains a source
of great concern. Millions are on the brink of famine. In
addition, the conflict in Al-Hudaydah governorate has
escalated further as renewed fighting has moved closer
to Al-Hudaydah city. With the situation deteriorating
dramatically, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs warns that the recent escalation
of fighting has left the lives of hundreds of thousands in
an extremely dangerous situation.

We heard it loud and clear earlier from Under-
Secretary-General Mark Lowcock that Yemen is facing
the worst humanitarian crisis. Almost every day,
millions struggle to survive and depend on humanitarian
assistance to obtain basic needs and services. The
devaluation of the Yemeni rial, rising food prices,
non-payment of public salaries and a cholera outbreak
have contributed to further worsening the humanitarian
situation in the country. As has been repeatedly stated
by the United Nations and its humanitarian partners,
Al-Hudaydah port is a lifeline for millions who depend
on humanitarian assistance.

In that regard, we appeal to all parties to do
everything possible so that the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners can have safe, sustained
and unimpeded humanitarian access to reach all
Yemenis in need. We also stress the importance of
protecting civilians and civilian facilities. In addition,
for the sake and consideration of civilians who have
suffered so much, we call on the parties to exercise
restraint to avoid civilian casualties. The launching of
missiles by the Houthis against the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and attacks on commercial vessels are also
counterproductive and unacceptable. We condemn
such acts.

It is indeed heartbreaking to note that despite the
continued efforts of the Special Envoy to revive the
political talks, the fighting in Yemen is escalating,
affecting civilians and the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. While urging all parties to cooperate with
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners,
we underscore that the ultimate solution to end the
unspeakable tragedy in Yemen is a comprehensive
political dialogue that meets the legitimate aspirations
of Yemenis and addresses the security concerns of
regional actors. In that regard, we support the tireless
diplomatic efforts of the Special Envoy, who has
continued his shuttle diplomacy to bring all parties
back to the negotiating table.

In conclusion, it is imperative for all parties to engage
with the Special Envoy in good faith and constructively,
without any preconditions. That is what the people of
Yemen expect from all parties. We also believe that the
Security Council and countries with influence should
extend their backing to the endeavours of the Special
Envoy as he continues to facilitate a political solution in
accordance with relevant Council resolutions, including
resolution 2216 (2015). Lasting peace in Yemen will be
possible only through an inclusive political process
facilitated by the United Nations.

