Mr. Jegermanis (Latvia): Latvia has aligned
itself with the statement made on behalf of the
European Union. However, we still feel the need to
underline our position on this critical issue. As a
country acceding to the European Union (EU), we
share the EU's common objective of full and effective
disarmament of Iraq of its weapons of mass
destruction, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolution 1441
(2002).

Latvia would like to thank Mr. ElBaradei and Mr.
Blix for their reports and for their work in monitoring
Iraq's compliance with its disarmament obligations.

Latvia evaluates these reports keeping in mind
that the Security Council and the international
community have unanimously demanded immediate,
full, active and unconditional cooperation on the part
of Iraq.

Even taking into account such recent steps by
Baghdad as the destruction of proscribed Al Samoud 2
missiles, we have to conclude that Iraq has not taken
the strategic decision to disarm and to cooperate fully
with the United Nations.

Four months ago, Security Council resolution
1441 (2002) offered Iraq a last chance to fulfil its
earlier commitments and to disarm. Unfortunately, Iraq
is continuing its policy of deception. Problems persist
with interviewing weapons scientists and technicians,
no substantive new information has been provided on
the stocks of VX gas and anthrax and we have just
learned that Iraq has failed to declare a remotely
piloted aircraft.

We agree with the conclusion of Mr. Blix that
neither the enhancement of inspections nor the
extension of the inspection time-frame can substitute
for active cooperation by Iraq. The inspectors have
earned our admiration for their courage. However, the
success of the United Nations is to be measured by the
degree of Iraq's cooperation and commitment to
disarm. The limited progress achieved until now is the
result of strong diplomatic pressure backed by military
force. It falls short of satisfying the demands of the
international community.

The European Council Conclusions of 17
February state that the unity of the international
community is vital in dealing with the disarmament of
Iraq. Today it is more important than ever before. If we
are to achieve the peaceful disarmament of Iraq, we
need to increase diplomatic pressure on Saddam
Hussain.

Therefore, Latvia supports the adoption by the
Security Council of the draft resolution co-sponsored
by the United Kingdom, the United States and Spain,
which would set a clear deadline for Iraq to comply
with its obligations. The unanimous adoption of this
draft resolution would ensure the continued credibility
of the United Nations and would send a clear and
unequivocal message to Saddam Hussain that the time
for taking the last opportunity is limited and, in the
case of Iraq's failure, serious consequences will apply.

