Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I thank the
Australian presidency for organizing this briefing
on the evolution of sanctions. I would also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman and
INTERPOL Secretary General Jiirgen Stock for their
informative briefings.

We share the view that, together with Peacekeeping
Operations, sanctions are a useful tool for the Security
Council in achieving the objectives of the Charter of the
United Nations, especially in maintaining international
peace and security. The increase in Security Council
sanctions resolutions over the past two decades
demonstrates their necessity and the international
community's support for their utilization in response
to threats to peace and security. We emphasize that all
Member States are obligated to implement Security
Council resolutions in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations.

As mentioned in the concept note before us
(S/2014/793, annex) and in the briefings, today's
sanctions regimes are evolving and defined by their
targeted application. They stand in contrast to the
comprehensive trade and economic embargoes of the
past. Sanctions are now applied not only to assist conflict
resolution, but also to address a wide variety of security
challenges, including counter-terrorism, violations
of international human rights and humanitarian law,
and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
However, despite the development of sanctions by the
Council, gaps still remain.

The level of understanding of sanctions and the
implementation capabilities of Member States, as well
as the resources of the Secretariat, seem to lag behind
this evolving trend. With regard to the Security Council
sanctions, we would like to emphasize the following
several points.

First, Security Council sanctions must be effective.
If we fail to ensure the effectiveness of sanctions, they
lose their raison d'etre. By their nature, sanctions are
a means to achieve a specific goal. We should bear in
mind that this can only be achieved when sanctions are
effective enough.

Secondly, the Security Council must improve
Member States' understanding of the obligations
imposed by Security Council sanctions. Security
Council resolutions adopted under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations are binding, but this
does not in itself automatically lead to implementation.
Sanctions will only be effective when implementation
by Member States and cooperation by international
and regional organizations, as well as from the private
sector converge. In this vein, the sanctions committees
should utilize more open briefings to explain the
sanction regimes to the broader United Nations
membership and facilitate the exchange of views. The
committees and their groups of experts should engage
in proactive outreach to further clarify the measures to
various actors on the ground and to hear their input on
challenges they face or good practices that they may
have developed.

Thirdly, the Republic of Korea shares the view that
there is a growing need to support capacity-building of
Member States in order to assist implementation efforts.
Such support is necessary because States face different
challenges and operate in different environments.
While the responsibility to implement sanctions lies
with Member States, the sanctions committees and the
Secretariat have important roles in assisting Member
States to fulfil their obligations.

Today's briefing is a part of an ongoing process
to calibrate and strengthen sanctions implementation
as an important policy tool of the Security Council.
We look forward to continued consultations among
actors, including the Security Council, its subsidiary
committees, the groups of experts, the Secretariat and
relevant international organizations and civil society
with a view to enhancing Security Council sanctions
as an effective tool for maintaining international peace
and security.

