Mr. Aranibar Quiroga (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President, I would like to express my
delegation's thanks to you for having convened this
meeting of the Security Council to consider the
situation in the sister republic of Haiti. We welcome
the presence, at the beginning of this meeting, of the
Secretary-General, as well as that of the Foreign
Ministers of Jamaica and the Bahamas.

Bolivia has already expressed its deep concern
regarding the serious situation in Haiti at the General
Assembly meeting convened by its President,
Mr. Julian Hunte, to hear the report of the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs. At this time, we
would like to emphasize the significance of having this
item addressed in the Security Council, since we
consider that the situation of Haiti deserves speedy and
determined action on the part of this important body
entrusted with the preservation of peace and security.

The international community has also expressed
its concern in statements and through the steps taken
by regional organizations such as the Organization of
American States (OAS) and the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM). For its part, the United Nations has
announced the appointment of a Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. Unfortunately, all of these
steps have, as yet, had very limited results.

The Security Council must play a decisive role in
finding solutions to the worsening of the Haitian crisis
by taking urgent and agreed upon steps and measures
to deal with this situation, which could lead to even
more serious consequences. We are thus faced with the
moral and political imperative to do our utmost to
avoid any more suffering on the part of the Haitian
people. The action of the Council, in our opinion, must
be directed towards finding solutions in the following
four areas: political, security, humanitarian, and
economic and financial.

On the political front, a dialogue must begin as
soon as possible among the Government, the
opposition and the rebel groups to find a peaceful,
institutional and negotiated outcome to this crisis. We
do understand that the situation is complex, that
positions have become extreme, that tempers are
running high, but efforts must be redoubled on the
political front before it is too late.

Insofar as security is concerned, there is talk
about sending a quick response multinational force to
stabilize the country and, in particular, to avoid further
clashes and suffering on the part of the Haitian people.
We would View with interest and would support a
Security Council decision to create and dispatch a
multinational peace and stability force to Haiti. The
Haitian Government has appealed for assistance from
the international community and a response must be
given.

The precarious situation in which humanitarian
assistance is being carried out is also cause for great
concern. We understand the difficulty of the prevailing
conditions and we support those organizations that are
making heroic efforts in the field to bring food and
medicine to the neediest people. It is essential to appeal
to the international community, to Governments, to
institutions and to governmental and non-governmental
organizations to speed up and increase humanitarian
assistance. We are facing here a situation that also calls
for urgent and immediate action.

The fourth front, to which notably scant attention
has been paid, is the economic, social and institutional
development of Haiti. It is important to rely on an
emergency plan from the economic, financial and
institutional point of view, followed by a medium and
long-term plan that will ensure economic, social and
environmental development. A solution to the political,
security and humanitarian assistance crises, however
vital at this time, will nonetheless not suffice in the
medium and long term. A true, viable and feasible
plan, along with the necessary resources, is needed that
would give real opportunities to all sectors of the
population and would entail new activities and raise
new hope. Otherwise, we will again be faced with a
situation that has all-too-familiar consequences.

The international community, particularly the
Latin American and Caribbean region, expresses its
deep concern for the fate of the sister people of Haiti
and stands united in calling on the Council to take the
necessary steps to achieve a political and diplomatic
solution that is peaceful and institutional, thereby
avoiding further suffering on the part of the noble
Haitian people. These measures must be taken with the
urgency that the situation requires.

