Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
Today's draft resolution of the Security Council was
prepared by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the G-8 on
the basis of the principles for a political settlement and
peace plan adopted by the leadership of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, as well as of the relevant
provisions of previous Security Council decisions. The draft
resolution's main significance lies in the fact that it restores
the Kosovo settlement to the political track along with the
central role of the United Nations. This is the only possible
way to surmount the crisis in and around the Yugoslav
province of Kosovo. It is precisely such an approach to a
solution of the Kosovo problem that Russia has always and
consistently advocated, seeking the earliest possible end to
the unlawful military actions of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) against Yugoslavia as an absolute
condition for a political settlement and for overcoming the
humanitarian catastrophe.

Russia has strongly condemned the NATO aggression
against a sovereign State. This action on the part of the
Alliance, which was undertaken in violation of the United
Nations Charter and in circumvention of the Security
Council, has severely destabilized the entire system of
international relations based on the primacy of international
law. The humanitarian crisis in Kosovo was transformed
by the NATO bombing into the most serious humanitarian
catastrophe, encompassing not only Kosovo, but all
Yugoslavia and the Balkans as a whole. The irreparable
harm done to the social and economic development of all
Balkan States and to the environment is enormous.

We cannot close our eyes to violations of
international humanitarian law, wherever they may take
place. However, the tragic consequences of the NATO air
strikes clearly show that such violations cannot be
countered by even greater lawlessness and the wanton use
of violence. It is essential to fight for respect of human
rights and norms of international humanitarian law, but
solely through political and legal methods on the firm
basis of the United Nations Charter and the relevant
multilateral instruments.

We are pleased that the members of NATO have
finally recognized the utter futility of the war they have
unleashed and come to understand that there is no
alternative to respecting the Charter prerogatives of the
Security Council as the body charged with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security. This insight, won at such a heavy price, is
clearly reflected in the draft resolution, which puts an end
to the military actions of NATO and establishes genuine
conditions for the return of refugees and displaced
persons.

In addition to clearly reaffirming the commitment of
all States to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the draft resolution
authorizes the deployment in Kosovo, under United
Nations auspices, of international civil and security
presences with a clearly formulated, concrete mandate.
The activities of both presences are to be carried out
under the thorough political control of the Security
Council, to which the Secretary-General will regularly
submit reports on the course of the entire operation. As a
matter of principle, it is important that the obligations of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, who
is to be appointed in consultation with the Security
Council, should include the overall coordination of all
international efforts in Kosovo. This will undoubtedly
help enhance their effectiveness.

The draft resolution' s reference to Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter relates exclusively to ensuring the
safety and security of international personnel and
compliance with the provisions of the draft resolution. It
does not even hint at the possibility of any use of force

 

beyond the limits of the tasks clearly set out by the
Security Council.

The demilitarization of the so-called Kosovo
Liberation Army (KLA) and other armed Kosovo Albanian
groups is of special importance in terms of achieving a
lasting and effective political settlement of the Kosovo
crisis. The draft resolution clearly defines this as one of the
principal duties of the international security presence. This
task must be carried out conclusively, with maximal
effectiveness and completely. The KLA must scrupulously
comply with all demands made of it by the Security
Council and must cease to exist as a military force.

The leadership of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
should, of course, comply fully with the obligations it has
entered into.

Russia supports and is taking an active part in efforts
to find a comprehensive approach to the social and
economic reconstruction, stabilization and development of
the Balkan region. We are convinced that the effectiveness
of those efforts will depend directly on full, constructive
involvement by all States of the region, including the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The United Nations has an
important coordinating role to play here. We are certain that
the adoption and ensuing adequate implementation of the
draft resolution will make a vital contribution to achieving
a peaceful, just and long-term solution to the Kosovo crisis
under United Nations auspices. The Russian Federation will
continue actively to promote the earliest possible
achievement of that goal.

The draft resolution has even greater significance,
going beyond the framework of the Kosovo problem and
the Balkan region. It highlights the urgent need to form a
truly multi-polar world order based on the Charter of the
United Nations, a world order in which there will be no
room for unilateral diktat or attempts at domination by
force. Only on such a collective basis can we achieve
lasting solutions to the complex problems of today's world.

