Mr. Mohammad Kama] (Malaysia): My
delegation welcomes the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Bernard Kouchner, back to the
Security Council. We are certainly very grateful for his
comprehensive and very useful briefing, and, like
others, we also pay tribute to the members of the
international community who have lost their lives in
the cause ofpeace in Kosovo.

We have followed the municipal elections on 28
October very closely and with very deep interest. We
welcome the successful conduct of the elections, held
in a free and fair manner and in an atmosphere devoid
of violence. As Mr. Kouchner himself has said, the
election day was the safest and quietest day in
Kosovo since the beginning of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
deployment in June 1999.

Clearly, the election is a historic event for
Kosovo and its people. Its successful conduct is not
only a great achievement for all Kosovars, but also a
clear testament to the excellent work of UNMIK, under
the able leadership of Mr. Kouchner. This success is no
doubt the culmination of continuous efforts and serious
commitments by Mr. Kouchner and all UNMIK
components, as well as the Kosovo Force (KFOR), in
the implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999).

The immediate challenge before the international
community now is to implement the results of the
elections. We take note of the steps that have been
taken so far, as outlined by Mr. Kouchner. We urge all
leaders and people of Kosovo to continue to cooperate
with UNMIK in implementing the outcome of the
election.

The holding of municipal elections and
subsequent follow-up actions are important elements in
the institutional building process. This will provide the
Kosovars with greater responsibility for self-
administration and self-government and inculcate trust
and confidence in the democratic process and
democratic solutions. The absence of the Serb
community in the election is, as we have said on
various occasions in the past, regrettable. We support
the efforts by Mr. Kouchner to devise a suitable
formula to ensure that representatives of the Serb
community and other minorities will be able to take
part in the relevant municipal administration.

We continue to be seriously concerned at the fate
of the Kosovars being detained in Serbian prisons,
especially in the light of the recent tense situation in
those prisons. We have repeatedly called for their
immediate and unconditional release. We fully support
the efforts of Mr. Kouchner and Ambassador Henrik
Amneus to find an early and acceptable solution to this
very grave problem, as well as to the equally grim
issue of missing persons. In this regard, we reiterate
our call for early and concrete actions by the Yugoslav
Government to cooperate with UNMIK in finding
solutions to these problems. The release of Ms. Flora
Brovina early this month was a step in the right
direction.

The overall security situation in Kosovo has
improved significantly, but the recurrence of ethnically
motivated violence shows that the whole situation is
not entirely satisfactory. We join in the condemnation
of the killing of four Ashkali men in the village of
Dosevac last week. Those responsible for this
horrendous crime should be brought to justice. We
support the continued efforts by UNMIK and KFOR to
address the security problems.

Finally, we agree completely with Mr.
Kouchner's approach to tackling the issue of autonomy
and self-government for Kosovo. We fully support the
plan of action that he has outlined with regard to
Kosovo-wide general elections to be organized early
next year.

