The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Somalia, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Daale
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ahmedou Ould
Abdallah, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Ould Abdallah to take a seat at the
Council table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 8 January 2010 from the
Permanent Representative of Uganda to the United
Nations, in which he requests that the Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union
Commission, His Excellency Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
in accordance with rule 39 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure. If I hear no objection, I shall take it
that the Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 to Mr. Lamamra.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Lamamra to take a seat at the Council
table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 6 January 2010 from the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United
Nations, in which he requests that the Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States to the United
Nations, His Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani, be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item in
accordance with rule 39 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure. If I hear no objection, I shall take it
that the Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 to Mr. Mahmassani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mahmassani to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2009/684, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Ould Abdallah, Mr. Lamamra and
Mr. Mahmassani. I now give the floor to Mr. Ould
Abdallah.


