Mr. Nobilo (Croatia): Allow me, Sir, to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and to assure you that my
delegation is fully committed to assisting you on the
many important issues that will come before the
 

Council, particularly those that concern Croatia and its
neighbours.

I also extend my delegation's compliments to the
Permanent Representative of Rwanda for the able way in
which he led the work of the Council during December.

My delegation would also like to take this opportunity
to welcome the Foreign Minister of Italy, His Excellency
Mr. Antonio Martino, who is a high-ranking representative
of a friendly neighbouring State.

Croatia welcomes the draft resolution before the
Council. It contains elements that will be of great benefit to
the peace process in Croatia and the region in general. It
also contains elements that should enhance the credibility
of the Council, following the reports and decisions
regarding the illicit transfer of fuel into the occupied
territories of Croatia from the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). This draft resolution
alleviates some of our concern that the international
community may not be sufficiently determined in its quest
for a durable peace in the region.

Paragraph 3 of the draft resolution extends the
Yugoslav-Bosnian border blockade to affect Croatia. From
now on Belgrade will not be able to send non-humanitarian
assistance to the occupied territories of Croatia via the
Bosnia and Herzegovina border, without consequences.
Should the Belgrade authorities choose to violate paragraph
12 of resolution 820 (1993) in this way, the Council will be
left with no alternative but to reinstate the sanctions that
were suspended by its resolution 943 (1994).

The Council's decision in this regard is made with the
same principles in mind as when paragraph 12 was
included in resolution 820 (1993) in the first place - to
reiterate Croatia's sovereignty over its entire territory; to
promote economic reintegration between the Government
and the local Serb authorities in the United Nations
protected areas in Croatia; and to protect the Croatian
citizens in the protected areas from the sanctions regime
imposed on the occupier, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). Indeed, the
reinforcement of this paragraph represents the Council's
commitment to the spirit and the letter of that resolution.
The Council's decision is especially welcome at a time
when my Government is pursuing implementation of the
economic reintegration agreement of 2 December with the
same local Serb authorities.

This extension of the border blockade, however, is
not complete. The border between the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and Croatia's
United Nations protected areas Sector East can still be
used by Belgrade without consequences. The members of
the Council should bear this in mind with regard to the
next review of the issue, which will take place in a
hundred days' time. This may be quite possible, as
substantial human and financial resources will be released
from Croatia at about that time, given my Government's
decision today on the mandate of the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR). The UNPROFOR
resources would thus be usable for other alternatives. A
complete blockade of the border between Serbia and
Montenegro and Croatia in this way would further the
peace process in Croatia.

My Government's decision on the UNPROFOR
mandate, which was transmitted to the Secretary-General
this morning and to your office, Mr. President, this
afternoon, was taken with full regard for the international
community's concerns and interests in the region. On this
occasion I shall simply emphasize the words of my
President - that the Security Council can continue to
count, in full confidence, on Croatia's acting in a manner
consistent with its long-standing constructive policy in the
region.

Croatia will continue to support the work of the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia and
to look for a political solution consistent with Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions, in a
reasonable time-frame. We shall continue to negotiate the
2-4 political plan for Croatia with the Contact Group. We
shall continue to work to implement the economic
agreement of 2 December, with the assistance of the
international community. But we shall not allow the
annexation of any part of our sovereign territory.

We hope that the international community will be
able, in the coming months, to seize the opportunity to
assist Croatia to reintegrate its occupied territories in a
timely and peaceful way. The draft resolution gives us
great hope. I should like to take this opportunity to praise
the sponsors of the draft resolution for their serious and
skilful work.

A viable Croatia will as such also be able to play a
more significant role in achieving the desired balance of
power in the region - a balance that is still needed
because of one party's rejection of the Contact Group
plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina. A political solution for

 

Bosnia and Herzegovina does not appear likely in the near
future. By addressing the situation in Croatia first, however,
the international community can help Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in the short term, by reallocating the
necessary additional UNPROFOR resources into Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and, in the long term, by creating conditions
of balance favourable to continuing with the Contact Group
plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina. This draft resolution is a
small but important step in that direction.

