The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Pakistan.

Pakistan voted in favour of the resolution, which,
in our view, is the minimum necessary response to the
Israeli military incursions in Rafah that have left scores
of Palestinian civilians dead or fatally injured. Pakistan

condemns these actions. The blatant attack on
demonstrators protesting against the mass military
operation today is the latest violation of international
humanitarian law, especially of Israel's obligations as
an occupying Power under the Geneva Conventions.

The Security Council has the primary
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security. We believe that silence at this critical juncture
is not an option for the Council. It is therefore a matter
of some satisfaction that the Security Council has at
last been able to pronounce itself on the continued
Violations of international law and humanitarian norms
in the occupied Palestinian territories. It is unfortunate
that, in Palestine as in certain other parts of the world,
the legitimate campaign to root out terrorism has been
abused by the occupying Power to suppress the
legitimate right of peoples to self-determination.

Peace in the holy land, as elsewhere, cannot be
established merely by imposing a fait accompli on the
weaker party. The Israeli actions are bound to further
worsen the security situation, which is already volatile
due to the continued Israeli occupation of Arab
territories. These actions will further aggravate the
humanitarian situation prevailing in the occupied
territories, particularly in Rafah.

The ability of the Security Council and the
international community to bring durable peace to
Palestine and the Middle East on the basis of its own
resolutions and the Quartet's road map can produce
positive results throughout the Arab and Islamic world.
Conversely, our failure to do so will further intensify
frustration and anger among the Arab and Islamic
peoples, increase insecurity and instability in the entire
region and escalate support for terrorism and
extremism.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The Permanent Observer of Palestine has asked
for the floor. I give him the floor.

