Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico welcomes the fact that the Security Council's
work includes discussion of the significant matter of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We are
pleased that this is a priority issue of fundamental
importance in the work of the Council. The protection
of the lives and the human dignity of all individuals
must be the ultimate goal of international action in
preventing and resolving conflicts. That is why my
country believes that is it necessary to reassess the way
in which we think about the victims, according that
issue due importance in dealing with conflict.

The central focus of United Nations peace
operations and of the steps that must be taken to
prevent conflict must be the protection of innocent
civilians. This must be - indeed, in the experience of
the United Nations, it has been - one of the
fundamental grounds for the establishment of
peacekeeping operations.

Mexico therefore acknowledges the efforts made
by the Secretary-General in preparing and submitting
the aide-memoire - a document that was produced in
close cooperation with Member States. In this context,
my country acknowledges the special work carried out
by Norway to promote the preparation of that
document, and to accord priority to this matter and
establish its importance within United Nations
peacekeeping activities. We hope that this work will be
ongoing, and not just an isolated effort.

Mexico is in favour of greater contacts and
exchanges between the principal bodies of the
Organization, in particular the General Assembly and
the Security Council. The aide-memoire will strengthen
the link between those two organs, holding them
responsible for working together on this issue.
Furthermore, the document will help make the work of
the Security Council more open and transparent. It will
thus be a useful tool for consultation, making it much
easier to observe the Council's work on issues such as
the effects of conflict on the most vulnerable and
fragile human beings caught up in situations of
violence - who are often, of course, women and
children.

The fact that the aide-memoire is to be applied on
a case-by-case basis, rather than as a prescription for
every situation, should also be emphasized. We must
take into account the specific circumstances of each
conflict. In this respect, we must commit ourselves to
revising and updating the aide-memoire in the light of
all the experience gained.

In responding to your recommendation,
Mr. President, in convening this meeting, that we
should have an interactive debate and raise issues in
order to consider, together, what course of action to
take, I would like to stress the need to set out specific
time frames and mechanisms for updating the aide-
memoire so that it will be an instrument in constant
flux - a living tool. It would thus be appropriate to
establish a specific time frame within which this
process can be carried out.

I would also like to raise the question of how that
tool is to be incorporated into the work of the
Organization and of other bodies that can play an
important role in protecting civilians in conflict
situations. For example, how can this effort be linked
with the specific work being done by the United
Nations Children's Fund, the Office of the High
Commissioner for Refugees, the World Food
Programme and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict?
Once progress is made on the aide-memoire - and we
are pleased at the work done on it - we would be
interested in knowing the status of the progress made
in the other two areas in which the Secretariat is
working: the road map and improving cooperation
between the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, as well as the cooperation
that other bodies of the system are providing.

I would like to highlight the issue of a code of
conduct for all United Nations personnel working to
care for the victims of armed conflict. My delegation
has on a number of occasions, both here and in other
forums, expressed its views regarding the urgent need
to establish a code of conduct for all United Nations
personnel and, as was stated here by the delegation of
the United Kingdom, for all others who work under the
United Nations flag. This is a matter whose importance
for the Organization is growing daily. Recent reports of
possible serious abuses committed by staff associated
with the United Nations doing humanitarian work in
West Africa has drawn the attention of Members of the
Organization to the need to formulate such a code of
conduct as soon as possible. As a backdrop to this we
already have at our disposal the 10 rules of personal
conduct to which Blue Helmets commit themselves.
But this effort must go far beyond that. My delegation
would like actively to participate in promoting this
task.

Before concluding, I would like to note the
presence in the Mexican delegation of the Under-
Secretary for Foreign Affairs for Human Rights,
Ms. Mari Claire Acosta Urquidi, who is taking part in
this meeting precisely because of the importance that
my country attaches to the subject of human rights in
general, and in this instance to the human rights of
civilians in armed conflict.

