Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the United Kingdom presidency for convening this
important public meeting. In addition to Under-
Secretary-General Herve Ladsous and the Permanent
Representative of Morocco, Mr. Omar Hilale, I
especially thank His Excellency President Faustin
Archange Touadera for travelling to New York and
for the important briefing he has just provided to
the Council.

President Touadera is well aware of the degree to
which the Council has mobilized to promote his efforts
to make the establishment ofpeace and reconciliation in
the Central African Republic an exemplary success. He
can count on our unwavering support. We also commend
the commitment of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
who is on the ground beside President Touadera every
day in the Central African Republic.

The Central African Republic is not yet fully
stabilized, as fighting persists among armed groups. It
has been said and bears repeating that the perpetrators
are motivated by a criminal logic of predation, control
of territory and resources, and the perpetuation of
violence unconnected to any political claims. France
soundly condemns these criminal opportunists who
thrive on civilian suffering and instability. In that
context, I wish to highlight three main messages.

First and foremost, I wish to convey to President
Touadera, himself a message of support for him and
for his work. As we all know, he was democratically
elected under excellent conditions by a broad majority of
Central African citizens throughout the entire national
territory. He immediately positioned himself as the
President of all Central Africans under a reconciliation
and reform programme. His inaugural speech was
welcomed as a model of its kind and his travels in the
provinces, such as to Bambari and Ouaka on Sunday,
testify to his commitment.

Everyone knows that President Touadera has
spared no effort in translating his message of peace,
justice, reconciliation and reform into action. I could
cite multiple examples, but I will highlight only two
very illustrative ones: his establishment of the platform
for dialogue and disarmament, whose work he himself
supervises; and his idea of creating a mixed Central
African Armed Forces (FACA) unit by integrating
demobilized veterans, for which he requested support
from the European Union (EU) military training
mission in the Central African Republic.

He is committed to a dynamic based on sustainable
reconstruction of the country, taking care to address
the root causes of the crisis, particularly the impunity
of perpetrators of crimes, which has long nourished
cycles of violence in the Central African Republic.
He is committed to the special criminal court and
to restoring the national justice system. Like usm
President Touadera is convinced that the crisis plaguing
his country will find its solution through regional
cooperation. Based on that logic, he immediately
visited with the Heads of States of the region. In all
of those and other endeavours, he may rest assured of
France's unwavering support and, I believe, that of the
Council as a whole for his efforts.

My second message is one of full support for the
efforts ofMINUSCA andits Head, SpecialRepresentative
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga. The Security Council
has deployed MINUSCA to support the President of
the Central African Republic, and its complex mandate
reflects the great variety of measures to be taken there.
A great deal has already been accomplished, despite the
numerous challenges remaining.

Today, MINUSCA is a fully operational partner. It
has a robust and comprehensive mandate focused on the
strategic objective of reducing the presence of armed
groups and the threat they represent in the Central
African Republic. In that regard, I would like to send
a message of support to MINUSCA, particularly in the
light of its recent actions in the central region of the
country. By acting decisively, including by using force
to defend its mandate, MINUSCA is establishing its
credibility and demonstrating to the armed groups that
the only way ahead is the political path.

In terms of international support for the Central
African Republic, I also wish to highlight the initial
results of the EU military training mission, which
completed the reform and training of a first FACA unit.
A first battalion will be fully trained by May.

My third message concerns the need to work
together and in coordination in the same direction.
We are many in a position to help the Central African
Republic recover. There is the United Nations, of
course, and other international partners, including the
World Bank and the African Bank; regional partners,
including the African Union, the Economic Community
of Central African States, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region; the EU and bilateral
partners. Such attention is good news. It has positive
effects, such as the financial mobilization in Brussels
in November, where France announced an €85-million
contribution over three years.

But that widespread mobilization i which, I
reiterate, is necessary - is beneficial only when
precisely coordinated in order to avoid duplication
of efforts. Ultimately, the important thing is that
the assistance will truly benefit stabilization and
development of the Central African Republic. The
coordination role is key. It is the responsibility, among
others, of the Peacebuilding Commission country-
specific configuration for the Central African Republic,
which was convened this morning by the Moroccan
leadership, and whose efforts I commend.

Moreover, the general mobilization is beneficial
only if based on the same frame of reference, with full
support for President Touadera and his Government.
The frame of reference is clear - it is that identified
by the Central Africans themselves at the Bangui
Forum on National Reconciliation; reiterated in the
Republican Pact for Peace, National Reconciliation
and Reconstruction in the Central African Republic
and integrated in the programme of the President of the
Central African Republic; and further enshrined in the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

We are fortunate to support a dynamic that could
be virtuous and restore sustainable stability in the
country. That is why President Touadera was elected
and why the Council has demonstrated its commitment.
In the coming days, we will propose a draft presidential
statement to the Security Council. I reiterate our
full support to President Touadera in fulfilling his
noble mandate.

