Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Ambassadors Drobnjak and Patriota for
their briefings.

In the past year, the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) has actively implemented the mandate set out by
the relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions and has done a lot of work in helping post-
conflict countries to consolidate peace and proceed
with reconstruction and development programmes. Last
March, the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone smoothly completed its mandate,
thereby becoming an example of peacebuilding success.

Peacebuilding is a long, complex and arduous
task. Through years of practice, the PBC has built up a
great deal of valuable experience. But it has also faced
multiple challenges, including inadequate responses to
the root causes of conflict and the need to strengthen
coordination and cooperation among all the relevant
parties. China believes that, in order to strengthen post-
conflict peacebuilding efforts, the various parties must
make additional efforts in the following four areas.

First, there must be respect for ownership by the
countries concerned. Post-conflict countries bear
the primary responsibility for peacebuilding. The
PBC and the international community should fully
respect the will of the Governments and the peoples
concerned and provide assistance in accordance with
national conditions and key priorities determined by
the countries themselves.

Secondly, we must pay attention to resolving the root
causes of conflict, which include underdevelopment,
The international community should focus on helping
post-conflict countries to achieve economic recovery
and reconstruction as soon as possible so that the people
can quickly enjoy a peace dividend, thus contributing
to political reconciliation and the stabilization of the
security situation, providing a solid political foundation
for the peace process and avoiding a recurrence of
conflict.

Thirdly, there is a need to focus on capacity-
building in the countries concerned, because giving
one a fish is not as good as teaching someone how to
fish. In its engagement in the peacebuilding process of
the countries concerned, the international community
must always proceed from capacity-building and
human resources training and prioritize developing and
utilizing the existing human resources of the countries
concerned.

Fourthly, we must strengthen cooperation and
coordination among agencies in order to generate
synergy. The PBC should strengthen its cooperation
with major United Nations bodies, such as the Security
Council, as well as other specialized agencies, the
international financial institutions and regional
organizations in order to develop a comprehensive
strategy for peacekeeping, peacebuilding and the
promotion of economic and social development. It
should also fully exploit the comparative advantages
of the various agencies and organizations, in order to
better provide assistance to the peacebuilding efforts of
those countries.

China attaches great importance to United Nations
peacebuilding efforts and has always supported the
efforts of the PBC and the Peacebuilding Fund. We
actively support the PBC in playing a greater role in
the peacebuilding efforts of post-conflict countries.
Along with the rest of the international community, we
will continue to make a positive contribution to helping
post-conflict countries to achieve lasting peace and
sustainable development.

