Mr. Christian: On behalf of the Peacebuilding
Commission, I wish to thank the President of the
Security Council for the invitation and will make the
following statement in my capacity as Acting Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission.

First, I wish to commend the delegation of the
Republic of the Congo for organizing this debate. We
welcome the presence of the Secretary-General and his
briefing.

In recognition of the need for a coordinated,
coherent and integrated approach to international
peacebuilding efforts, the Security Council and the
General Assembly passed concurrent resolutions to
give effect to the recommendation made in the
Outcome Document of the World Summit of 2005
(General Assembly resolution 60/1) on the need for a
peacebuilding commission to serve as an institutional
mechanism dedicated to addressing the particular
challenges faced by countries emerging from conflict.
The ultimate goal of the Peacebuilding Commission, as
envisaged by its founding resolutions, is to help
07-49195

countries emerging from conflict to lay the foundations
for their post-conflict recovery and reconstruction, to
enable them to experience sustainable peace and
development, thereby preventing them from relapsing
into violence.

Besides the expert bodies and the studies
undertaken under the auspices of the Secretary-General
over the past years, I would be remiss if I did not
acknowledge the efforts of the Security Council's ad
hoc working group on conflict prevention and
resolution over the past ten years. Those efforts
contributed to the groundwork for the establishment of
the Peacebuilding Commission. The Commission looks
forward to benefiting from the rich storehouse of
innovation vested in this body.

It is especially relevant that today's open debate
is geared towards Africa, as the Commission, during its
first year of operations, has so far focused its attention
on two African countries - Burundi and Sierra Leone.
One of the Commission's key accomplishments has
been to maintain international attention on the
peacebuilding efforts in those two countries. This has,
in turn, instilled a greater sense of accountability and
responsibility among the national and local actors on
the ground to ensure long-term peace.

Furthermore, with the full support of the
Governments in those countries, the Commission has
engaged with relevant United Nations and non-United
Nations actors involved in peacebuilding there to
support the Governments' development of integrated
peacebuilding strategies. It is hoped that international
efforts will be more coherent and that enhanced
resources can be mobilized around those strategies.

In addition, by virtue of the Commission's
consideration of Burundi and Sierra Leone, the
Secretary-General announced earlier this year that he
would allocate funding envelopes of $35 million to
each, from the Peacebuilding Fund, for those countries'
peacebuilding priorities.

We wish to welcome the results of the first round
of elections in Sierra Leone and the free and
transparent manner in which they were conducted. We
wish the people of Sierra Leone well as they go to the
second and final round of the polls, so that the gains
made so far in the post-conflict recovery in
collaboration with the Peacebuilding Commission will
be consolidated.
5

The Commission also has an important role to

play in contributing to the development of

comprehensive strategic visions for United Nations

actions in conflict prevention and resolution by

ensuring that such strategies take peacebuilding

priorities into consideration. In that way, conflict

prevention and resolution efforts can help to foresee
and forestall the potential for relapse into conflict.

As mandated, the Commission is working to
improve the coordination among all relevant actors,
both inside and outside the United Nations, in order to
focus attention on the reconstruction and institution-
building efforts necessary for recovery from conflict
and to bring those actors together to marshal resources
for peacebuilding. Indeed, peacebuilding is an integral
part of improving the United Nations capacity for
conflict prevention and resolution, and we hope that
the Commission will be able to significantly enhance
the international community's efforts to prevent
countries from lapsing or relapsing into conflict, as
envisioned in its founding resolutions.

In this regard, it will be important to increase
cooperation and engagement between the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission. Indeed,
one of the issues we hope to address in the coming year
is how the Commission can best engage with the
Security Council, as well as with the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council, including in
developing the most appropriate mechanisms for
providing advice as necessary and in accordance with
its founding resolutions. It may be useful to have
regular interaction between the Commission and the
Council, including by participating in meetings such as
this open debate. The open debate organized by the
Security Council earlier this year, during the
presidency of the Russian delegation, demonstrated the
Council's commitment to finding ways to strengthen
the effectiveness of the Peacebuilding Commission.

The Commission's first annual report
(S/2007/458), to be debated during the General
Assembly session and also to be submitted to the
Security Council for review in the course of this year,
highlights some of the Commission's challenges and
achievements during its first year of existence. It is our
hope that the contents of the report will provide food
for thought in fine-tuning the mandate of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
