Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Many thanks
indeed to the Chairs of the three Committees for their
very helpful briefings today. We commend their
commitment and energy in leading the work of these
Committees dedicated to the fight against terrorism.

This debate comes at an important moment. The
death of Osama bin Laden has significant
consequences for the fight against terrorism
worldwide. As British Foreign Secretary William
Hague said, it was a devastating, but not a terminal,
blow to Al-Qaida. We will need to be as vigilant and as
determined as ever in fighting terrorism. The United
Nations, including through the work of these three
Committees, has a crucial role to play. Let me turn first
to the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), which is a unique tool in countering
terrorism worldwide and in its potential to support
Afghan and international efforts on reconciliation in
Afghanistan.

This sanctions regime has undergone significant
reform since its inception, in 1999. The Committee has
made great strides forward in ensuring that procedures
are fair and clear. Today, it systematically and regularly
reviews all designations. A fundamental development
has been the establishment of the Office of the
Ombudsperson. We are fortunate to have found such a
well qualified and dedicated individual in Kimberly
Prost as the first incumbent of that role. We are
encouraged by the level of cooperation that States have
extended to Ms. Prost, the seriousness with which the
Committee approaches this process and the significant
improvements that Ms. Prost has already brought to
bear on the de-listing process.

There is of course more that we can do. We must
consider whether today Taliban and Al-Qaida listings
belong under one sanctions regime. The death of bin
Laden presents an opportunity for us to send a clear
message to the Taliban that it is time for them to
separate themselves from Al-Qaida and to participate
in a peaceful political process in Afghanistan. We must
ensure that the list of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) supports, rather
than frustrates, this reconciliation process.

With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), too, we have come
a long way. But the threat from international terrorism
is evolving and becoming more diffuse. Our response
to it as the international community must therefore
evolve. The United Nations should continue to work to
build the counter-terrorism capacity of all Member
States. It must fill the gaps that would otherwise be
exploited by terrorists, their financiers and their
supporters. As we take this forward, we must ensure
complementarity in the work of States, the United
Nations and other multilateral actors to best mitigate
the terrorist threat.

Finally, let me turn to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), which is a crucial
component of international efforts to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
terrorists. We welcome the recent renewal of resolution
1540 (2004), which placed it on a solid, long-term
foundation. Our extension of its mandate by 10 years
demonstrates the conviction of the Security Council
that international action is essential to combat this
threat. The United Kingdom believes that it is key that
we continue to move from reporting to implementation
over this period.

The next 10 years present an opportunity for us to
achieve significant progress in implementation and for
the 1540 Committee to assist States in meeting their
obligations under this resolution. We must ensure that
the Committee and the Group of Experts have the
architecture in place to ensure that they can work
efficiently and effectively to achieve this aim.
Within the Committee, we will soon begin a
review of the Group of Experts to ensure that the
Committee is getting the best possible support and that
the Experts are working as effectively as possible to
provide support to the States requesting assistance.

I should like to close by reiterating the
importance that the United Kingdom attaches to the
Security Council's fight against terrorism and our
ongoing commitment to the work of the 1267, 1373
and 1540 Committees.

