Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I offer many
thanks to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) for her report and her briefing. She has set
out clearly the action that the International Criminal
Court has taken over the past six months on Darfur and
the areas on which the Court will focus in the coming
months.

But regrettably, the past six months have not seen
much progress in Darfur. The implementation of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur is significantly
behind schedule, despite the timetable having been
extended by a year, in July. The Government of the
Sudan has failed to deliver its funding commitments
to the Darfur Regional Authority. As a result, the
Authority lacks both the human and financial resources
required to deliver the change so desperately needed
by the people of Darfur. There has not even been much
progress on the non-financial commitments. There
is little evidence that the Special Court for Darfur
is operating or that its Prosecutor is filing cases, for
example.

The recent announcement that a splinter group of
the Justice and Equality Movement led by Mohammad
Bashar will begin negotiations with the Government in
Doha this month is cause for cautious optimism. We
will continue to urge those other movements that have
not signed the Doha Document to engage constructively
in the peace process. And we hope that all Darfuris
will be given the opportunity to engage in an internal
dialogue, without fear of reprisal.

The lack of political progress is compounded by
the deterioration in the security situation in Darfur,
in Northern Darfur in particular. International human
rights and humanitarian law continue to be violated.
Attacks in Sigili saw civilians suffering once again,
as fighting between Government forces and the
armed movements continued. The reported massacre
in Hashaba in September is of extreme concern, with
about 70 civilians reported dead following armed
militia activity and aerial bombardments.

The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) also continues to
come under attack. Six peacekeepers have been killed
in the past six months. None of the perpetrators of the
attacks has been brought to justice. This is an outrage
and must be condemned.

It is unacceptable that UNAMID continues to
be prevented from gaining access to investigate
such attacks. We have also seen restrictions on the
access of humanitarian agencies, the United Nations
panel of experts and the United Nations independent
expert on human rights. That, too, is unacceptable.
The Government and armed movements must stop
preventing access by humanitarian agencies to those
most in need of assistance and must allow full access to
Darfur for those mandated by the Council.

Given those ongoing and deeply troubling issues,
the continuing jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court in Darfur is all the more relevant,
and the Prosecutor's continued efforts to monitor and
investigate allegations are vital. Attempts to argue that
this Council did not have the right and power to refer
the situation in Darfur to the jurisdiction of the ICC are
entirely specious.

We welcome the progress in the trial of Abdallah
Banda Abakaer Nourain and Saleh Mohammed
Jerbo Jamus. It is unacceptable, however, that the
Government of the Sudan continues to obstruct the
pursuit ofjustice for the people of Darfur and has failed
to take action to enforce the four outstanding arrest
warrants. The Government of the Sudan is bound to
comply with the obligation laid down by this Council
in its resolution 1593 (2005) to cooperate fully with
the ICC and its investigations. The United Kingdom
has repeatedly urged the Government of the Sudan to
comply with that obligation, and we repeat that call
today.

Indeed, we call on all States, whether States parties
to the Rome Statute or not, to assist and cooperate with
the ICC to end impunity. The Council, which referred
the situation in Darfur to the ICC, should consider what
it can do to assist the ICC.

In conclusion, we want once again to thank
Ms. Bensouda, not just for her briefing today, but for
the continuing work of the Office of the Prosecutor. We
will continue to work together to achieve justice for the
victims of that conflict.

