Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina wishes once again to thank the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, for her briefing on her eighth report pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011).

Argentina wishes to recall that the referral of
cases to the ICC reflects the explicit recognition by
the Council of the role of justice and the fight against
impunity for crimes of international concern, and the
contribution of the Rome Statute and the ICC to that
goal. I wish to reiterate that for my country, Argentina,
it is unacceptable that the culture of memory be
transformed into a history of oblivion. For my country,
truth, remembrance, justice and reparations are the
right not only of the victims, but also of society as a
whole and the international community, so as not to
compromise on the issue of impunity.

Libya is facing numerous challenges in the area
of strengthening rule-of-law institutions; however, a
constructive dialogue among the Libyan authorities and
the Office of the Prosecutor continues to unfold. Since
2013 that dialogue has been more fluid, in particular
regarding the implementation of the memorandum of
understanding on the distribution of the workload in
future investigations and trials signed by the Attorney
General of Libya and the Prosecutor.
I should like to focus on three key issues relating to
the situation in Libya.

The first is the obligation of Libya to cooperate with
the Court. While Libya had challenged the admissibility
of the case against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi before the
Court, the decision of Pre-Trial Chamber I handed down
on 31 May 2013 and upheld by the Appeals Chamber on
21 May 2014 makes it clear that Libya should hand over
the accused. We are aware that there is a trial in Libya
against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi; however, Libya
should ensure that that trial does not undermine its
responsibility and obligation to cooperate with the ICC.

The second issue concerns the allegations of crimes
committed in Libya since 2011 and more recently,
particularly since May 2014, when two major armed
coalitions emerged there - the forces of Operation
Dignity and of Operation Libyan Dawn - leading to
the establishment of two parliaments and Governments,
one in Tripoli and one in Tobruk, with the house of
representatives of the latter being the legitimate Libyan
authority as recognized by the United Nations.

The Office of the Prosecutor continues to address
cases of arbitrary detention, torture, the cruel treatment
of detainees, the forced displacement of approximately
30,000 Tawergha civilians, assassinations in the
context of the conflict, threats against journalists and
human rights defenders, in particular against women
human rights defenders, and against prosecutors,
judges and lawyers. Some of those cases were reported
on by the Ministry of Justice, with the assistance of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. However,
the Court was unable to investigate those allegations
of crimes under the Rome Statute owing to a lack of
access for security reasons. We believe that the Libyan
authorities should ensure that they are investigated and
the perpetrators brought to justice.

Thirdly, and in conclusion, the Prosecutor is clear
about the situation resulting from the proposed cuts in
the budget of the Court, which affects the Office and its
capacity to undertake new investigations, in particular
regarding the crimes committed by the rebels, and with
respect to the implementation of the memorandum of
understanding in a more ambitious manner.

This leads my delegation to make a comment
that we reiterate every time the Council considers
the question of referrals to the ICC. Argentina find
it inexplicable that the Council has determined that
the costs of referrals are not covered by the United
Nations but, rather, by the States parties to the Rome
Statute. Beyond the fact that this contravenes the Rome
Statute and the Relationship Agreement between the
United Nations and the International Criminal Court,
the situation and the facts show that, with the growing
number of cases, there has been an intensification of
the pressure on the resources available to the Court.

Thus today we see in the report of the Prosecutor
what the effects are of the United Nations not covering
the costs of referrals to the Court. This threatens not
only the current activities of the Prosecutor but could
also jeopardize the long-term viability of the Court.

We reiterate that the fight against impunity is
not an obligation exclusive to the States parties to the
Rome Statute; it is, rather, that of the international
community. It is also a priority for the United
Nations. That goal, however, should also come with a
commitment to providing the Court with the resources
it needs to function. If the Organization can provide
such resources for the two ad hoc Tribunals, we fail to
understand what is preventing it from doing the same
for the International Criminal Court.

We should emphasize Libya's willingness to deal
with its situation and to enable the current violence to
yield to political dialogue, so that justice can be the
essential element in the country's social, political and
ethical reconstruction. Argentina, like the Prosecutor,
fully understands the many challenges the Libyan
authorities are facing, and commends the Office of the
Prosecutor for its willingness to continue to support
the Libyan Government in its efforts to address as
many cases as possible through its jurisdiction. But
we also believe that Libya's need for institutions such
as the legitimacy of the rule of law is clearly greater
than any cooperation the International Criminal
Court can supply, and for that it is essential to have
a comprehensive strategy of which national justice
is a key component. It is vital that the Libyan people
see justice done for serious crimes, regardless of the
perpetrators, and that they see it done not only in The
Hague but also in Libya.

The Prosecutor suggested the possibility of
creating a contact group. Argentina believes such an
undertaking could provide Libya with the support of a
group of countries that would work in close consultation
with Libya, particularly on how to fight impunity at
the domestic level. The international community's
cooperation is essential to achieving a genuinely
peaceful Libya, with security, reliable and effective
institutions and respect for its citizens' human rights,
but we also believe that the Security Council should
assist such efforts with the support they need. One
aspect of following up on referrals is that the Council
should be considering alternative ways of backing up
the efforts of Libya and the international community to
support the country.

As we do every time we discuss the International
Criminal Court, the Argentinian delegation would like
to emphasize its belief that the Court represents one
of the most significant contributions we can make to
achieving accountability for crimes of international
concern, and that it is as essential today as it was when
it was established in 1998. I commend the Prosecutor
for her values and dedication to eradicating impunity. I
would also like to acknowledge the efforts of the Libyan
authorities and people in embarking on a path that we
should all support - that of memory, truth, justice and
reparation.

