Ms. Pusic' (Croatia): We are currently confronted
with unprecedented challenges in the Middle East and
North Africa that are having immense, rippling effects
on the wider region, the broader neighbourhood, of
which Croatia is definitely a part, and on other parts
of the world.

Unresolved conflicts, poverty, water and food
insecurity, all sorts of discrimination, terrorism,
violence, human rights violations, the transformation
of war into a war exclusively against the civilian
population, and the elevation of sexual violence to
the level of the weapon of choice in these conflicts all
demonstrate that this type ofwar has become less about
territory or even natural resources and more about the
destruction of peoples. Weak and non-functioning
institutions definitely contribute to that, lawlessness
contributes to that; all of this contributes to the
increasing number of conflicts and to making people
leave their homes in search of safety and peace, most of
them running for their lives. Such challenges require an
exceptional, coordinated and comprehensive response
as well as strong leadership and genuine partnership.
We urgently need to stand together and act with resolve.
This is in the interest of us all, as we see it.

We believe that in our approach we should address
this problem at three levels. The first is the immediate
priority: the stopping of violence. The second is
bringing peace, and I emphasize here the difference
between stopping the violence and creating peace;
they are two different though related processes and
sometimes require different partners. The third is a
sustainable and long-term solution, in other words, a
functioning, safe State.

Only by addressing the root causes and facilitating
political solutions can we create prospects that will
stand the test oftime. To achieve this, we need a genuine
political commitment on all sides; otherwise, even the
best- designed approach will fail. In this regard, we
see the importance of a United Nations-led process
to negotiate political settlements and find sustainable
solutions for peace and stability in the region.

Our action should have a strong regional and
country-specific dimension and outreach that brings
on board all international and regional players. It
should be an approach that includes intensified
diplomatic engagement in finding political solutions
while at the same time comprehensively employing
other mechanisms to improve conditions on the
ground: sustainable development, humanitarian and
stabilization support, counter-terrorism, peacebuilding
and confidence-building measures, and so on.

The current refugee crisis that has engulfed the
Middle East has spilled over into Europe. It is a test of
humanity and solidarity for us in Europe, especially for
us in the immediate neighbourhood. Close to 90,000
people have crossed Croatia's border in the past two
weeks.

It is difficult, but if we have a clear objective in
mind - a clear second and third step - as to what can
be done and how to approach or address the problem,
we can deal with it. But if our thinking remains entirely
open-ended, if we do not know what we are doing and
we are just lying low and letting waves of people wash
over us, it is going to be destructive for a much broader
set of countries than the countries of the Middle East.
Recognizing and dealing with the refugee crisis is also,
in our view, a serious wake-up call for all of us who
have seen people come to our doorstep, a wake-up call
to all of us that our first reaction should be a humane
one - we need to treat these people as people - and
the second step needs to involve talking to all partners.
The third step needs to involve using this coming winter
to find a way to stop the fighting in Syria and Iraq, but
especially in Syria.

With regard to Syria, I would like to emphasis
again the fact that we see, from our experience in that
respect, the termination of the fighting as a connected
but separate process from the actual bringing about
of peace, which takes years or decades. Stopping the
fighting is not peace yet, but it is a prerequisite for
peace. It is a prerequisite for starting to build and
embark on the long-term process called peacebuilding,
which ends in real peace.

We believe that, in order to stop the fighting, we
might need a different or broader group of partners
than the one needed to build peace. In Syria, in order to
stop the fighting, we need everybody who is prepared
to participate in the effort to stop the fighting to be
on board. In order to build peace, we probably need a
different group of actors, but that will come later. In my
view, Staffan de Mistura has been doing an excellent
job in showing the way and the need to replace fighting
with talking. Sometimes that actually works. At the end
of all of the fighting there is talking, so it is probably
better to start sooner rather than later.

We also believe that time is of the essence in that
context. Winter is coming. Now is the time when we
should find a common solution for stopping the fighting
in Syria. If we do not do that, spring will bring new
surprises and new suffering for the people of the region,
as well as the danger of an expansion of the crisis into a
much broader regional neighbourhood than the one we
are looking at now.

On Libya, we believe that we need to continue
to support the United Nations-led inclusive political
process headed by Bernardino Leon aimed at reaching
an agreement on establishing a Government of national
unity. A bad Government is a bad thing. The only thing
worse than a bad Government is no Government. Libya
is probably a case in point. In that sense, we need to
support all United Nations efforts to establish a unified
Government in that country.

With respect to Iraq, we believe that we should
remain committed to helping the Iraqi Government
to further sustain the transition process, in particular
with regard to the inclusiveness of its policies, credible
national reconciliation and reform. We believe that the
Iraqis - the Iraqi Government and Iraqi forces - need
and deserve our support. The Iraqi forces and the
Peshmerga are fighting the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and need and deserve humanitarian assistance
and support. Earlier this year, I Visited a number of
refugee camps in Iraq. They definitely need us and our
support.

Finally, on the Middle East peace process, I
think there is nobody in the Chamber and around this
table - regardless of the different opinions that States,
countries and people might have on the issue - who
does not think that we should devote all our efforts
to reviving the peace process in the Middle East. The
process has, obviously, not been successful; in fact, it
has been a very difficult. Although it has looked like
a failure many times, there is no alternative to it. We
have to persevere in trying to revive the peace process
in the Middle East. In addition, as a member State of
the European Union, which informs our perspective,
we also believe that the European Union should play
a more active role and take more responsibility for the
process.

In conclusion, the current challenges in the Middle

East and North Africa are multidimensional in nature,

and therefore require multidimensional answers. As
we watched people from Syria and other countries
pass as refugees through Croatia, one thing that was
clear was that they were middle-class people. They
are people with degrees - high school, university
degrees - exactly the people who are needed to rebuild
a country after a war. If they leave the neighbourhood,
if they leave and go somewhere in Western Europe or
North America or God knows where, it is very unlikely
that they will return. If they do not return, there will be
nobody to rebuild Syria and other countries once the
fighting and the war are over, and everybody will be
left behind. We ourselves might even be left behind, if
we do not act now.

