Mr. Acharya (Nepal): My delegation wishes to
express its sincere appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important open debate on the rule of
law in the maintenance of international peace and
security. This is an important step in reviewing the
progress we have made so far and to chart out our
shared road map for the future by upholding the hope
and aspirations of millions of people yearning for the
rule of law, justice, peace, security and development.

Over the years, the United Nations has made a
steady and significant effort in establishing the rule of
law in different parts of the world by ensuring
accountability and reinforcing norms, building justice
and security institutions and promoting gender
equality. The engagement of the Security Council has
also been important in the promotion and strengthening
of the rule of law, with a view to maintaining
international peace and security.

We firmly believe that ensuring the rule of law at
the international level is as important as it is at the
national level. The rule of law is an essential
component for the smooth transition of post-conflict
societies towards a just, peaceful and stable society. In
post-conflict situations, it is also understandable that a
transitional justice system plays an important role in
ensuring justice to the victims of conflicts. At the same
time, post-conflict societies may also require overall
reforms in the legal framework and institutional
structures of governance, including their functioning.
Adhering to the international principles is important
while making provisions for transitional justice and
consolidating the system of the rule of law. However, a
one-size-fits-all approach does not produce effective
results, since the political, social, historical, economic
and cultural contexts of different States have a great
deal of implications for their legal systems,
frameworks and institutions. In devising rule of law
programmes, special attention needs to be given to
address the specific needs of women, children,
minority and marginalized groups, refugees and
displaced persons.

No external support mechanism can replace
national ownership and national capacity in the nation-
building process. In that context, all the efforts of the
international community to promote the rule of law,
including those of the United Nations system, should
be focused towards building national ownership and
national capacity in a sustained way. That will help
national stakeholders to take ownership for the
enactment and implementation of laws and for the
strengthening of institutions as a part of broader reform
efforts. We believe that this will alone ensure
sustainable peace and progress around the world.

The rule of law agenda in post-conflict societies
should be advanced in tandem with other issues. In
particular, the root causes of conflict, such as
exclusion, marginalization and deprivation in political,
economic and social spheres, as well as poverty, must
be dealt with in a comprehensive manner to make
societies more inclusive, just, equitable and
prosperous. The consolidation of security and the
revitalization of the economy will reinforce the rule of
law in the medium term by creating more stakes in the
overall transformation of post-conflict societies.

Nepal approaches the rule of law agenda with
determination as part of its historic transformation
process, with a view to moving forward in the
establishment of an inclusive, diverse yet unified, just
and peaceful society. Nepal has an independent
judiciary. It is also carrying out timely reform and
consolidation activities to deliver justice effectively
and efficiently. The use of a mobile court system has
brought judges and prosecutors closer to the people,
while the application of traditional mediation
mechanisms has helped communities to solve their
differences on their own.

As per a provision of the Comprehensive Peace
Accord, signed in 2006, the bill for the establishment
of a truth and reconciliation commission and a
commission on disappearances have been prepared
with wide consultations among various stakeholders,
including civil society and human rights organizations.
This matter is under discussion in our legislative
parliament. We believe that justice is part of the peace
process, and peace, justice and reconciliation have to
be seen in an integrated and holistic manner.

The Secretary-General's report contained in
document S/2011/634* reveals that the Security
Council has made references to the rule of law and
transitional justice in well over 160 resolutions since
2004. We need to remind ourselves that translating
those resolutions into action is a continuous challenge.
We call for an enhanced level of support from the
international community, in a coordinated and coherent
manner, so as to promote national ownership and
national capacity, including the appropriate provision
of an accountability framework in the field of the rule
of law. That would not only contribute to establishing a
just and stable society in countries receiving support,
but also help to maintain international peace and
security at large. In that regard, Nepal looks forward to
contributing to the high-level meeting on this issue to
be held in the General Assembly this year.

