Ms. Veneman: Mr. President, I am pleased to
join you today as the Security Council turns its
attention to the situation of children in armed conflict.
We appreciate the role of the French Government over
the past six years in ensuring that the Security
Council's peace and security agenda benefits and
protects children affected by armed conflict.

As all here are aware, children continue to be
targeted in today's armed conflicts. Since 1996
approximately two million children have died as a
result of war, while a further twelve million have been
left homeless and an estimated six million injured or
physically disabled. Children are the first to suffer the
poverty, the malnutrition and the ill health resulting
from the disruptions caused by war.

In every region of the world, girls and boys
continue to endure the consequences of being caught
up in wars. The current situation in the Middle East is
no exception.

Security Council resolution 1612 (2005) and the
Working Group dedicated to children and armed
conflict herald a new era of cooperation to end some of
the most egregious abuses of children during conflict.
Effective monitoring and reporting will help reveal the
extent and severity of the Violations, bring greater
accountability to those who target, abuse or exploit
children, and strengthen programmes to assist and
protect children.

In addition to an effective monitoring and
reporting mechanism, there are three areas that are
relevant to resolution 1612 (2005), including the use of
children by armed forces and groups, gender-based
violence and small arms and light weapons.

First, monitoring and reporting. In collaboration
with the inter-agency task forces in each of the seven
pilot countries, UNICEF and its partners have begun to
implement the monitoring and reporting mechanism.
Common terminology and a minimum set of indicators
for violations against children have been developed.
Technical support and guidance have been provided in
Nepal, Burundi, Somalia and Cote d'Ivoire. Together
with non-governmental organization partners, UNICEF
will continue to help ensure that monitoring and
reporting will lead to programmes that prevent and
address the consequences of these violations. For
example, reliable data on the prevalence of sexual
Violence can help in decisions to establish clinics and
other support services.

Second, child recruitment. Girls and boys are
sometimes involved directly in combat but are also
exploited as messengers, informers, cooks, porters or
sexual slaves. Recruitment can be forced, but it also
results from factors such as poverty. That is why
prevention, demobilization and reintegration need to be
comprehensive by also providing children with
education, training, support and protection. A
document that outlines guiding principles for
preventing the use of children in conflict and
facilitating their demobilization and reintegration is
being developed. A symposium to present this
document will be hosted by the French Government in
Paris at the end of the year.

Third, gender-based violence, which is another
devastating effect of conflict on children. Sexual
Violence represents a significant threat to children,
particularly girls. More than 40 per cent of reported
sexual assaults are perpetrated against girls aged 15 or
younger. In conflict situations, Violence against women
and girls is often used as a strategic method of warfare
and is often associated with an increase in the risk and
spread of HIV and AIDS. Data on gender-based
Violence is lacking in many countries due to an absence
of reporting mechanisms and support services, along
with factors such as shame and stigma.

Resolution 1612 (2005) provides an opportunity
to strengthen not only the reporting of gender-based
Violence but also programmes to provide Victims with
access to health, psychological and legal support.
Sexual violence against children cannot be tolerated,
and we must do all that we can to prevent it and to deal
with its impacts.

Fourth, small arms and light weapons. The
Council is well aware of the effects of small arms and
light weapons on children in armed conflict. UNICEF
will work with Member States to achieve the objectives
set out in the United Nations Programme of Action on
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. Here
again, studies and surveillance that can lead to
programmes to prevent Violence and rehabilitate child
Victims are needed. The Security Council's support in
encouraging respect for arms embargoes, including the
criminalization and punishment of violators, is
absolutely critical.

UNICEF has deep appreciation for the Council's
commitment to deal with children in armed conflict.
We encourage enhancing the monitoring and reporting
mechanisms in countries where children are affected by
armed conflict. The safety and security of those who
implement the mechanisms must be ensured. Under no
circumstances should United Nations staff or those of
our partners be targeted while they carry out their
crucial roles.

Resolution 1612 (2005) provides opportunities to
bring together key elements to monitor compliance and
accountability. Governments have a fundamental
responsibility to protect their populations. The
international community, and especially the Security
Council, must collectively and regularly remind all
parties to a conflict that egregious Violations against
children cannot be tolerated.

