Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Madam President, for convening this
meeting, and Mr. Mark Lowcock for his enlightening,
albeit dark, briefing.

Peru regrets and notes with deep concern the
continuing conflict in Yemen, which has resulted in
the worst humanitarian crisis in the world and serious
violations of international law and international
humanitarian law. More than 11 million children are
in extremely vulnerable situations. In accordance with
the presidential statement on the protection of civilians
(S/PRST/2018/18) that we just adopted, we express
our rejection of the current escalation of Violence in
and around Al-Hudaydah, and we must continue to
point out its grave consequences in terms of deaths,
wounded, displaced persons, extreme poverty, hunger
and malnutrition.

We lament that the timely warnings issued by the
United Nations and other humanitarian agencies about
the risks of escalation in Al-Hudaydah have not led
to effective preventive diplomacy, notwithstanding
the significant efforts made by Special Envoy Martin
Griffith with the Security Council's support. It is clear
that his task is very complex and that we must continue
to support him.

We regret the absence of the Houthis and the
difficulties in making progress in Geneva. Nonetheless,
under no circumstances can that be interpreted as
justification for insisting on a non-existent military
solution to the conflict. On the contrary, we must step
up efforts to bring the parties to the negotiating table.

In that connection, we note that the promises of a
supposedly limited impact of an escalation of hostilities
in Al-Hudaydah are not credible. We must remember
that a defining feature of the conflict has been the
committing of atrocious crimes with impunity by all
parties and with a clear disdain for their consequences
on the civilian population.

There are 22 million Yemenis living under
precarious conditions. The economic paralysis generated
by the conflict has hit them hard. Basic services have
become inaccessible. As has been pointed out, civil
servants, including teachers and medical personnel, are
no longer being paid. Hyperinflation and devaluation
are affecting the poorest.

In that context, Peru considers it indispensable
and urgent that all the parties involved in the conflict,
and especially those with the capacity to influence
them, including the Council, take action to achieve
a lasting ceasefire and bring the conflict back to the
negotiating table.

We stress the real possibilities of achieving an
inclusive political solution, which the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General has been promoting, and we
stress the need to move forward in the process with
confidence-building measures among the parties.

For now, we stress the need to ensure the safety,
openness and full functioning of the ports, especially
that of Al-Hudaydah, as well as the city's highways and
other access routes to the city, to provide essential goods.

We would also like to express our admiration and
support for the humanitarian workers deployed in the
country, who are carrying out their work under very
risky conditions, and we underscore the need to ensure
their safe and unrestricted access to the population.

Lastly, we cannot accept double standards. It is
imperative that the Council remain united and be
consistent with regard to its responsibility to protect
civilians in all humanitarian crises, wherever they
occur, in line with international law and international
humanitarian law.

