The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of China.

I thank Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Assistant Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator, and Mr. Antonio
Guterres, United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, for their briefings.

The Syrian conflict will soon enter its fifth year.
This protracted conflict has devastated the ancient and
beautiful nation of Syria, traumatized its people, spread
terrorism and placed enormous economic and social
pressures on Syria's neighbours. In this grave situation,
the parties in Syria, the international community,
the United Nations and humanitarian agencies must
take terrible risks and overcome great difficulties
in delivering humanitarian assistance in Syria and
its neighbours, and have contributed significantly
to alleviating the humanitarian crisis. China highly
appreciates their work.

In the meantime, humanitarian efforts in Syria are
still confronted by a variety of challenges, including
ongoing conflict, rampant terrorism, blocked channels
of communication and grave shortfalls in funding. If
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council are to
be fully implemented and the humanitarian situation in
Syria is to be tangibly improved, the parties should, out
of their own sense of humanity, assume their respective
responsibilities, strengthen their coordination and
focus on the following aspects in the next phase.

First, we must vigorously promote the political
process to resolve the Syrian issue. That is the only
way to restore peace and stability in Syria and improve
the humanitarian situation. China appreciates and
supports the mediation efforts of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, to promote the freeze initiative. We also
support the efforts of Russia and Egypt to promote the
political process. The international community, and
the Security Council in particular, should support the
political mediation efforts of the relevant parties and
urge the Syrian Government and the opposition to find
a solution as soon as possible that is appropriate to
national conditions and accommodates the interests of
all parties.

Secondly, the parties in Syria, the international
community, the United Nations and other humanitarian
agencies should fully and comprehensively implement
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014).
The Syrian Government should bear the primary
responsibility for protecting civilians. The Syrian
opposition should, alongside the Syrian Government,
take measures to protect civilians and support efforts
to deliver international humanitarian assistance.
Organizations such as the United Nations should follow
the United Nations guiding principles for humanitarian
assistance and strengthen communications with
the Syrian Government to win cooperation and
support. The international community should provide
constructive assistance on the basis of respect for
Syria's independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity, and avoid politicizing humanitarian questions
and militarizing humanitarian assistance.

Thirdly, close attention should be paid to the
exacerbation by terrorists of the humanitarian situation.
Terrorist organizations inside Syria kill civilians
brutally, thereby exacerbating the humanitarian crisis
and undermining humanitarian efforts. This has
become the principal cause of the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in Syria. China is firmly
opposed to all forms of terrorism and condemns all
violence against innocent civilians. The international
community should fully implement resolutions 2170
(2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015), on curbing and
combatting terrorism. In that regard, counter-terrorism
and humanitarian assistance needs should be well
balanced and we must develop a comprehensive strategy
to ensure that our goals are aligned and mutually
reinforcing, and that no civilians are harmed.

Fourthly, the international community should
strengthen its support for United Nations humanitarian
assistance efforts. China appreciates the fact that Kuwait
and the United Nations will jointly host a pledging
conference. We call on the international community to
actively contribute to the United Nations Syria strategic
response plan for 2015 and to regional refugee and
reconstruction programmes so as to alleviate funding
shortfalls and ease the pressure on Syria's neighbours
caused by the refugee problem.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

