Ms. Juul (Norway): Today I will focus on three
themes: the conflicts in Syria and Yemen and the
Middle East peace process.

On Syria, we would like to thank Special Envoy
Staffan De Mistura for his tireless efforts to bring peace
to the Syrian people. He has set an example for how
peace processes must devise inclusive mechanisms and
involve civil society and women's groups. We wish the
new Envoy, Geir Pedersen, every success in his efforts
to forge a peaceful solution to the conflict in Syria. We
strongly encourage Council members to come together
and agree on a durable political solution for the benefit
of the Syrian people.

On Yemen, Norway welcomes the Stockholm
Agreement and the adoption of resolutions 2451
(2018) and 2452 (2019). As the situation on the ground
remains very fragile, it is important to uphold the
momentum achieved in Sweden. The concerted efforts
of international, regional and national actors will be
necessary to make sure that the Stockholm Agreement
is implemented on the ground and that political
and humanitarian progress is achieved. Women's
representation at all levels of the political process is
key. Norway will continue to prioritize humanitarian
aid to Yemen.

There is a strong international consensus that only
a negotiated two-State solution can lead to durable
peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians.
Palestinian State-building and economic development
remain essential building blocks to achieve this goal,
but cannot substitute the need for a political resolution.

Norway will chair the next meeting of the
international donor group to Palestine, the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians, hosted by the
European Union in Brussels on 12 April. Leading up
to the meeting, Norway will encourage progress on
the outstanding fiscal issues between the Palestinian
Authority and Israel and take concerted action to
mitigate the risks to the Palestinian economy. The
parties and the donors also need to move faster on
implementing key infrastructure projects in the water
and energy sectors, especially in Gaza.

The situation in Gaza remains of great concern.
Increased access to energy, clean water, health services,
job creation and movement of people and goods in and
out of Gaza are crucial. The political brinkmanship
in and around Gaza will not lead to any stability or
development. The interests of the people of Gaza must
be put first. Donors should mobilize support to the
humanitarian package for Gaza in coordination with the
Palestinian Authority. The monthly financial transfers
to Gaza by the Palestinian Authority are a lifeline for
the population and must continue. The United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East remains indispensable. It is vital that donors
remain committed to supporting the organization.

Norway has been a consistent partner in promoting
peace and security in the Middle East for decades. Our
commitment to helping resolve the conflict between
Israel and Palestine is based on our firm support for the
two-State solution. In the absence ofpolitical progress,
we call on all parties and donors to do their utmost to
preserve the institutional and economic foundation of a
future Palestinian State.

