Mr. Andanje (Kenya): I would like to express my
sincere appreciation to you, Mr. President, for organizing
this important debate. I thank the Secretary-General, the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
the Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights for
their presentations.
My delegation welcomes the adoption this
morning of resolution 1894 (2009), on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. It is testimony to the
Security Council's continued commitment to enhancing
the protection of civilians.

Today is indeed a special occasion. It marks the
tenth anniversary of the Council's first consideration of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict as a
thematic issue. This occasion provides us with the
opportunity to reflect on the progress made, the
challenges we face and the steps we must take to
address this problem. It also provides us with the
opportunity to renew our political will and resolve, and
to rally support for the protection of civilians.

We welcome the Security Council's engagement
since February 1999 in enhancing the protection of
civilians. The adoption by the Council of additional
resolutions, the aide-memoire (see S/PRST/2009/1, annex) and the establishment of the Security Council
Expert Group have given impetus to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Equally important are the
measures the Council has taken in addressing the
impact of war on women and children in armed
conflict.

My delegation believes that, despite those
positive achievements, the question of protection
deserves deeper reflection due to its complex and
multifaceted nature. It touches on issues involving the
conduct of peacekeeping operations, compliance with
human rights, the rule of law, political security,
development and disarmament. It is therefore
important that we address the matter taking into
account those underlying issues.
In view of the foregoing, there are still a number
of challenges. They include gaps in Security Council
mandates, the lack of pre-mandate planning, protection
guidance and assessments, failure by parties to conflict
to honour their obligations under international
humanitarian law and the failure to provide unfettered
access for humanitarian agencies and organizations to
people in dire need.

All parties to a conflict must respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law. We
note that this is a particular problem with many
non-State armed groups. The Security Council needs to
enhance compliance by consistently calling on all
parties to a conflict to adhere to their obligations,
especially in exercise of the principles of

proportionality and distinction. The Council should
further ensure that investigations of alleged violations
on civilians in armed conflict are carried out in a
timely manner, with commensurate consequences for
violators. This will not only promote accountability
among the various actors but will demonstrate the
Council's opposition to impunity as part of a
comprehensive approach to ensuring that perpetrators
are brought to justice through national or international
legislation and that victims are granted redress.

Providing unhindered humanitarian access during
conflicts is a fundamental prerequisite for ensuring
life-saving assistance. It is therefore important for
peacekeeping missions to provide a secure
environment to facilitate humanitarian access to
enhance the capacity of peacekeeping missions to
provide protection to humanitarian agencies. While
current efforts are commendable, significant challenges
still remain at the operational level. Peacekeepers lack
capacity to reach populations at risk. The Council
should address and streamline that aspect during the
adoption of mandates. That would certainly guarantee
the safety and security of humanitarian personnel.

My delegation appreciates the fact that the
protection of civilians is currently mandated in a
number of United Nations peacekeeping missions. We
note that the first such mandate was authorized to
afford protection to civilians a decade ago in Sierra
Leone. At present, the majority of United Nations
peacekeeping missions operate under such mandates.
Nevertheless, there are real challenges in their
implementation because the mandates remain largely
undefined in both their military and mission-wide
aspects.

The Council should provide clear protection
guidelines and underline the importance of a
comprehensive approach involving all components of a
mission in delivering on the task. There is also a need
to ensure that available capacity and resources are
deployed for the task at hand and made available. It is
also necessary to emphasize that peacekeeping
missions should conduct their tasks without prejudice
to the primary responsibility of the host nations for the
protection of civilians.

In this connection, we welcome the independent
study jointly commissioned by the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. It is
insightful. We are convinced that it can strengthen the
implementation of civilian protection mandates. We
trust that the findings and recommendations will be
given consideration by all actors.

My delegation recognizes that sexual violence is
no longer considered to be a simple by-product of
armed conflict. It is being used as a tool of warfare. It
dehumanizes and instils fear in civilians during armed
conflict in order to achieve political and military
objectives. The adoption by the Council of resolution
1820 (2008) against sexual and other forms of violence
against civilians in armed conflict situations, in
particular women and children, was a significant
development.

However, there is a lot that needs to be done to
enhance its implementation. We must move from words
to deeds to ensure protection of sexually vulnerable
populations in armed conflict situations. The recent
creation of a post of a special representative of the
Secretary-General to address sexual violence in armed
conflict will, we believe, complement those efforts.

Finally, I reaffirm Kenya's commitment to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and to
guaranteeing their rights in conformity with
international humanitarian law. Considering the fact
that civilians continue to be subjected to indiscriminate
attacks and other violations by parties to conflict, and
taking into account the fact that they comprise the vast
majority of casualties, we need to work consistently
towards enhancing their protection. We urge the
Security Council to act in a swift and decisive manner
wherever such violations occur.
