The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 37 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Bangladesh, Brazil,
Canada, the Czech Republic, Egypt, Germany, Ghana,
India, Italy, Jordan, Morocco, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan,
the Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Spain and Uruguay.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mrs. Alice Aghenebit
Mungwa, Senior Political Affairs Adviser, Office of the
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations.

It is so decided.

I invite Mrs. Mungwa to take the seat reserved
for her at the side of the Council Chamber.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend invitations under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Susana Malcorra,
Under-Secretary-General for Field Support.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Susana Malcorra,
2
Under-Secretary-General for Field Support. Before
giving them the floor, I would like to make a statement
by way of introduction.

Let me first answer the question of why we asked
for such a debate in an already busy month for the
Security Council. In fact, we tried to do that in our
concept note circulated two weeks ago. There, we
highlighted the importance of maintaining the
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
operations as a key tool of United Nations peace efforts
and the ongoing reform efforts to overcome the
challenges facing it.

In the process of reform of the United Nations
peacekeeping mechanism, numerous questions emerge
that require the active engagement of and response
from the States Members of the United Nations and
from the Security Council. Thus, the strengthening of
interaction between those who plan and mandate the
United Nations peacekeeping operations and those who
implement these mandates on the ground, often at
considerable risks, is one important aspect that calls for
further deliberation by the Council.

In our concept note, we have already touched
upon questions relevant to that aspect. We believe that
we can find the right answers to these questions only
through mutual, transparent and interactive dialogue.
In fact, today's meeting aims precisely at that
achieving that purpose. We are so pleased that the
representatives of major troop-, police- and financing-
contributing countries are also with us today,
participating in the debate.

As the Council knows, there is already a lively
debate taking place in different forums within the United
Nations, such as the Committee of Thirty-Four - the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and
the Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations. There are also several initiatives that have
been launched by Member States with a View to further
strengthening United Nations peacekeeping to meet the
needs that arise from the contemporary challenges,
such as the United Kingdom/France joint initiative and
the initiative of Canada and the Center on International
Cooperation.

On the Secretariat side, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support have launched an internal review of the full
range of issues confronting the peacekeeping agenda,
under the name New Horizon, on which I am sure the
09-38504
Under-Secretaries-General Mr. Alain Le Roy and
Ms. Susan Malcorra will brief us.

What we aim to do today is to continue and
contribute to the ongoing discussions on United
Nations peacekeeping by inserting new ideas and
highlighting some existing issues and thus to contribute
to the efforts under way in various forums. We are
hoping that the views expressed today by some of the
major stakeholders in the realm of peacekeeping will
present useful inputs to the ongoing debate in other
forums, particularly for the Secretariat in the
finalization of the New Horizon paper.

Now, without any further ado, let me open the
floor for what we hope will be a lively and fruitful
exchange.

I now give the floor to Mr. Le Roy.


