Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Sir, for convening this meeting of the Security Council
on the topic of threats to international peace and
security caused by terrorist acts, at which the Council
has adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2015/ 14,
concerning the Multinational Joint Task Force against
Boko Haram. Chad welcomes the consensus adoption
of the statement and thanks all delegations for their
valuable contributions, commitment and flexibility
throughout the negotiations on the draft text proposed
by the delegation of Chad.

The terrorist group Boko Haram, recently renamed
the Islamic State's West Africa Province, has increased
its horrific attacks and atrocities against peaceful
civilians in all the riparian States of Lake Chad, sowing
destruction and death. The impact of these attacks and
atrocities is incalculable. Over 10,000 people have been
killed and over 1.5 million internally displaced. Over
200,000 have sought refuge in Nigeria's neighbouring
States. Dozens of towns and villages have been
destroyed. Subregional economic and trade routes have
been profoundly disrupted.

Aware of the serious security situation in the Sahel
in general and in the subregion in particular, the States
members of the Lake Chad Basin Commission (LCBC)

have spared no effort in effectively confronting
the threat, as attested by the various summits and
ministerial meetings held by the African Union and the
LCBC, the Economic Community of Central African
States and the Economic Community of West African
States. These efforts have allowed us to launch a robust
military operation and to establish the Multinational
Joint Task Force.

Chad commends the great sacrifices made by the
armed forces of the countries of the Lake Chad Basin
and reiterates its commitment to fighting Boko Haram
alongside them. We pay a warm tribute to all the
courageous soldiers of the armies engaged in this fight
who have paid the ultimate price. Through me, Chad
also wishes to thank all our bilateral and multilateral
partners - in particular France, the United States and
the European Union - for their intelligence, logistics,
technical and financial support.

In just a few days later this month, the Multinational
Joint Task Force will be operational and ready to fight
Boko Haram. With that in mind, we welcome the
Security Council's appeal for greater support for the
efforts of the countries of the LCBC and Benin, and ask
the international community to contribute generously
to the African Union Trust Fund established to that end.
We also count on the support of the Secretary-General
in further mobilizing the international community
as a whole. Moreover, if we are to find a long-term
solution to the terrorist threat and its consequences,
we must be sure to take into account issues related to
socioeconomic development. In that regard, the support
of the international community should also target the
rehabilitation of the affected communities and zones,
quick-impact projects and the return and reintegration
of refugees.

In conclusion, we emphasize that Boko Haram
has been weakened militarily but is not yet fully
defeated. It remains a serious cross-border threat and
is capable of reorganizing itself with the support of
the vast terrorist network entrenched in the Sahel. The
increase in asymmetric attacks and cowardly assaults
in all the countries of the Lake Chad Basin is a sorry
manifestation ofthat capacity. The best way to eradicate
this scourge is through the Multinational Joint Task
Force established by the LCBC members and Benin, to
be headquartered in N'Djamena.

The reach, duration and effectiveness of the Force's
activities will lagrely depend on the means made
available to it. The countries involved will be unable
to assume that burden alone, and the international
community will need to assume its share of the
responsibility. Like the Islamic State in Iraq and the

Sham, Boko Haram poses a real and major threat to
international peace and security to which no one can
remain indifferent.

The meeting rose at 10.20 am.
