Mr. Deng (South Sudan): Once again, Sir, I
appreciate the opportunity to address the Security
Council for the third time during the Republic of
Korea's presidency. While it is an honour and a pleasure
for me to appear again before the Council, I also realize
that it is sadly due to the multiplicity of crises facing
our country and region. My focus today will be on
the situation in Abyei and how I believe we can move
forward beyond the current impasse.

Let me begin by welcoming the decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) for
four months. While we believe that that is a very short
period in which to meet the protection challenges in the
area, it provides an opportunity to develop more durable
solutions to the Abyei problem. We must also express our
profound appreciation and gratitude to the Government
of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and to
the Force Commander and his courageous forces for
their commitment to the protection of our people. As
I have often said, the best thing going for the Abyei
Area and its Misseriya neighbours is the presence of
UNISFA there.

Permit me to express my appreciation for the very
positive tone my colleague from the Sudan set in his
statement about the situation - a tone that, if in fact
acted upon in the same spirit and good will, could lead
us forwards. The reality, however, is that we have had
difficulty moving forward in finding a final solution
to the situation. That is why, in my note entitled "The
Interim Stabilization of the Crisis Situation in Abyei",
which the Council included in its consideration of
the resolution on UNISFA (resolution 2156 (2014)), I
argue that the situation has now reached a point where
alternative ideas are urgently needed to overcome
the impasse on Abyei and to prevent the crisis from
escalating into yet another catastrophic explosion in
the region.

In my opinion, the highest priority now must
be to stabilize the situation in Abyei by establishing
an effective administration and ensuring that the
Ngok Dinka return in safety and with dignity to their
original areas of residence, resettle and lead a secure
and productive life without the threat of violent attacks
from their neighbours. Equally important is addressing
the needs of the Misseriya, both in their own areas of
normal residence and in the transitional zone oftheir dry
season migration in search of water and pasture in the
Abyei area. That requires urgent measures to promote
Ngok Dinka-Misseriya dialogue towards durable peace
and reconciliation.

The tragedy of the Abyei situation is that recent
hostilities have overshadowed at least a century of
well-documented peaceful coexistence and cooperation
between the Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya. That
exceptional cooperation was widely recognized,
including by the British colonial administrators,
as a positive model in an environment of pervasive
interracial, inter-ethnic and interreligious violence
between communities along the borders of the then
North and South Sudan. It is indeed still referred to as
a legacy worth restoring and emulating.

The basis for those cordial ties was the recognition
and respect that the two communities - and especially
their respective leaders - had for each other.
Particularly important was the protection the Ngok
Dinka leadership afforded to the Misseriya and other
Southern Sudanese during their seasonal migration into
the Abyei area. In that Respect, it should be noted that
South Sudanese herders, both Dinka and Nuer, from
several provinces, which are now states, escape floods
during the rainy season by moving to the drier areas in
Ngok Dinka territory. That is an important part of what
makes Abyei a genuine crossroads between the Sudan
and South Sudan.

We recognize that the international community
did not approve of the Abyei community's referendum
and does not recognize the overwhelming vote to join
South Sudan. It is, however, widely acknowledged that
the referendum was well organized and efficiently
and transparently conducted, and that it reflects the
genuine aspirations of the Ngok Dinka. Yet without the
cooperation of the Sudan and the support of regional
and international organizations, expressions of such
aspirations have no practical significance.

Nevertheless, it is worth recalling that the Ngok
Dinka were acting in the spirit of the proposal of the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel, under
the chairmanship of former President Mbeki of South
Africa, that the referendum be held in October, which
was the month the community's referendum was indeed
conducted. Furthermore, that proposal, which South
Sudan accepted and the Sudan rejected, was endorsed
by the African Union (AU) and its Peace and Security
Council as the best way forward in addressing the
challenges posed by the Abyei problem.

In October, 2013, the African Union Peace and
Security Council urged the Security Council to extend
support to the AU proposal. The Council has not
been able to respond positively to that request. In any
case, it is realistic to recognize that only a negotiated
settlement to which both the Sudan and South Sudan
will be committed in good faith will bring genuine
peace, security and stability to the area.

President Salva Kiir has been striving to strike
a balance between supporting the aspirations of the
Ngok Dinka and winning the cooperation of the
Sudan's President, Omer Hassan Al-Bashir. So far,
the two leaders have not been able to agree on Abyei.
Meanwhile, urgent measures are needed to stabilize
the security situation for both the Ngok Dinka and the
Misseriya.

To stabilize the situation in Abyei during the interim
period as the leaders of South Sudan and the Sudan
negotiate the final status of Abyei, it is my opinion
that the Ngok Dinka need and deserve to restore their
erstwhile autonomous administrative status - which
had been combined with cordial and cooperative
relations with the Misseriya - this time under
internationally guaranteed security arrangements and in
cooperation with the Governments of South Sudan and
the Sudan. We must remember that the Misseriya, too,
have their own autonomous administration within the
Sudan's national framework. Such mutually respectful
arrangements would allow the area to stabilize, develop
socially and economically and rise to the challenge of
its postulated role as a bridge between the two Sudans.
I should reiterate that the details of my proposals for the
stabilization of Abyei are in the note that I have referred
to earlier, which is contained in the annex to document
S/2014/356.

The objective of my remarks is not to offer
solutions for the resolution of the final status of Abyei
or to undermine the proposals under consideration, but
rather to suggest ideas for normalizing the situation
in order to promote peace, security and stability for
the local population - both the Ngok Dinka and the
Misseriya. I also believe that this would contribute to
creating a climate conducive to a more constructive and
cooperative negotiation of the final status of Abyei, by
the leaders of South Sudan and the Sudan. I genuinely
believe that it is a win-win proposal, in sharp contrast
to the current situation, where both sides are losing.

1 would like to end with the metaphor that a Ngok
Dinka elder told me and which I have often cited. He
said that Abyei is like the eye, which is so small but
sees so much. I now reverse that metaphor by saying
that although Abyei is so small, the eyes of the world
are focused on its security and general welfare. I think
that is a major departure from its previous suffering
in isolation. I hope that the positive momentum can
be sustained and that Abyei will not fall back into the
abyss of past tragedies. The realization of that hope is
primarily in the hands of the Security Council and its
African partners.

