Mr. Kavakure (Burundi) (spoke in French): It
is my great pleasure to address the Security Council
today. Allow me, at the outset, to convey the greetings
of His Excellency Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza, President of
the Republic of Burundi, as well as of all Burundians.

For the umpteenth time, the topic of the security
situation in the Great Lakes region is once again before
the Council today, in the context of this high-level
meeting, in order to consider the best approaches to
lasting security, stability and development in the Great
Lakes region. I thank the organizers of this debate and
hope that it will be successful.

The Government of Burundi welcomes and
strongly supports all the initiatives and commitments
already made to restore peace and security in the Great
Lakes region. As the headquarters of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, Burundi is an
integral part of the commitments made under to the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
signed in Addis Ababa on 24 February and baptized the
"hope agreement" by the Secretary-General's Special
Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, Ms. Mary Robinson.

The Government of Burundi welcomes the efforts
already under way by Ms. Robinson to implement the
Framework, in particular the organization of a regional
conference on women, peace, security and development
in the Great Lakes region, held in Bujumbura from
9 to 11 July. Burundi fully endorses the results of
the conference in terms of women's crucial role in
implementing the Framework agreement.

In that context, the Government of Burundi
has fully endorsed the outcome of the high-level
ministerial conference held in Addis Ababa on 19 July
concerning regional approaches to development and
the implementation of the Framework - again, the so-
called "hope agreement", to recall the expression used
by Ms. Robinson.

The Government of Burundi considers the
approaches developed at the Bujumbura and Addis
Ababa conferences to be complementary and fully
focused on the fact that breaking the cycle of violence
requires determined action on multiple fronts, including
women's economic empowerment.

In particular, the Addis Ababa conference noted
that increased regional cooperation and economic
integration, along with improving infrastructure
and increased trade, could foster participation in the
economy and create opportunities for disadvantaged
groups, such as women and youth, as well as strengthen
political agreements to produce concrete results.

Also at Addis Ababa, our delegation advocated
for the quick financing of projects proposed by the
Economic Community of the Great Lake Countries
(CEPGL). With its headquarters in Gisenyi, Rwanda,
located opposite the city of Goma, capital of the
Congolese province of North Kivu, in the very heart of
the Great Lakes region, the CEPGL is currently being
relaunched and deserves every support to achieve its
goals.

The integration projects put forward by the
CEPGL - approved by the Addis Ababa conference,
which was sponsored by the World Bank, the United
Nations and the Commmission of the African
Union - focus primarily on the energy sector, for
example, the rehabilitation of the Ruzizi I and II power
plants and the construction of the Ruzizi III unit.
There is also a proposal for developing agriculture
on the Ruzizi plain, as well as a project for fostering
cross-border trade, specifically by modernizing four
border stations to serve as one-stop border crossings
and building markets and roads in their vicinity. It is
important to note that cross-border trade is largely the
purview of women, which is why the conference in
Addis Ababa included the topic of modernizing border
stations, with an emphasis on gender.

The conference in Addis Ababa also recognized the
importance of establishing transport corridors in the
region between the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its eastern neighbours, as well as the construction
of railway lines to link Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda and
Burundi with the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The conference also recommended improving
existing ports, creating new sea ports and improving
national airports in conformity with regional airport
standards, as well as establishing industries to support
agricultural development in View of developing regional
fertilizer-production facilities, among other things.

With regard to national airports, I should like to
emphasize the special role of the Bujumbura International
Airport when it comes to rotation operations of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I ask that
the airport receive priority consideration in terms of
development projects.

In conclusion, I would like to express the wish
that this high-level ministerial debate also address the
resolutions and decisions of the recent conference held
in Bujumbura, on integrating the gender dimension in
the implementation of the hope agreement, as well as
those of the Addis Ababa ministerial conference, on
development and regional integration.

