Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting on the situation in Guinea-Bissau.
I also wish to thank Mr. Prendergast, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his introduction to the
report of the Secretary-General on developments in that
country.
The delegation of Tunisia notes with satisfaction the
gradual return to constitutional and democratic order in
Guinea-Bissau following the holding of free, fair and
transparent elections. In this regard, we welcome the
efforts of the new Government to consolidate the nascent
democracy, to promote national reconciliation through
grass-roots involvement in the decision-making process,
to provide for good governance of public affairs and to
once again become part of the overall dynamic of
development in the subregion, within the Economic
Community of West African States.

It is clear that the return of Guinea-Bissau to a
lasting state of normalcy will require large-scale national,
subregional and international efforts. It is, of course, the
responsibility of the Bissau Guineans themselves to
undertake this task by tackling the economic
reconstruction of their country, while ensuring the
consolidation on a daily basis of national reconciliation,
with a View to bringing about lasting stability.

 

In extending the mandate of the United Nations Peace-
building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) for
a year as of 31 March, the Security Council has reaffirmed
its resolve to continue to lend the necessary support to the
consolidation of peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau. The
international action which took that country from a state of
war to a state of peace is for us a source of pride. The
cooperation of all Bissau Guinean parties, with the support
of ECOWAS, the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries and the United Nations, proves that the
mobilization of the entire international community to work
for peace always provides grounds for hope.

The satisfactory outcome of the conflict in Guinea-
Bissau should encourage protagonists in other areas of
tension and conflict to reflect on this example and opt
resolutely for peace.

Mr. President, the Tunisian delegation supports the
statement that you will be making on behalf of the Council,
which reflects our full support for the process of
reconciliation and its requirements, as well as the role that
the international community will continue to play in
building peace in Guinea-Bissau.

