Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
also wish to thank Executive Director Fedotov for his
briefing. Drug trafficking and transnational organized
crime seriously endanger the economic development
and social order of all countries and constitute a
common challenge facing the international community.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) has done a lot of work in combating drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime, for
which China expresses its appreciation.

Over recent years, the international community
has achieved remarkable progress in its drug control
efforts. However, the drug issue in the world is still
rampant and drug production remains at a high level.
At the same time, drug production and smuggling are
increasingly interwoven with funding for international
terrorism and transnational organized crime. In
countries such as Afghanistan and in West Africa the
issue of drugs has become an important element
affecting security and stability. I wish to emphasize
three points.

First, the international community should
implement a comprehensive and balanced drug control
strategy. It is imperative to strictly tackle the illicit
drug supply, on the one hand, and to effectively reduce
the demand for illicit drugs, on the other. Drug-
consuming countries, production countries and
countries of transit should take on their responsibilities
in earnest. Developed countries should help developing
countries, which are severely affected by drugs, and
should promote alternative economies and provide the
necessary financial and technical support in this regard.

Secondly, in preventing conflicts and building
peace, both the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission should pay close attention to the impact of
the drug issue. In supporting countries in conflict or
emerging from conflict in their drug control efforts, the
international community should fully respect the drug
control strategy independently formulated by the
countries concerned. China welcomes the participation
of UNODC in the relevant discussions with the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Thirdly, drug control efforts require better
coordination and coherence among countries and
international organizations, which should bring into
full play their advantages and expertise. China
welcomes the establishment of the United Nations
system task force on transnational organized crime and
drug trafficking, which can consolidate the resources in
the United Nations system so as to work in synergy.

