Mr. Daou (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me at the
outset to convey to you, Sir, my warm congratulations
on Guatemala's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. At the same time, I commend your
initiative to convene this meeting.

The Security Council's adoption on 5 July of
resolution 2056 (2012) opened the way to prospects for a
comprehensive solution to the dual political-institutional
and security crisis in Mali. Since then, key developments
have arisen, including the return to our country of the
interim President of the Republic, followed by the
implementation of a Government of national unity that
has made the management of the crisis in northern Mali
and the holding of free, transparent and democratic
elections its priorities.

A decisive phase was completed with the request
of the Malian authorities at the highest levels to the
President of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the President of the African Union,
the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
European Commission for their assistance in ensuring
the political stability of our country and restoring its
territorial integrity.

Now is the time to commend the praiseworthy and
tireless efforts of our partners and the international
community in the context of accelerating the process
under way. The high-level meeting on the Sahel, held
on 26 September, fueled that dynamic.

My country, Mali, underscores once again the
importance and urgency of deploying an international
military force under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter to support the defence and security forces of
Mali in restoring territorial integrity, fighting terrorism
and transnational organized crime, and restoring human
rights in the northern regions under occupation.

At the same time, in its search for a political
solution to the security crisis in the northern regions of
our country, the transitional Government vehemently
reaffirms that Mali's territorial integrity and
sovereignty, as well as the secular nature of the State,
are non-negotiable.

Another important phase has also been closed this
afternoon with the unanimous adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 2017 (2012), which Mali fully
endorses. We thank all Council members that voted in
favour of the resolution. My country reaffirms its full
preparedness to cooperate with the Security Council,
the African Union, ECOWAS, the European Union and
all other partners in the framework of implementing the
resolution that has just been adopted.

In a few days, Bamako will host a ministerial
meeting of the Follow-up and Support Group for Mali.
The meeting will be marked by interaction between
the Group and high-level Malian authorities on matters
related to governance and transition, the restoration
of State authority in the north, the convening of
elections, support for post-conflict reconstruction and
peacebuilding. Other matters on the agenda of that
important meeting will include the stabilization of the
Sahel region and humanitarian assistance for refugees
and internally displaced persons.

Similarly, there will be exchanges on the
strategic concept paper drafted by the African Union
Commission.

In conclusion, we dare to hope that the results
of this important meeting will contribute to the
strengthening of the initiatives under way, with a view
to adopting a Security Council resolution as soon as
possible authorizing the deployment of an international
military force in Mali.

