Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno and Mr. Piot for the comprehensive and
detailed briefings they have just given. The briefings
are particularly useful in helping us to gain a full
picture of the implementation of resolution 1308
(2000) and the challenges ahead. The relevant
recommendations made by the speakers are also highly
enlightening and merit the Council's serious
consideration.

We welcome the presence of the Secretary-
General at our debate today.

HIV/AIDS not only threatens human physical
health, but also seriously impedes the economic and
social development and stability of the affected
countries and regions. It has become one of the
contemporary world's most salient non-traditional
security issues. In recent years, the international
community and the United Nations in particular have
paid increasing attention to the issue of HIV/AIDS. At
the recent high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS, countries
reaffirmed their resolve and confidence that they will
prevail over the disease. It is now an urgent imperative
that we pursue effective action, further enhance
cooperation and support and coordinate with the United
Nations in these efforts. The Security Council can also
play its due role in facilitating the resolution of this
problem.

China welcomes the series of positive steps taken
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, on the
basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions, to
increase HIV/AIDS prevention awareness among
peacekeepers, to deploy policy advisers on the
epidemic and to revise the code of conduct for
peacekeepers. These steps will undoubtedly help to
ensure the safety of peacekeepers and allow them to
fulfil the Security Council's mandates with all
diligence. We hope that the Security Council will
continue to strengthen its coordination and cooperation
with the relevant international bodies, allowing them to
exploit the strengths of their respective comparative
advantages and division of labour and to promote the
attainment of the Millennium Development Goals in
the anti-HIV/AIDS campaign, in accordance with the
timetable that has been set.

The Chinese Government has vigorously
participated in international cooperation in the fight
again HIV/AIDS. We have pledged $10 million in
contributions to the Global Fund to Fight HIV/AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria. We are engaged in
cooperation projects with the countries concerned and
are actively exploring the possibility of cooperation
with African countries. China is ready to continue to
work with the international community in a tireless
effort to reduce the risk and damages of HIV/AIDS and
to promote common development.

