Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Let me first
express the thanks of the United Kingdom delegation
to Norma Chan for her extraordinary service to the
United Nations and to the Security Council over so
many years, as well as for her kindness, efficiency and
wise advice. Her shrewd and sometimes quite wicked
sense of humour has enhanced our lives. We are
immensely grateful and we wish her all the best.

On the matter at hand, let me begin by thanking
the Secretary-General for his latest report on the
situation in Afghanistan (S/2009/475) and Special
Representative Eide for his briefing today. I also
welcome Foreign Minister Spanta and thank him for
his contribution to our consideration of this item.

It is important that we continue to have regular
and frank discussions on the situation in Afghanistan.
These reports and these briefings are a key element of
the Security Council's engagement with the work of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).

When the Council met in June (see S/PV.6154) to
discuss the last UNAMA report (S/2009/323), many if
not all of us underlined the significance for
Afghanistan of the August presidential election and the
need for the United Nations to work with the Afghan
authorities to ensure that they were credible, inclusive
and secure. The fact that those elections went ahead, in
what were very challenging circumstances, is an
achievement in itself. Holding the first Afghan-led
electoral process for 30 years was an important step
along the road to creating a stable, secure and self-
sustaining Afghanistan.

The Secretary-General's report sets out some of
the significant achievements, including the number of
polling stations opened and the substantive tenor of the
political debate. It also notes the reports of electoral
fraud and irregularities. The only appropriate response
to those reports is to allow the Afghan Independent
Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission to complete the electoral audit currently
under way. We must be patient and allow that process
to run its course. Their work is essential to ensure that
the outcome of the election is credible and reflects the
will of the Afghan people. They have our full support.

As the Secretary-General's report notes,
regardless of who wins the election, the crucial next
step is the formation of a credible and effective
Government that will deliver to the people of
Afghanistan on the issues that matter: security,
governance, justice, development and a workable
programme for reintegration. Building the legitimate
economy and pursuing the fight against corruption will
also be key challenges for the new Government. We,
alongside the rest of the international community, stand
ready to support that Government in pursuing these
priorities, focusing wherever possible on building
Afghan capacity.

To that end, we hope there will be agreement to
the proposal to convene a post-election conference in
Kabul, co-chaired by the United Nations and the next
Afghan Government, the aim of which should be to
cement the international community's coordinated
support for a new government programme.

The United Nations, and more specifically
UNAMA, will be at the heart of the international
support to the new Government. Their ability to lead
and coordinate the overall international effort is crucial
to success in Afghanistan. So, we welcome the
publication of UNAMA's strategic benchmarks and
indicators of progress, which will be an important tool
for measuring progress. We hope that those
benchmarks will continue to evolve. As we look to
further enhance UNAMA's ability to deliver on its
mandate, it will be important to measure accurately the
progress of the Mission and its role in delivering our
shared objective, as well as that of the broader
international effort.

We continue to support UNAMA's plans to
establish a more extensive presence across the country
and look forward to hearing more detail on UNAMA's
expansion plans, their resource implications and the
setting of priorities.
Despite the many challenges Afghanistan faces, it
is heartening to be able to note the continuing positive
trends in counter-narcotics, as Special Representative
Eide himself noted earlier. Following the 19 per cent
decrease in opium cultivation in 2008, it looks set to
fall by a further 22 per cent this year. In Helmand,
close work with the Afghan authorities has resulted in a
decrease in cultivation by one third, and the operations
conducted this year under the trilateral initiative of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime provide
grounds for cautious optimism at the regional level as
well.

Let me touch briefly on the issue of civilian
casualties. The position of the United Kingdom
remains as set out in previous discussions. We deeply
regret - deeply regret - any civilian casualty. Each
and every innocent life lost is a tragedy. As General
McChrystal has made clear, protecting the Afghan
population is at the core of our international mission,
in stark contrast to the Taliban and their fellow
insurgents, who, as the Secretary-General's report
makes clear, continue to account for the vast majority
of civilian deaths.

I would like to conclude by taking the
opportunity to express our gratitude and thanks for the
efforts of Special Representative Eide and all UNAMA
staff, who continue to do vitally important work, often
in incredibly difficult circumstances. The 18 August
attack in Kabul that killed two UNAMA staff members
and wounded a third is a tragic reminder of the very
real dangers they face in carrying out their work. They
will continue to have the United Kingdom's full
support.

