Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mindaoudou for her comprehensive briefing. I would
also like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Marcel
Amon-Tanoh, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cote
d'Ivoire, to the Council. It is a pleasure to have him in
the Chamber for this final briefing on the successful
completion ofthe 14-year mission of the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI).

Please allow me to commend Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Mindaoudou and all UNOCI
staff, past and present, including those who lost their
lives, for their dedication to supporting a better future
for C6te d'Ivoire. The country has made great progress
in consolidating its economic and security gains. The
result of the Security Council election this morning
symbolizes and affirms these achievements.

The 14 years of activity of UNOCI offer a rich
storehouse of lessons on peacekeeping. While the
magnitude and complexity of issues may differ, the
Council should continue to apply lessons from Cote
d'Ivoire to its ongoing work on peacekeeping, especially
in Africa. In particular, UNOCI has demonstrated
that comprehensive and nationally owned security
sector reform and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration are key tools for successful peace
processes, as well as for preventing the recurrence
of conflicts.

We have also seen how unresolved disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration issues, including
incomplete socioeconomic reintegration of former
soldiers, can impact even a well-designed security sector
reform programme and improved security architecture.
We are confident that C6te d'Ivoire will continue to
enhance the professionalism and accountability of the
security sector under the coordination of its National
Security Council.

Cote d'Ivoire will not be alone in these tasks.
Together with other international partners and the
United Nations country team, Japan will continue
to support Cote d'Ivoire's efforts in sustaining
peace, but this month marks a milestone in C6te
d'Ivoire's development.

I would like to conclude by, once again,
congratulating UNOCI, as well as the people and
Government of Cote d'Ivoire, on their achievements.

