Archbishop Auza (Holy See): At the outset, let
me congratulate Jordan for its presidency during this
month, and in particular for scheduling this debate
on the role of young people in countering Violent
extremism and promoting peace.

The ever-increasing globalization and technological
interconnectedness have brought many benefits to
our world today, but they have also created new
and emerging challenges. Young people around the
world can use the Internet and social media to enter
into contact, make friends and learn about the great
cultures and traditions of other people in every corner
of the world. Unfortunately, those great technological
advances can also be manipulated to spread messages of
hate and violence. Today's debate allows us to examine
more in depth how these harmful messages are finding
new audiences and how States can work together to
face the challenge.

The phenomenon of young people responding to the
recruitment of those inciting them to engage in violent
extremism develops within a context of disillusionment
and missed opportunities, ofsociocultural identity crisis
and failed integration, of alienation and dissatisfaction,
of intergenerational break-ups and broken families.

A fundamental step in addressing the radicalization
of young people is to work with and support the family
in its efforts to educate children and young people in
the values of dialogue and respect for others, to make
them better equipped to resist what appear at first as
attractive calls to a higher cause and to adventure with
extremist groups. If States really want to reach young
people before they are exposed to extremist ideologies,
they should render appropriate assistance to parents in
the performance of their child-rearing responsibilities,
according to the Convention on the Rights of the Child.

Studies and events show that some Governments
tend to avoid frank and constructive conversations on
the question of radicalization. Hiding the problem,
however, is counterproductive. Fostering public debate,
on the other hand, can encourage young people to vent
their frustrations before they succumb to extremist
ideologies and can assist the State to articulate policies
accordingly. Failure to bring the problem to public
discussion may imply disinterest on the part of States,
fear or both, while encouraging debate will ordinarily
promote collective confidence and deeper mutual
understanding among the various ethnic, racial and
religious components of society. This dialogue can lead
to the formulation of Government policies of which all
members of a society can claim collective ownership
and offer young people convincing counter-narratives
to extremist propaganda.

Indeed, balanced public policy plays a key role in
facilitating solid integration of immigrants in society as
citizens. Policies that discourage xenophobic or racist
perceptions are much needed because they contribute
to the observance of healthy religious and sociocultural
values. Religion constitutes a potent part of these value
systems. Policies and education that seek to minimize
or eliminate the faith component of individual and
collective identities could leave the young disoriented,
alienated, marginalized or excluded and prone to the
message of extremist groups. There is no doubt that the
catchwords and slogans used by extremist groups to
recruit young people often involve distorted religious
and sociocultural values.

Unemployment and despair also lie behind the
vulnerability of many young people to the propaganda
and manipulations of extremist recruiters. Idle
minds and hands are highly vulnerable to extremist
ideologies. Thus, global economic inequalities and the
marginalization and exclusion from development to
which they lead are not only a grave social and economic
concern but can become a threat to international peace
and security. Achieving social justice is therefore key
to countering the phenomenon of young people joining
extremist organizations.

In our fight against extremist ideologies and our
efforts to promote a culture of peace, young people
themselves are a most precious resource. We can
counter extremist recruiters by promoting voices that
are trusted and respected among their peers on the very
platforms they use to recruit new members, like the
social media.

Finally, faith leaders and organizations must
condemn messages of hate in the name of religion
and provide young people with religious education
that fosters understanding and respect between
peoples of different faiths. People of faith have a grave
responsibility to condemn those who seek to detach
faith from reason and who instrumentalize faith as a
justification for Violence. As Pope Francis emphasized
during his visit to Albania on 21 September 2014, no
one should consider oneself "to be the 'armour' of God
while planning and carrying out acts of violence and
oppression".

