Mr. Ramos-Horta: Thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me the opportunity to essentially say many,
many thanks to you, first, for inviting us to share in the
deliberations of the Council today, and to thank all
Council members for their very kind words addressed
to me, and in particular to thank them all for their
continuing active engagement with the ongoing process
of Timorization, capacity-building and security in East
Timor.

I would like to use this opportunity to answer
only one question that has been raised consistently by a
number of speakers. Sergio Vieira de Mello will speak
for all of us on all other questions in his capacity as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head ofthe United Nations in East Timor.

I would like to address the issue of security and
violence which has been raised, only to point out that
in the course oflast year - one full year - there were
only two politically related violent incidents. Neither
ofthem caused any deaths. This is only to put the issue
in context, since some delegations raised with certain
concern the issue of political violence. This is the
clarification. There were two politically related violent
incidents in the course of twelve months, neither of
which caused any deaths.

In balance, the situation is largely very peaceful.
But even when we address the issue of increasing
criminality, including common crimes, petty theft and
so forth, according to the statistics of the civilian
police, East Timor still records among the lowest
criminality rates in the world, even given one of the
highest rates of unemployment.

In view of that, in the context of security in the
territory, political violence is minimal. Criminality in
terms of common crimes and in view of the
unemployment rate is really not very significant in
terms of the peacefulness of the territory. This is to
reassure Council members and other speakers that, by
and large, the situation has been very peaceful and
successful in this regard.

I thank the Council once again and sincerely
apologize for not being able to stay longer. We have
been given a ticket that does not allow changes. In
View of the constraints induced by the International
Monetary Fund on our budget, I cannot change my
ticket. I really have to leave.

