Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): In a
few days' time, the loya jirga will be opened. Clearly,
this is a very important stage, as Sir Kieran has just
said, in the implementation of the Bonn and Petersburg
Agreements - that is, the implementation of the
reconstruction of and reconciliation in Afghanistan.

Clearly, as Sir Kieran has told us, we have to be
very careful with regard to the approach to this crucial
stage. Reconciling all Afghans after decades of war is
not an easy exercise. Therefore, we have to be
particularly careful about the security conditions
prevailing in Afghanistan. There is good security, of
course, in Kabul, but as Sir Kieran has just said, we
have seen some incidents in the provinces. Just last
Sunday someone was assassinated in a village in
Ghowr Province; he was a member of the electoral
college just elected a few hours before. This means that
we have to remain very vigilant and very careful about
this.

In view of this security challenge, the
international community can take a number of actions
and is already taking action in some areas. I note at
least three areas.

The first, a priority, is training the army and the
Afghan police force. The effort of the international
community here is well coordinated now, thanks to
some pilot donations by the United States for the army
and by Germany for the police force. As was indicated
by Sir Kieran, now there is a mechanism for
coordination between contributors and the Afghan
Authority. On 17 May in Geneva a meeting brought
together all States interested in security matters.
Substantial contributions were pledged at that
conference, and France will be responsible for training
two battalions for the future Afghan army. This training
will start on 1 June for the first battalion and in mid-
September for the second battalion. We will be
deploying a total of 55 trainers to help in this training
exercise. This is in addition to the other contributions
made by France in the area of security - that is, the
participation of 409 French soldiers in the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF), as well as my
country's contribution to the Enduring Freedom
operation.

Clearly, in the area of training, there is a problem
of delay in timing. These Afghan units are not yet fully
operational, apart from one Presidential Guard
battalion, which we think should be able to be used to
guarantee a secure environment during the loya jirga.
This is the Presidential Guard trained by the United
Kingdom.

But other security instruments must continue to
be used. The second vital instrument is ISAF, whose
role in ensuring security in Kabul is crucial, because it
is in Kabul that the headquarters of the transitional
institutions are installed. It is excellent that all the
conditions for the extension of ISAF are now in place,
before the opening of the loya jirga.

Thanks to the contribution of Turkey, it is now
possible for Turkey to take over the command of ISAF
after the role played by the United Kingdom during the
first six months of the existence of ISAF. This means
that today we can renew our authorization - identical
to the Council's original authorization - to extend
ISAF for six months from 20 June. We will be adopting
a draft resolution along those lines today, and this is
something we welcome. In addition to ISAF, of course,
there is the indirect security role played by operation
Enduring Freedom.

Finally, there is international aid. International
aid, particularly aid for reconstruction and recovery of
Afghanistan, contributes, directly and indirectly, to
strengthening security for the Afghan people. Our aid
towards recovery and reconstruction is conditional on
respect for human rights and on the strengthening of
the authority of President Karzai throughout all the
provinces of Afghanistan. This is provided for in
resolution 1401 (2002), particularly in its paragraph 4.
Of course, aid efforts still must be fully coordinated.
This role is being played by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi in
Kabul on behalf of the international community.

Of course, it also remains to be seen whether the
aid will actually be disbursed. Pledges were made in
Tokyo amounting to $1.8 billion, but the donors must
now meet their commitments. We note one important
aid programme, which is the combat against the drugs
trade and assistance in planting substitute crops. That is
another priority for international aid.

The Afghans and the international community
have accomplished a great deal in just six months.
Nonetheless, much remains to be done. We have every
confidence in the Afghans and in their ability to come
together in this crucial stage of the loya jirga to rebuild
their country with the full support of the international
community.

