Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): My
delegation, too, would like to thank Mr. Vieira de
Mello for his comprehensive briefing. We are all aware
of the high quality of the work undertaken and the
commendable efforts made by the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) - which has made progress and obtained
concrete results in East Timor - as well as by the
Indonesian Government and the humanitarian
organizations that have also participated in stabilizing
the situation and making the United Nations mission in
East Timor a success.

It is clear that the instability of the situation in
that region is largely due to the thorny problem of the
return of the refugees, which is both a cause and a
consequence of the precarious humanitarian situation,
unemployment and the presence of uncontrolled
militias. These are all aspects that impede a swift and
definitive resolution of the problem.

The difficult situation of some hundred thousand
refugees is of concern, and is in danger of worsening as
a result of the absence of humanitarian assistance from
humanitarian organizations because of the dangerous
conditions under which they carry out their work. The
security aspect is of concern to the Council. As Mr.
Vieira de Mello stressed, the activities of the
uncontrolled militias and the reprehensible incidents
that have occurred recently cast into doubt all of the
efforts undertaken in the past year by UNTAET and the
Indonesian Government.

In this respect, we encourage Indonesia with
regard to both the position it adopted towards the
militias and its commitment to put an end to their
activities. We believe that the disarmament process
begun by the Indonesian Government constitutes a very
important stage in the resolution of this problem. This
stage will surely be followed by other initiatives that
the Indonesian Government will not fail to undertake,
given the positive attitude shown by the Indonesian
side, which is aware of the importance of maintaining
ongoing contacts with the Security Council. The next
visit of Minister Shihab is certainly part of this
approach.

Security should also be strengthened on both
sides of the border in order to minimize the possibility
of incursions by the militias. The conclusion on 14
September of an agreement between the Indonesian
Government and UNTAET, creating a Joint Border
Committee, was encouraging.

We believe that the easing of the security
situation would encourage the promotion of economic
activities and have a positive impact on the internal
situation of the country. Indeed, the economic aspect is
one of the greatest priorities to which special attention
should be given by the international community. The
post-conflict period and its humanitarian and economic
requirements will call for intensive efforts so that
lasting peace can be established.

