Mr. Valle (Brazil): First of all, let me congratulate
you, Ambassador Dejammet, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of July.
Under your able and wise guidance the work of the
Security Council will be conducted in a highly effective
way. I would like also to take this opportunity to express
appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador Nabil
Elaraby, for the competence with which he presided over
the Council during the month of June.
We would like to pay tribute to the key role
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali and his Special
Representative, Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye, continue to
play in the consolidation of the peace process in Angola.
The multiple efforts deployed by the troika of observer
States in helping the peace process should also be
highlighted.

I wish to thank the Secretary-General for his report on
UNAVEM. III (S/1996/503), which in our view presents an
objective picture of the latest developments in the situation
in Angola. In his assessment, the Secretary-General points
out that during the last two months the pace of
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol has improved
somewhat. He also notes, however, that the coming weeks
will be critical.

The quartering of troops of the Uniao Nacional para
a Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA) - one of the
key elements of the Lusaka Protocol - remains subject to
delays. Some of the problems in this area, according to the
report, are the

"high number of desertions, the unsatisfactory quality
and quantity of weapons and ammunition handed over,
[and] the failure to quarter UNITA police
personnel". (S/1996/503, para. 37)

It is noteworthy that UNITA's leader has promised
to hand over weapons of "better quality" (para. 12).

However, it is mentioned in the report that, up to now,
UNITA has not handed over

"any of its heavy weapons, rocket launchers, anti-
aircraft artillery, armoured personnel carriers and
tanks, communications and engineering equipment or
vehicles used for military purposes". (para. 13)

Brazil is in agreement with the report when it states that

"Without such equipment, the quartering process
will not be complete" and that "the United Nations
will not be in a position to declare that it is
complete unless convincing evidence is provided that
all regular, commando, engineer, support and other
units of UNIT A have been effectively cantoned or
otherwise accounted for". (Ibid.)

On the political level, the prospects are still not
reassuring. Up to now, Mr. Savimbi has not formally
accepted the post of Vice-President. Most of the UNITA
members of Parliament have not taken their seats in the
National Assembly. Officials from UNITA have not yet
joined the State administration at the national, provincial
and local levels. Therefore, the coming meeting of
President Jose Eduardo dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi
should indeed provide an opportunity to reach agreement
on these critical questions.

Brazil, as the Council is aware, remains fully
committed to the peace process in Angola. Our very
substantial participation in UNAVEM. III reflects a
long-term involvement with Angola and its people, based
on common cultural and historical roots, as well as on
shared aspirations to social and economic development.
We firmly believe that all Angolans are now tired of war
and ready for reconciliation.

In this light, the Secretary-General recommends the
extension of UNAVEM. III's mandate for three months.
The suggestion for a renewal of a short duration reflects
the sense of the international community, which we share,
that further procrastination within the peace process is
unjustifiable.

The mild improvement in the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol should not distract us from the fact that

 

the coming weeks will be critical. The Security Council,
while closely monitoring the events in Angola, should
concentrate efforts in assuring that concrete steps required
for the consolidation of the peace process are taken without
further delay.

