Mr. Obradovic' (Serbia): I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to speak to the Council again. Before
I proceed to address the important topic on the
Council's agenda today, I would like to welcome our
esteemed guests from The Hague, the Presidents and
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the Mechanism for
International Criminal Tribunals. I thank them for their
semi-annual reports.

Serbia remains firmly committed to cooperating
with the ICTY, while the Serbian domestic judiciary
continues to fight impunity for core international crimes
perpetrated during the armed conflict in the former
Yugoslavia. In the reporting period, my Government
duly executed warrants of arrest against Mr. Jovica
Stanisic' and Mr. Franko Simatovie, the two indictees
acquitted by the Trial Chamber, whose first-instance
judgment was quashed on appeal on 15 December
2015. These ICTY arrest warrants were the first to
be executed, dating back to the time of the arrest, in
2011, of indictees Ratko Mladie and Goran HadZie,
who were also arrested by my country. Somehow this
important information did not find its way into the
Prosecutor's report.

Today, the ICTY completion strategy relies heavily
on the cooperation of the Serbian Government, in
particular in cases of provisional release. In the past
six months, Serbian agencies were called upon to
report to the ICTY, in some cases on a daily basis,
on the compliance with the terms of their provisional
release of indictees Goran Hadzic', Jovica Stanisic' and
Mr. Franko Simatovie and of convicted individuals
Radivoje Miletie and Drago Nikolie, who passed away
while he was in Serbia. The terms and conditions of
their provisional release were determined by the ICTY
Judicial Chambers and sometimes included surveillance
24 hours a day. Serbia has a perfect record in carrying
out the guarantees its Government provided for the
process of provisional release. In addition, it has fully
complied with its specific duty to report to the Appeals
Chamber on the progress of the medical treatment of
indictee Vojislav Seselj during his provisional stay
in Serbia.

The ICTY Prosecutor acknowledges in his
report (S/2016/453, annex II) that he has free access
to evidence located in Serbia, such as documents,
archives and witnesses, while the same conditions,
in accordance with the principle of equality of arms,
are maintained for defence counsel. So far, Serbia has
received 2,170 requests for assistance from the Office
of the ICTY Prosecutor and 1,331 requests from various
defence teams; no pending requests for assistance or
disputes in that regard are recorded. These statistics
are a telling illustration of the dedication of my
country to the process of cooperation with the ICTY,
and they stack up quite well against the records of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, for
instance. The efforts behind the statistics deserve full
international recognition.

As suggested in my statement to the Council
in December 2015 (see S/PV.7574), the Serbian
Government has now adopted a national strategy on
the prosecution of war crimes. The strategy is aimed
at improving the efficiency of domestic war crimes
proceedings and at promoting regional cooperation
in this sensitive area. It reflects my Government's
commitment to accountability for core international
crimes, regardless of the national, ethnic or religious
status of the perpetrator or the victim. For this and other
reasons, Serbia rightly expects that all other countries
of the former Yugoslavia share the same objectives and
act in accordance with the principles of international
humanitarian law.

In that context, let me recall that, since June 2015, I
have drawn the attention of the Council to the fact that,
in spite of the ICTY and International Court of Justice
findings that murders, inhuman acts and cruel treatment
were perpetrated against the civilians of Serb ethnicity
during and after Operation Storm in 1995, Croatia
has had only one final conviction for the war crime of
murder committed in that operation. The representative
of Croatia never contested my assertion. I also advised
that the Croatian Government attempted to deprive
Serbia of jurisdiction to investigate and prosecute
the crimes perpetrated by Croatian nationals. At the
meeting of the General Assembly (see A/70/PV.31) on
the 2015 annual report of the ICTY (see A/70/226), I
submitted that, in so doing, the Croatian Government
sought to establish impunity for its citizens and, for
some reason, there has been no reaction from the United
Nations. Moreover, the judicial bodies of Croatia and
Kosovo have ceased to cooperate in acceding to Serbia's
requests for assistance in the meantime.

Notwithstanding this situation, the ICTY
Prosecutor has now confirmed in his written report
that the Croatian Government established impunity for
its citizens. The relevant Croatian agencies have been

instructed by decision of the Croatian Government of
3 June 2015

"not to provide cooperation to foreign judiciaries
in certain war crimes cases in which the indictment
alleges that members of Croatian civilian and
military bodies participated in a joint criminal
enterprise to commit international crimes or that the
Croatian military participated in widespread and
systematic attacks against civilian populations".

This information is alarming, and Serbia expects the
Security Council to react adequately. Otherwise, our
efforts will be ineffective, and justice will be denied or
remain selective.

Serbia fully understands and shares the Prosecutor's
concern about evident regression in regional cooperation
and calls once again on the United Nations to find a way
for strict and continuous international monitoring in
the field. Accountability is a regional issue and national
war-crimes prosecutors must cooperate faithfully
in fighting impunity without political interference.
The Serbian national strategy therefore envisages the
convening of a regional conference in which all open
issues of regional cooperation would be addressed
and resolved.

Serbia also supports the View of the ICTY
Prosecutor that the search for missing persons needs
to be intensified. Notwithstanding that need, however,
mention should also be made in this regard that,
according to the official data of the International
Commission on Missing Persons, more than 70 per
cent of the 40,000 persons who went missing during
the armed conflict in the former Yugoslavia have
been accounted for. This ratio has not been equalled
anywhere in the world, and no small credit for it is due
to the efforts made by the country that I come from.

Admittedly, the Prosecutor's report before us is
critical of some of Serbia's recent activities. I shall now
briefly address that criticism.

An impression has been created, particularly in the
region, that Serbia is somehow responsible for the recent
acquittal ofVojislav Seselj. That is not fair. The Serbian
Government has been continually requested to fully
respect the judgments of the ICTY, especially in the case
of the acquittals of General Gotovina and other Croatian
generals, despite the factual findings that murders and
other serious violations were committed against Serb
civilians in Operation Storm. The Serbian Government
has also been asked not to comment on the judgments
in the cases of Bosnian war commanders Naser Orie
and Rasim Delie, whose superior responsibility for
crimes of murder and torture in prison camps, including
decapitation of Serbian soldiers by mujahideen units,
could not be established. However, Naser Oric' is now
being tried by a Bosnian court on the basis of evidence

of individual criminal liability provided by the Serbian
War Crimes Prosecutor. We all should be well advised
to watch developments in this case.

Respect for ICTY judgments was also requested
following the acquittal of Kosovo Liberation Army
commanders Ramush Haradinaj and Fatmir Limaj for
crimes committed against Serbs. The Judges noted,
however, that the Trial Chamber gained "a strong
impression that the [Haradinaj] trial was being held
in an atmosphere where witnesses felt unsafe". A new
light has been shed on the ICTY failure to successfully
prosecute the crimes committed by Kosovo and
Metohija Albanians by the establishment of a new
internationalized judicial mechanism to prosecute
those crimes.

Serbia has been criticized also for not electing
a new war crimes prosecutor. Indeed, the process
of election did fail, but a new recruitment is under
way. The election will be one of the priorities of the
new Government, expected to be formed soon. In
the meantime, the Serbian war crimes prosecution
continues to be fully operational under the leadership
of the First Deputy Prosecutor and eight indictments for
war crimes against 15 individuals have been confirmed
in Serbia in 2016.

Now, I will say a few words in explanation of the
reported failure by Serbia to execute the warrants of
arrest issued by the ICTY Trial Chamber in the case of
contempt of court against three individuals. The arrest
warrants were issued two months after the provisional
release of the accused Vojislav Seselj, the leader of an
opposition political party, under the unprecedented
conditions ordered for his stay in Serbia. Government
agencies have been ordered to exercise no control over
his behaviour and political conduct and, immediately
upon his release, Mr. Seselj began to create difficulties
for the Government, in particular with respect to the
bilateral relations of the country with its neighbours.
The timing of the arrest of his close associates is
indicative of the lack of regard for the political and
social realities in Serbia.

In that context and acting faithfully upon the ICTY
request, my Government made a necessary security
analysis and decided that it could not execute the orders
at the critical moment because of national security
risks. It was of the opinion that there were serious
and justifiable reasons to delay execution, especially
because the investigation in this case lasted many years.
In such a case, the domestic law on cooperation with
the ICTY provides for a possibility to raise an objection
to the International Tribunal. On the other hand, the
ICTY Rules of Procedure and Evidence provides for
no reason to establish a moratorium on ministering the
orders of the Tribunal. Therefore, while the Security
Council can defer International Criminal Court
proceedings for a period of 12 months by a resolution,
such a procedural solution does not exist in cases before
the ICTY; consequently, the Trial Chamber dismissed
the arguments presented by Serbia.

Once again, let me point out that Serbia never asked
the Tribunal for a waiver of its international obligations;
it asked only for a postponement of an execution while
the accused, Seselj, was on provisional release, under
circumstances that endangered the bilateral relations
with countries of the region of former Yugoslavia.
The postponement of the execution would not set an
example; after all, we read in the annals of the Tribunal
that Shefqet Kabashi appeared in the courtroom only in
2011, four years after a warrant of arrest for contempt of
court had been issued against him in 2007. Meanwhile,
the ICTY Presidents did not report to the Security
Council the non-cooperation by the United States.

The Serbian Government did not want to protect
the accused persons from criminal prosecution. As
a compromise solution, a communication was made
with the ICTY President to consider the possibility
of referring the case to the domestic judiciary proprio
motu, in accordance with ICTY Rule 11 bis. In the
View of my Government, such a referral would be fully
in accordance with resolution 1503 (2003) calling on
the ICTY to concentrate on the trial of the most senior
leaders suspected of being most responsible for crimes
within its jurisdiction and to transfer cases involving
those who may not bear that level of responsibility
to competent national jurisdictions. On 5 February,
however, the ICTY President informed the Serbian
Government that contempt matters did not fall within
the scope of cases that may be referred to the domestic
courts of a State pursuant to 11 bis of the Rules. No
particular explanation of such a precedent was provided.

My Government, however, was fully aware of
the need to respect ICTY decisions and orders. For
that reason, it decided to continue with the domestic
case for arrest and transfer of the three accused to the
ICTY and, pursuant to the law on cooperation with
the ICTY, the Ministry of Justice conveyed the case
file to the domestic court for further procedure. Yet,
on 18 May, for the first time in the history of Serbia's
cooperation, the High Court in Belgrade decided that
the legal conditions for the executions of the Tribunal's
warrants were not fulfilled in this case, because the
law on cooperation stipulates that only the indictment
for core statutory crimes, that is, grave breaches of the
Geneva Conventions of 1949; violations of the laws or
customs of war; genocide and crimes against humanity,
provide a legal ground for the execution of ICTY arrest
warrants, unlike an indictment for contempt of court.

Perhaps some more light would be shed on the
reasoning ofthe Belgrade High Court ifjuxtaposed with
the explanation given to the Tribunal by the Embassy
of France in The Hague in its note verbale no. 1108 of
27 December 2011 in which it is said: "France has no
judicial foundation at its disposal that would permit
it to act on the request for the arrest of Ms. Florence
Hartmann and her transfer to the Tribunal." The
difference, though, is in the consequences: unlike on
13 October 2015 in the case of Serbia, President Meron
did not report to the Security Council the failure of a
Government to cooperate with the ICTY in arresting its
citizen. Is it that the principle of the sovereign equality
of all Member States assumes a different light once
refracted through the prism of the ICTY?

Nevertheless, the decision of the Serbian court in
no way precludes Serbia's determination to continue to
cooperate with the ICTY in the most active manner so
as to enable it to accomplish its mission. We must not be
discouraged in our efforts to bring about reconciliation
and cooperation and that includes through trying those
responsible for crimes in domestic courts. The victims
will not be forgotten and we must not allow the crimes
to be repeated.

Instead of a conclusion, let me take this opportunity
to commend all hardworking officials and the staff
of the Tribunal and the Residual Mechanism for the
relentless efforts they continue to invest, despite all
the challenges. My personal cooperation with many of
them over the past 15 years was my highest professional
privilege. My thanks are also due to the Security
Council for its continued monitoring of this important
international issue.

