Ms. French (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Kafando for his briefing. We would also
like to thank Ambassador Lauber for his briefing and
tireless efforts with the Peacebuilding Commission.

Arbitrary arrests, a lack of transparency, the
suspension of media outlets and attempts to put pressure
on voters marred Burundi's 17 May referendum process,
thereby undermining confidence in its reported
outcome. The results leave us concerned that Burundi
is moving closer to one-party rule. The referendum
took place against the backdrop of stalled progress in
the East African Community-led dialogue, continuing
repression and an unstable political situation. The
referendum further aggravates ongoing acute political
tensions, which have destabilizing effects on Burundi
and the wider region.

Although the Government allowed vigorous

campaigningbytheoppositionduringthe designatedtwo-
week campaign period, numerous cases of harassment
and repression against referendum opponents in the
months preceding the voting contributed to a climate of
fear and intimidation, resulting in an environment that
did not allow for a credible referendum. The absence of
independent observers also undermines confidence in
the reported result. We also condemn reports of armed
groups killing 26 innocent civilians in the days leading
up to the referendum. The climate of violence, fear and
repression underscores the need for serious dialogue to
advance peace.

Restrictions on media worsened in advance of the
referendum, further undermining the credibility of
the process. We condemn the Government's decision
to suspend the broadcasts of Voice of America and
the British Broadcasting Corporation during that
particularly volatile time. That decision, along with
other media restrictions, arbitrary arrests and harsh
sentences for human rights defenders, undermines basic
democratic norms and signals continuing troubling
limitations on civic and political space in Burundi.

We remain concerned that the Government
will interpret the revised Constitution as resetting
presidential term limits, and that other amendments seek
to consolidate the President's power, place restrictions
on independent candidates and coalitions of candidates
and run counter to the power-sharing principles
enshrined in the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi. Such amendments will
have long-term impacts on Burundi's governance
and institutions.

We recall the ruling party's commitment under
the Pretoria Protocol to respect the principles of the
Arusha Agreement, including respect for term limits,
and expect it to abide by them. The United States is
closely tracking the trend of leaders extending their
rule by eliminating or extending term limits. We note
from experience that, when whole generations of people
are denied democracy and fundamental freedoms,
instability and insecurity are often the result. It appears
that Burundi is following that undemocratic trend,
which we fear will lay the foundation for continued
instability and political tensions for years to come.

The United States supported and was present at the
signing of the Arusha Agreement, which brought an
end to years of tragic civil war in Burundi. We believe
that parties must continue to respect it in the interests
of Burundians and the wider region.

The Government of Burundi must take clear
steps to reopen the political space for members of the
opposition, independent media and civil society and to
engage in inclusive dialogue with Burundian political
stakeholders. It is critical that the Government of
Burundi participate in good faith in the next session
of the inter-Burundian dialogue. We urge the region
to intensify its engagement on Burundi in the post-
referendum period to press for a durable political
solution to Burundi's political crisis, a reopening
of political space and an end to human rights abuses
and violations.

