Mr. Cho Tae-yul: I thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting me to the Security Council, in my capacity
as former Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
to present the annual report of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) on its eleventh session (S/2018/83).

Since the adoption of the twin resolutions on
the review of the peacebuilding architecture in 2016
(resolutions 2282 (2016) and Generaal Assembly
resolution 70/262) and the Secretary-General's strong
commitment to peacebuilding and sustaining peace, the
political momentum for improving the activity of the
Peacebuilding Commission has been growing. Taking
advantage of that hard-won momentum, the Commission
continued to work hard in the past year to use its
convening role to mobilize relevant stakeholders within
and outside the United Nations and to assist countries
and regions, in line with its mandate in pursuing their
peacebuilding priorities, by way of an integrated,
strategic and coherent approach to peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. I would like to highlight some of the
achievements made in the past year.

First, as an advisory body to the Security Council,
the Peacebuilding Commission continued to make
efforts to improve the quality of its advice to enrich
the Council's deliberations, when requested. For that
reason, the interaction and dynamics between the PBC
and the Council seemed to improve, as the Council
recognized the importance of the convening role of
the Commission last year on a number of regional and
country-specific issues, including the Sahel region,
the Central African Republic, Liberia and Guinea-
Bissau. Such requests provided an opportunity for the
Commission to show that, given its role of convening
diverse actors, including host Governments, United
Nations agencies, international financial institutions,
civil society and, where relevant, private sector actors,
it can provide comprehensive advice to the Council.
For instance, in the case of Burundi, the Commission
presented to the Council the socioeconomic dimensions
of the country, while maintaining a channel of
communication with the Burundian Government.
As for Liberia, the Commission helped to develop a
peacebuilding plan for the country in preparation for
the transition ahead of the withdrawal of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia.

On the Sahel, the Council emphasised the
importance of the Commission's convening role to
mobilize relevant stakeholders in collaboration with
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel, with a view to advancing the implementation of
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
To that end, the Commission held several meetings on
the Sahel last year and engaged with the African Union
High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa and the Sahel, the Permanent Secretary of the
Group of Five for the Sahel, the European Union Special
Representative for the Sahel and the Deputy Secretary-
General of the United Nations, among others. An
informal interactive dialogue with the Council was also
held to discuss the regional peacebuilding challenges
in the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin. In my capacity
as Chair of the PBC, I attended the meeting in Chad
of the Ministerial Coordination Platform for the Sahel,
to identify ways by which the PBC can support the
efforts of the countries in the Sahel in making progress
towards development and stability, the results of which
I shared with the Council last year (see S/PV.7976).

The PBC also held a joint meeting with the
Economic and Social Council to focus on the social and
economic dimensions of the Sahel's multidimensional
challenges. That was also an attempt by the PBC to play
its bridging role among the relevant intergovernmental
United Nations principal organs and to pursue an
integrated and coherent approach to peacebuilding and
sustaining peace within its mandate.

Secondly, in addition to the good work of
the existing country-specific configurations, the
Commission expanded its work by considering, in the
Organizational Committee, other countries and regions.
Most notably, the PBC started to assist the Gambia, upon
its request, at a critical time of transition by sustaining
international attention and supporting the country,
which was not on the Commission's formal agenda,
after the Security Council stopped deliberations on its
situation. After visiting the Gambia with the Assistant
Secretary-General of the Peacebuilding Support Office
and the Permanent Representative of the Gambia, I
convened a series of meetings on the country with PBC
members and senior officials from the United Nations,
international financial institutions and civil society
to discuss the peacebuilding priorities of the Gambia,
with the Gambian national authorities clearly in the
driver's seat.

The Commission also for the first time deliberated
on Solomon Islands, Colombia and Sri Lanka, upon their
request. After becoming eligible to receive resources
from the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF), those countries
came to the PBC to discuss their peacebuilding priorities.
The meetings illustrated how countries eligible for the
PBF can use the PBC as a platform for securing global
political support for their peacebuilding priorities.

The PBC has also been increasingly taking on a
regional approach, as the challenges faced by certain
countries are intertwined with those of other countries
in the region, making it increasingly important to
address the issues with a regional, cross-border
approach. As I mentioned earlier, last year we discussed
the Sahel region, at the request of the Security Council,
as well as the Great Lakes region, with the consent of
the countries concerned.

To better assist countries in building and sustaining
peace, the Commission has also been strengthening its
partnerships with key stakeholders within and outside
of the United Nations, such as international financial
institutions, regional organizations, civil society and,
where relevant, the private sector. For instance, in
June last year, I led a delegation of PBC members to
the World Bank, where we met with the President and
other senior officials of the Bank and members of the
Executive Board to discuss ways to assist the countries
and regions considered by the PBC. The PBC and World
Bank later issued ajoint statement on holding a meeting
on an annual basis, and the Commission should make
use of such annual meetings to help mobilize resources
for the countries supported by the PBC.

In December, I also led a delegation of the
Commission to Addis Ababa to discuss ways to
reinforce cooperation between the Commission and the
African Union. Given that regional organizations and
subregional organizations are increasingly playing a
leading role in building and sustaining peace in their
respective regions, the Commission will continue to
strengthen its partnerships with those organizations
so as to gain a better understanding of the situation
on the ground, while enhancing the coherence and
coordination of international efforts in order to assist
countries with their peacebuilding priorities.

The convening role ofthe PBC has also created space
to engage with civil society organizations. Last year, in
the discussions on Colombia, Solomon Islands and Sri
Lanka, local civil society representatives contributed to
the Commission's deliberations by sharing their Views
on what peacebuilding and sustaining peace meant
in practice.

Before I conclude my remarks, I wish to make a
couple of points on how the Peacebuilding Commission
can work more closely with the Security Council.

First, the Commission's efforts to advise the
Council can be more effective ifits work is coordinated
with the activities of the Council. For that reason, the
Commission should continue to align its work with the
Council's calendar and engage with the relevant actors
to gather diverse perspectives in the months preceding
the relevant Council meetings.

Secondly, the Security Council and the PBC can
consider working more closely during and following
transitions, especially in the transition related to the
withdrawal of a peacekeeping operation. The PBC
could also look at a country situation that is coming
off the Council's agenda, at the request of the country.
The Commission can help to maintain the international
community's support, while assisting the country's
efforts to maintain stability and build and sustain
peace by helping to implement its peacebuilding plans,
mobilize resources and promote coordination and
coherence of international assistance.
I would like to conclude by congratulating
Ambassador Jinga, Permanent Representative of
Romania and current Chair of the PBC, for the
excellent work done so far, and by thanking the
Peacebuilding Support Office for its dedicated
support to the Commission. The Republic of Korea,
in its capacity as Vice-Chair of the Commission
this year, remains committed to fully supporting the
Peacebuilding Commission.

