Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Sir, for having convened
this meeting. We welcome the presence ofthe Secretary-
General among us. His assessments are always very
precise and useful, and we thank him for the intensive
work that he is doing for the benefit of upholding the
purposes and principles of the Organization.

For some reason, some members of the Security
Council are avoiding addressing the main reason
for convening this meeting, which is that one State
Member has threatened the unilateral use of force in
violation of the Charter of the United Nations. Much
has been said about the use of chemical weapons, and
Bolivia would like to make clear its total and absolute
condemnation of the use of chemical weapons or the
use of chemical agents as weapons as unjustifiable and
criminal acts wherever, whenever and by whomever
they are committed. For their use is a grave crime
under international law and against the interests of
international peace and security. Those responsible for
committing those terrible and criminal acts must be
identified, investigated, prosecuted and punished. We
demand a transparent and impartial investigation that
must identify those responsible for any act of the use of
chemical weapons.

Needless to say, it is essential that the Security
Council ensures an independent, impartial, complete,
conclusive and, above all, depoliticized investigation.
We regret that the Security Council has as yet failed to
achieve that objective. Nonetheless, we will support all
work intended to accomplish that goal. It is crucial that
the Council continue to discuss the issue of the use of
chemical weapons, but I reiterate that what has brought
us together at this meeting is the threat of one State
Member' illegal use of force.
Over the past 72 years, humankind has built a
framework that is not only physical or institutional,
but also juridical. Humankind has setup instruments of
international law intended precisely to prevent the most
powerful from attacking the weakest with impunity so
as to establish a balance in the world and prevent grave
violations to international peace and security. We have
built an international system - the Security Council is
clear evidence of it - based on rules. It is the duty of
the Council and of all the organs of the United Nations
to respect those rules and defend multilateralism.
The Charter of the United Nations, which prohibits

unilateral action, must be upheld.

Another key detail to remember is that the
Security Council is not representative of the five
permanent members it comprises, nor of its 15
members seated around this table; rather, it represents
the entire membership of 193 States, both the nations
and their peoples. The Security Council must not be
utilized as a sounding board for war propaganda nor
interventionism. It should also not be made into a pawn
to be sacrificed on the chessboard of war, geopolitics
and petty interests.

We have heard many stories from history about
the prohibition of chemical weapons, and Bolivia is an
active participant in that system, but I would like to
talk about the story of our Charter. When one is unsure
about how to act under certain circumstances, I read
that the best way to settle such uncertainty is to recall
the principles of the French Revolution and reflect on
where the principles of liberty, equality and fraternity
are upheld. Those principles form part of the genesis of
the Charter. Another part comes from the Magna Carta,
of course, which, for the first time in history, limited
the exercise of power precisely to defend the weakest.

Another antecedent to the Charter is the Yalta
Conference. I read that the Conference established the
system of control and checks and balances, which is
the Security Council with its five permanent members.
Bolivia did not attend the Conference. As I understand
it, just Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin were present.
The outcome of the Conference was ratified at the San
Francisco Conference a few months later in 1945. That
is the system that we have agreed to uphold, which
is why I believe that is essential to understand the
principles of our Charter. Our Charter is not words on
page, meant to hand out to tourists visiting the United
Nations Headquarters, but rather a set of norms that we
have agreed to comply with and uphold. Article 2 states
that

"The Organization and its Members, in pursuit
of the Purposes stated in Article 1, shall act in
accordance with the following Principles."

Principle 4 of Article 2 reads,

"All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of
any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with
the Purposes of the United Nations."

That is to say that any use of force must be authorized
by the Security Council, in accordance with the Charter.
Any form of unilateral action therefore contravenes
international law and the purposes and principles of
the Charter.

Another point worth mentioning is that we have
listened, with due respect, to our colleagues speak
about the criminal use of chemical weapons, and we
completely agree with them on that. However, it would
be very dangerous to fight an alleged violation of
international law with another violation of international
law and the Charter. That is why, in this specific
case, we hope that there is an independent, impartial,
comprehensive and conclusive investigation.

Allow me to offer a clarification to my dear
colleague from the United Kingdom. While Bolivia
voted against one draft resolution, it voted in favour
of two others. It voted against the one because,
regrettably, this platform was being exploited for
political motives. Draft resolutions are presented for
nothing more than the spectacle of it, for the television
cameras. Draft resolutions are presented knowing that
they will be vetoed, and not all efforts are put forth to
reach consensus, though that is what we normally do
for resolutions.

We believe that this meeting is very important
because we not only discussing an attack on a Member
State, or the threat ofa military strike against a Member
State of the United Nations, whichever it may be, but
rather because we are living at a time of constant attacks
on multilateralism. Let us recall that the achievements
in the Paris Agreement on Climate Change have been
undermined. Let us recall that the gains reached with
the Global Compact for Migration have been eroded.
Let us recall that there is a clear policy and mindset
of multilateralism subversion. What happens is that
for some the discourse on human rights is used until it
no longer serves their interests, and then they violate
those rights.
My region is a witness to that. We endured
Operation Condor, as it was called, during the 19705,
which was planned by the intelligence services of some
Member States. When democracy did not suit them,
they financed coups d'etat. When they were unhappy
with the discourse on human rights, they infringed
human rights. When the discourse of democracy was no
longer enough, they were ready to finance coups d'etat.
The use of unilateral practices leaves behind unhealed
wounds, despite the passage of time.

Some of the members of the Council have spoken
on the situation in Iraq and Libya, which I believe are
some of the worst crimes that have been committed this
century. The invasion ofIraq, with its dire consequences,
left more than 1 million dead. The effects of the strikes
against Libya and the regime-change policies imposed
on it, which, as my colleague from Equatorial Guinea
aptly said, they still feel, suffer and endure throughout
the entire region of the Sahel and Central Africa. But no
one wants to talk about the root causes ofthose conflicts,
and no one will talk about the impunity enjoyed for
those serious crimes. It warrants repeating. Those are
the most serious crimes committed this century. We
hope that all the members of the Security Council,
given the high degree of responsibility we have - 10
of us elected by the membership and five enjoy the
privilege to have a permanent seat on the Council with
the power of veto - must lead by example for the rest
of the membership on the fulfilment of the purposes
and principles of the Charter.

By way of conclusion, I would like to reiterate
what former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said
in a similar situation in 2013: "The Security Council
has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security". That is my appeal.
Everything must be addressed within the framework of
the Charter. The use of force is legal only in the exercise
of the right to self-defence, in line with Article 51 of
the Charter, or when the Security Council approves
such action. That was the reason for the meeting, and
Bolivia's position is to categorically condemn any
threat or use of unilateral force.

