Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Farid Zarif for his briefing on
the recent developments in Kosovo. I also acknowledge
the presence of His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dacie, First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and His Excellency Mr. Hashim
Thaci, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kosovo.

Nigeria notes the Constitution of the Assembly
of Kosovo and the formation of a new coalition
Government in Pristina. The Government's inclusive
nature is a sign of progress in the implementation of
the normalization Agreement. With the Government
and Parliament in place, Kosovo's leaders now have the
institutional framework to continue with the political
and economic reforms that were stalled by months of
political stalemate.

Nigeria acknowledges the efforts of the Kosovo
authorities to prevent their citizens from becoming
foreign terrorist fighters. The approval of the draft law
on the prohibition of joining armed conflicts outside
State territory is a significant step in that direction. It
is our hope that this legislation, which penalizes the
recruitment and participation of Kosovars in foreign
armed conflict, will be effective in dissuading potential
recruits. Preventing extremism, however, is not a task
for the authorities alone. That is why we commend
Kosovar religious leaders for their efforts at reaching
out to Kosovar youths with a message that discourages
extremism and radicalization.

The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
represents an ongoing security challenge for Kosovo, as
it does in our region. The situation calls for strengthened
measures to control the illicit flow of such weapons.
The legislative framework developed by the authorities
for weapons regulation and control is a step in the right
direction. That led to the removal of over 1,500 fire
arms from circulation in 2014. Nigeria commends the
authorities for that achievement and encourages them
to intensify their efforts.

In order to achieve lasting reconciliation in the
region, it is essential that residual issues awaiting
attention by the authorities be promptly addressed. To
that end, the Parliament should take urgent steps to
enact the legislative and constitutional changes required
for the efficient functioning of the specialist court on
post-war atrocity crimes. Similarly, it is important
that a transparent and credible judicial process be
put in place to adjudicate the allegations in the Dick
Marty report. That would facilitate a broad public
understanding and help to build consensus around the
adjudication process. Likewise, the disposal of assets
and the privatization of corporations should be guided
by extant laws and regulations and be conducted in a
transparent, impartial and credible manner.

The role of United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo remains vital to the promotion of
security and stability in Kosovo. We commend the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and his
team for the efforts they are putting into the fulfilment
of their mandate.

