Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): The
Security Council and the international community have
followed closely the progress of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda since its inception in 1994 after the
horror of genocide in that country. The challenges of
bringing the perpetrators of genocide to justice, addressing
the issues of impunity and contributing to reconciliation
in Rwanda still loom large.

The International Tribunal for Rwanda must carry
out its mission more effectively, more efficiently and
more productively. The trials must be completed and
judgments rendered in a timely manner. The United
Nations Office of Internal Oversight Services has made
extensive recommendations for reforms of the
administration of the Tribunal, the practices of the
Registry and the judges' Chambers. Some have been
implemented. We remain deeply concerned that, despite
those efforts at reform, serious problems remain. The
Tribunal must continue to implement reform measures to
improve its operations.

Today's draft resolution expands the International
Tribunal by adding another Trial Chamber with three
judges, who will be elected immediately. This expansion
should enable the Tribunal to render prompt justice.
Enlarging the Tribunal should not replace ongoing reform
efforts, but be carried out at the same time to enable the
Tribunal to perform its important work more effectively.

The effort to bring to justice those responsible for
crimes against humanity is equally urgent in two other
cases, those of the former Yugoslavia and Cambodia. The
United States is therefore working to expand in a similar
way the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and to establish a tribunal to bring to justice
those who were senior Cambodian Khmer Rouge leaders
during the period 1975 to 1979.

The draft resolution that we are about to consider is
a reaffirmation of the international community's
commitment to providing fair trials and just punishment
to those who perpetrated genocidal crimes in Rwanda.
The United States remains committed to holding those
responsible for crimes against humanity accountable for
their actions.

