Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): For four and
a halfyears Ihave had the honour to serve on the Security
Council. And for four and a half years I have had the
honour of working with the representative of the Russian
Federation. In that time, I have heard the representative
of the Russian Federation invoke whenever possible the
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of
another country. As soon as we talk about human rights
in a given country, the representative of the Russian
Federation says that there should be absolutely no
interference in the domestic affairs of another country.
I have just heard a statement that is nothing more than
pure interference in the internal affairs of Ukraine. I
am sorry to have to recall that there should be some
sort of coherence in the foreign policies that we should
be aspiring to. Everything that the representative of the
Russian Federation has just said is interference in the
internal affairs of Ukraine.

Secondly, the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation has told us that the decision for the
Russian armed forces to enter Ukraine has not yet been
taken. Please, everyone knows that the Russian army is
controlling the Republic of Crimea. That is a fact. Of
course they had no need to enter Ukraine, since they
were already were there. At this hour, the Russian army
is occupying Ukraine. That is a fact. The Internet and
television do exist, and Russian soldiers are not even
hiding the fact that they are occupying Ukraine and
surrounding the army bases of the Ukrainian army.

Thirdly, there is a long-standing habit of always
calling one's opponent a Nazi before getting rid of
him. The Soviets were good at that. No - not all the
demonstrators who were in the streets in Kyiv were Nazis,
and for the most part they were not from the far right
or radical nationalists. If members of the Council need
evidence ofthat, it is quite simple. Elections can be held on
25 May under international supervision - for example,
under the supervision of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Let the Ukrainians
vote. They will decide, under OSCE monitoring, what
future they want.

Finally, I am very touched by the Russian Federation's
attachment to the 21 February agreement, which the
Russian Federation had previously rejected. 1 repeat - it
is an agreement that the Russian Federation had refused
to endorse and that it now invokes incessantly. It is better
to find the path of wisdom late than never.

