Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): Allow me to
congratulate you, Madam, and your country on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council,
as well as to wish you every success. We would like to
thank you and the other members of the Council for the
opportunity to share our thoughts on an issue of great
importance to my country.
We welcome the Secretary-General's report
(S/2005/310) on the end of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). Also, we thank Assistant Secretary-
General Hedi Annabi for his comprehensive briefing.

We would like to take this opportunity to thank
the former Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, the Deputy Special Representative, Mr. Atul
Khare, and all the military and civilian members of
UNMISET for their invaluable contribution to peace,
stability, justice and capacity-building in Timor-Leste.
As we enter this new, and final, phase of the United
Nations mission, we would like also to thank all troop-
and police-contributing countries.

We welcome the adoption of resolution 1599
(2005) and the mandate of the new mission, the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL). We thank
the Council for extending the United Nations presence
in Timor-Leste for a final year. At the same time, we
would like to say that we share the views set out in
paragraph 31 of the report of the Secretary-General,
concerning the absence of provision for a back-up
security force in resolution 1599 (2005). While we
recognize our insufficient capacity, the Government of
Timor-Leste is deeply committed to peace and stability.
We will make every effort to protect all United Nations
personnel.

We also welcome the Secretary-General's
assessment that the justice and finance sectors should
be considered priority areas when allocating the 45
adviser posts to the various State institutions.

The political and social environment in Timor-
Leste remains peaceful and dynamic. Last month, the
Catholic Church organized a demonstration that lasted
for 20 days. During that time, despite some fears of
instability, the Government and the President initiated
a very constructive dialogue with Church leaders in
which an agreement witnessed by President Xanana
Gusmao was signed between Prime Minister Mari
Alkatiri and Bishops Basilio Nascimento and Alberto
Ricardo. That was a very challenging time for our new
democratic institutions; but, in the words of the Prime
Minister, it was a victory for the people of Timor-
Leste. According to that agreement, the Government
will include the teaching of religion as a regular
discipline in the school curriculum. It also gives
parents the right to choose such instruction at the time
they enrol their children at school. At the same time, a
joint working group will be created to follow up the
implementation of the agreement and to deal with
matters of concern.

The local elections held in the eastern and central parts
of my country were very successful and further
consolidated democracy in Timor-Leste.

The President of Indonesia, His Excellency
Mr. Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, paid an official visit
to Timor-Leste on 8 and 9 April. The visit reinforced
the friendship, solidarity and cooperation between our
two countries and peoples. The two Governments are
committed to resolving remaining issues of mutual
concern and to looking to the future. The Government
of Timor-Leste welcomed the decision of the
Government of Indonesia to provide training to
Timorese police officers in Indonesia and to continue
the scholarship programme for Timorese students, also
in Indonesia. On the occasion of the visit, the foreign
ministers of our two countries, Mr. Hassan Wirajuda
and Mr. Ramos-Horta, signed a provisional Agreement
covering 96 per cent of the land border. The Timorese
people were deeply touched by the visit of the
President of Indonesia to the Santa Cruz cemetery.

Regarding negotiations on the maritime
boundaries and the sharing of gas and oil resources
with our southern neighbour, Australia, we completed
another round of negotiations last week in Sydney,
Australia, and the Government of Timor-Leste is
carefully studying the proposals in order to achieve a
fair and just agreement.

At the same time, we have consolidated our
relations with countries of the Association of South-
East Asian Nations, as evidenced by the successful
official visit by Senior Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Mr. Ramos-Horta, to
Malaysia and Singapore.

Regarding issues of justice and human rights, the
Governments of Timor-Leste and of Indonesia
created- as the Council well knows - a bilateral
Truth and Friendship Commission on 9 March this
year

At the same time, we have cooperated fully with
the independent Commission of Experts established by
the Secretary-General. During its recent visit to Timor-
Leste from 5 to 10 April, the Commission met with
leaders of the country, as well as with civil society and
with relatives of the victims.

We would also like to welcome the decision by
the Government of Indonesia to invite the independent
Commission of Experts to visit Jakarta this month.
To consolidate achievements in the area of human
rights and justice, the National Parliament endorsed, on
29 March, Mr. Sebastiao Dias Ximenes as Ombudsman

for Human Rights and Justice - the very first in our
history.

While we have achieved progress in various
areas, Timor-Leste remains one of the poorest nations
in the world, with a very high rate of unemployment
and a low gross national per capita income of about
$520, as recognized by the World Bank's "Green
Book", published last month. Despite all of those
economic indicators, the Government of Timor-Leste is
determined to create a better life for its people. To that
end, the support of the international community is
necessary. That support was reaffirmed during the most
recent meeting of development partners in April 2005
in Dili.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
gratitude to the Security Council, Secretary-General
Kofi Annan, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Department of Political Affairs, United
Nations agencies and the international community at
large for their continued commitment to and support
for peace and stability, democracy, development,
human rights and the rule of law in Timor-Leste. We
wish every success to the new mission, the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste.

