The Secretary-General: The Syrian conflict began
with peaceful popular demands for political change,
but it soon became defined by internal, regional and
international divisions, including in this very Council.
Almost five years later, we see a country in ruins,
with millions of its people scattered across the world
and a whirlwind of radicalism and sectarianism that
challenges regional and global security.

I therefore welcome the critical initiative of the
International Syria Support Group. In particular, I
recognize the statesmanship of United States Secretary
of State John Kerry and Russian Foreign Minister
Sergey Lavrov. I also welcome the draft resolution
that the Security Council will adopt at this meeting.
As the first resolution to focus on the political path to
resolving the crisis, this marks a very important step on
which we must build.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank
all of the Ministers for their great leadership and for
participating in this meeting.

At the two recent meetings in Vienna, the
International Syria Support Group made two major
requests of the United Nations: first, to convene
formal negotiations in January between the Syrian
Government and opposition representatives, focused
on a Syrian-led transition process; secondly, in parallel,
to determine the requirements and modalities of a
nationwide ceasefire. The United Nations stands ready
to undertake those important tasks.

We welcome the meeting convened in Riyadh
that brought together a broad spectrum of the Syrian
opposition. As the Government and opposition
delegations are getting ready, the United Nations
stands ready to relaunch intra-Syrian talks mediated
by my Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura. As set out
in the Geneva communique' (S/ZOlZ/SZZ, annex), the
parties must ensure the full and effective participation
of women in those talks.

This morning, I urged the International Syria
Support Group to apply the necessary pressure on
the Syrian parties to immediately implement the
following confidence-building measures: first, to stop
the indiscriminate use of weapons against civilians,
including barrel bombs, which have continued despite
the Government's pledge to refrain from such assaults;
secondly, to allow unconditional and unimpeded access
for aid convoys - tens ofthousands ofpeople in besieged
areas have been forced to live on grass and weeds, and
that is outrageous; thirdly, to halt attacks on medical and
educational facilities and lift all restrictions on medical
and surgical supplies from humanitarian convoys; and,
fourthly, release all detainees ~ reports indicate that
prisoners face torture and atrocious conditions.

Nearly two years have passed since the Geneva
II Conference. The people of Syria have suffered
enough. I call on them to show vision and leadership
in overcoming their differences. A fleeting opportunity
for peace has emerged. Their duty is to seize it.

