Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen: As we commence a new
year, I brief the Security Council today with a mounting
sense of apprehension at the direction in which events
are transpiring in the region.

Regrettably, since last month's briefing (see S/PV.7339), neither the Palestinians nor the Israelis
have taken the challenging step or made the bold
decision required to begin the process of reversing
the ever-widening trust deficit between the two sides.
Instead, we have witnessed developments that may
unfortunately further reduce the likelihood of talks
resuming in future.

On 30 December, a draft resolution (S/20l4/916)
was submitted to the Security Council seeking to reach
a final status agreement and an end to the occupation
by the end of 2017. The Secretary-General took note of
the fact that the draft resolution failed to be adopted.
However, he also believes that the status quo remains
unacceptable and unsustainable, as stressed by many
Council members during their statements after the
voting (see S/PV.7354).

On the following day, President Abbas signed
instruments of accession to 18 international treaties,
including the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court. On 2 January, 16 instruments of accession were
submitted to the Secretary-General, who accepted them
in deposit, after having ascertained that the instruments
received were in due and proper form. On 3 January,
Israel decided to freeze approximately $127 million
in tax revenues collected on behalf of the Palestinian
Authority for the month of December, contrary to
Israel's obligations under the Paris Protocol of the Oslo
Accords. We call on Israel to immediately resume the
transfer of tax revenues. I also note that the League of
Arab States has been meeting today in Cairo to discuss
the latest developments on the Palestinian issue.

The Secretary-General is alarmed that the parties
are now engaged in a downward spiral of actions and
counter-actions and calls on both sides to refrain from
any action that would exacerbate existing divisions.
While the parties are ultimately responsible, the
international community must uphold its responsibility
to play an active role in shepherding an effective way
forward towards the two-State solution and lasting
peace.

Let me turn to the situation in Gaza, where
the security situation is showing signs of serious
deterioration. During the reporting period, Palestinian
militants fired three rockets at Israel, two of which
landed within Gaza, while one landed in an open area
of Israel without resulting in injuries or damage. In
response, Israel conducted its first air strike into Gaza
since the 26 August ceasefire. No casualties were
reported. Militants also test-fired some 22 rockets at
the sea. On 24 December, an exchange of fire across
the border resulted in one Hamas militant killed, three
Palestinian civilians injured and one member of the
Israel Defense Forces injured.

As we have consistently warned, the Strip is
balancing on a tightrope that will continue to fray unless
a number of critical issues, many of which are political,
are tackled with both determination and a heightened
sense of urgency. One of the most critical issues is the
outstanding payment of salaries to Gaza employees.
In late October 2014, the United Nations facilitated a
one-time humanitarian payment to help temporarily
address the matter. However, worryingly, there has
been no progress on the issue, which is once again
threatening stability in Gaza. On 14 January, dozens of
former Gaza employees disrupted the weekly Cabinet
meeting of the Government of National Consensus,
demanding their salaries.

In addition to the salary payment issue, since
the most recent briefing by the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process (see S/PV.7339), a
number of other grave issues remain unaddressed, and
the status quo is very much in place. Reconstruction
is not happening at the required scale and will not be
achievable without some tangible progress on a number
of key issues.

After almost five months, the ceasefire agreement
between Israel and the Palestinians of Gaza remains
perilously fragile, and there are no indications that
a return to talks under Egyptian auspices is on the
immediate horizon. The Palestinian factions have
unfortunately failed to overcome their divisions and
agree on a united path for the Palestinian people.
Further, the Government of National Consensus has not
yet taken control over the civil and security institutions
or the border crossings in Gaza, and there has still
been no progress on civil service reform. In addition,
once again Gaza is facing critical energy shortages, the
severity of which is being compounded by the harsh
winter conditions.

As has been repeatedly emphasized, the Gaza
reconstruction mechanism is temporary and is not a
substitute for the lifting of all closures on Gaza, as laid
out in resolution 1860 (2009). While the mechanism
has started to provide some much-needed relief to the
people of Gaza, its ongoing implementation is being
made increasingly difficult by the failure to address the
critical issues I have just outlined.

Despite these unfavourable circumstances, I
can report some positive news with regard to the
implementation of the mechanism. Operations have
scaled up significantly since mid-December. As
of 11 January, over 38,000 individuals requiring
construction material for shelter repairs have been
cleared to procure materials under the mechanism;
that number is well beyond the 25,000 figure predicted
for the end of December in our most recent briefing
(see S/PV.7339). Furthermore, over 23,000 individuals
have procured construction materials. Ultimately, over
100,000 individuals are expected to access construction
materials for shelter repairs through the mechanism.
Large-scale projects are also now being initiated.

These developments, while positive, must be
viewed in the broader, more troubling context of Gaza's
overall reconstruction process. Up to 100,000 families
are living in houses that have sustained varying degrees
of damage, while 18 school buildings belonging to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East continue to serve as collective
centres for some 15,500 internally displaced persons.
Obtaining the necessary financial resources to allow
Palestinians in Gaza to procure materials continues to
be a monumental challenge for the majority of those in
need.

Most pressingly, donors have largely failed to fulfil
their pledges three months after the Cairo conference.
This has severely handicapped the ability of the
Government of Palestine, the United Nations and other
development actors on the ground to make significant
progress on recovery and reconstruction work. The
importance of donors urgently meeting their pledges
cannot be overstated.

Inflammatory criticism of the United Nations for
its role in facilitating a temporary agreement between
the Palestinian Government of National Consensus and
Israel to open crossings for the import at the required
scale of construction material, while also taking account
of Israel's legitimate security concerns, is unhelpful.
It could affect the United Nations ability to continue
supporting the mechanism. The United Nations remains
committed to doing all that it can to facilitate resolutions
of the problems, but parties responsible for the delays
need to be fully engaged as well. The stark reality of the
situation demands a resolute approach on the part of all
those engaged in Gaza's reconstruction - a daunting
task under any circumstances.

I also encourage the Egyptian authorities to reopen
the Rafah crossing, while taking into account Egypt's
legitimate security concerns. Humanitarian concerns
are growing, with around 17,000 registered people,
including patients, waiting to exit Gaza, in addition to
37,000 others who wish to exit Gaza.

Meanwhile, violence is continuing in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem. As of 12 January,
Israeli security forces conducted some 390 search-
and-arrest operations during the reporting period,
resulting in the arrest of at least 500 Palestinians. Two
Palestinians, including a teenager, were shot and killed
by Israeli security forces, and 145 Palestinians, including
60 children and 4 women, were injured during security
operations. Palestinians injured three Israeli security
personnel, including one during violent protests.
Overall, in 2014 Israeli forces killed 54 Palestinians
and injured some 5,800 in the West Bank - the largest
number of injuries recorded in a single year since
2005 and the largest number of fatalities since 2007.
During the same period, Palestinian attacks resulted in
15 Israeli fatalities and some 270 Israeli injuries in the
West Bank and Israel, which is the largest number of
injuries recorded in a single year since 2006 and the
largest number of fatalities since 2008.

Daily clashes continued to take place between
Palestinians and Israeli settlers during the reporting
period, resulting in two Palestinians, including one child,
being injured. Settlers also reportedly damaged some
5,000 Palestinian olive tree saplings, while Palestinians
injured nine Israelis in the West Bank, including three
children and two women. The demolition of Palestinian
structures in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, continued during the reporting period. A
total of 60 structures, including 17 residences, were
demolished, leading to the displacement of some
47 Palestinians, including 16 children.

We are encouraged by the Israeli Supreme Court's
decision of 25 December ordering the evacuation and
demolition of Amona, the largest settlement outpost
in the West Bank, within two years, and look forward
to the swift execution of that judgment. The United
Nations reiterates its call on the Israeli authorities
to freeze and reverse all settlement activities in the
occupied territory.

Before closing, let me say a few words about Syria
and Lebanon.

On Syria, separate consultations continued with
the Syrian parties and a wide range of interlocutors
inside and outside Syria on the parameters of the
freeze, starting with Aleppo city. The Special Envoy
and his Deputy intend to return to Syria in the coming
days to pursue the discussions that were launched
in mid-December with the Government of Syria on
implementation before being able to brief the Council
on progress achieved. In the meantime, the Office of
the Special Envoy is closely following developments
relating to the Cairo and Moscow forum meetings, as
well as related developments with the opposition.

In Lebanon, the dialogue between the Future
Movement and Hizbullah, facilitated by Speaker Berri,
started on 23 December. Two rounds of talks have
now taken place aimed at calming sectarian tensions
and helping to resolve the deadlock over the election
of a new president. Efforts are also ongoing to initiate
talks between the leaders of the two largest Christian
parties, Samir Geagea and Michel Aoun. We welcome
and encourage dialogue among the parties in Lebanon
aimed at easing tensions, addressing security threats
and contributing to stability. We hope that these
processes will facilitate at the earliest the election of a
new president, which is long overdue.

The Lebanese Armed Forces continue efforts to
secure the border with Syria. On 26 December, they
killed three gunmen attempting to infiltrate near Arsal.
Twenty-five Lebanese Army and security personnel
remain in the captivity of the Al-Nusra Front and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. On 10 January, the
Al-Nusra Front claimed responsibility for the double
suicide bombing in the Alawite neighbourhood of Jabal
Mohsen in Tripoli, which killed 9 people and injured
over 35 others. Council members have condemned
this new terrorist attack in the strongest terms. There
are now over 1.1 million Syrian refugees registered in
Lebanon. On 5 January, new procedures were formally
introduced at entry points on the Lebanese border with
Syria - a consequence of which was a restriction on
the entry of refugees, except for extreme humanitarian
cases.

The area of operations of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebaon (UNIFIL) remained generally calm,
as both Lebanon and Israel continued to cooperate
with UNIFIL through its liaison and coordination
arrangements, and demonstrated their continued
commitment to the cessation of hostilities and to
the stability along the Blue Line in accordance with
resolution 1701 (2006). In a letter dated 12 December,
Israel communicated to the Council concerns about
media reports about Hizbullah's military capability.
It is worth reiterating that resolution 1701 (2006) calls
for the disarmament of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese
militants.

Israeli violations of Lebanese airspace continued
on an almost daily basis, as also regularly reported by
Lebanon to the Council. In accordance with resolution
1701 (2006), it is also worth reiterating the calls on
Israel to cease its overflights of Lebanese airspace.

In conclusion, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
now entering unchartered territory, which, lamentably,
seems to have dashed any immediate hope for a
return to peace talks. We should be under no illusions
about the perils that this new chapter may entail.
The increasingly antagonistic and virulent nature of
the discourse between the two sides should be cause
for serious concern among those seeking to foster an
environment conducive to a return to constructive
dialogue.

The failure ofthe parties to take the steps necessary
to overcome their mutual distrust has contributed to
bringing us to this precarious phase. It is now up to both
sides to determine their respective courses of action
moving forward. I urge Palestinians and Israelis to plot
a course that ultimately leads to a negotiated resolution
of the conflict on the basis of a two-state solution in
which Israel and Palestine live side by side in peace
and security. The alternative is fraught with unknown
hazards that may be irreversible.

