Mr. Kim Hyun Chong (Republic of Korea):
First, allow me to commend the work of the Security
Council and its Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict to end violations against children and to
guarantee the exercise of their rights. My delegation
would also like to commend Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and his Special Representative, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, for their dedication in addressing the
plight of children in armed conflict.

The Republic of Korea appreciates the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2007/757) as well as the
presentation by Ms. Coomaraswamy on recent
developments. We appreciate the achievements
accomplished so far, yet continue to have grave
concerns about the challenges that we still face.
Achievements have been accomplished in areas such as
the establishment of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism in 11 countries since the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1612 (2005).

We are particularly pleased to note a number of
significant developments related to ending impunity
for crimes against children, particularly the recruitment
of children in armed conflicts. These include, inter alia,
the confirmation of charges by the International
Criminal Court against the leader of an armed group in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the arrest
warrants issued by the Court for senior members of the
Lord's Resistance Army.

Despite this progress, we remain greatly
concerned about the continuing plight of children
affected by armed conflict. Child recruitment is still an

issue of grave concern. As the Security Council
continues to call upon parties engaged in armed
conflict to take firm and timely action to stop the
enlistment of children, it must also address the lack of
security in camps for refugees and internally displaced
persons, which are known hotbeds for recruitment.

My delegation contends that dealing with
persistent violators is an urgent issue that must be
addressed. Through the Secretary-General's reports, 16
persistent perpetrators have been identified. What will
the Security Council do with these offenders? The
Security Council should take effective targeted
measures against such perpetrators, including a ban on
the export or supply of arms, a ban on military
assistance, travel restrictions, freezing of assets and a
restriction on the flow of financial resources.
Otherwise, they will continue to violate and undermine
the credibility of the Security Council.

The delegation of the Republic of Korea, like
those of many other Member States, is disturbed by the
deplorable situation of sexual violence and abuse
against children in armed conflict. As the Secretary-
General's report highlighted, children are targeted with
various forms of sexual and gender-based violence
during armed conflict, including rape. As many as
60 per cent of the victims of sexual violence in areas of
conflict are children. Furthermore, in some trouble
spots, sexual violence and rape have been deliberately
employed for political and military purposes. Unless
the Security Council and the international community
respond strongly to these violations, such disturbing
cases will continue.

In this context, we urge the Security Council to
consider widening the scope of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism. We agree with the
recommendation in the Secretary-General's report that
equal weight be given to all categories of grave
violations. These include not only the recruitment and
use of children but also the other five grave violations:
the killing and maiming of children, rape and sexual
violence, abductions, attacks against schools or
hospitals and the denial of humanitarian access to
children.

The Republic of Korea supports an incremental
approach, extending the mechanism to include sexual
violence as a trigger for listing a party in the annexes
to the reports of the Secretary-General and establishing
a monitoring and reporting mechanism in the country
concerned. We urge the Security Council to take this
issue seriously and to work on a draft resolution in that
direction.

Ending impunity is a critical element for halting
violations of all kinds. Impunity for parties engaged in
armed conflict, as well as for individual perpetrators,
should cease. In order for this to come about, the
Security Council should refer those accused of
systematic and persistent violations against children to
the International Criminal Court.

Lastly, the delegation of the Republic of Korea
would like to emphasize the need to strengthen the role
of major actors and the coordination among them. The
Special Representative should be given all the
necessary support, assistance and cooperation in
implementing her mandate. The role of the Council's
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
should be further bolstered to address measures such as
recommending targeted action to the Security Council
and monitoring its implementation.

The additional actors involved in addressing the
issue of children in armed conflict are the
peacekeeping operations and the political missions,
specifically their child protection advisers. My
delegation believes that their role is crucial not only for
the effective implementation of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism, but also for the effective
prevention of violations and for more comprehensive
protection of children. In this regard, the Security
Council and the Secretary-General should send a stern
message to the head of each mission to assume strong
leadership.

Overall, national Governments should, in the end,
take responsibility in protecting their children. In this
regard, technical and financial assistance should be
provided for capacity-building, and Governments
should fully cooperate with the Security Council in
preparing and implementing these actions, including
the establishment of a justice mechanism.

Coordination and coherence are another important
element. In order to effectively address the complex
issue of children in armed conflict, both ending
violations and the recovery and reintegration process
need full coordination by all relevant bodies, including
the Security Council, the Office of the Secretary-
General, the peacekeeping operations, political
missions, humanitarian agencies such as UNICEF and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and various non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). At the field level, the
participation and contribution of NGOs are especially
critical. Therefore, more closely coordinated
involvement of NGOs in implementing the monitoring
and reporting mechanism is needed.

We hope that today's open discussion on children
in armed conflict will pave the way for meaningful
deliberation in the Security Council. We look forward
to a strong presidential statement which will lead to a
new resolution in the near future.

