Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and Sweden.

Let me, first of all, thank Azerbaijan for organizing
today's debate and for providing a very good concept
note (S/2013/613 annex). We appreciate that these
debates are turning into yearly events, since the working
methods of the Council indeed concern the membership
as a whole.

Since last year's open debate (see S/PV.6870), the
attention to this matter has increased further. Argentina
has continued the excellent leadership of Portugal of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. The adoption of note S/2013/515
during the presidency of Argentina in August was a
welcome step in which the Security Council committed
to a number of measures for increased transparency and
consultations.

Outside the Council, the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group has joined together in order
to push for a reform of working methods. We welcome
the establishment of the group and fully support the
statement made on its behalf made by the representative
of Switzerland.

The two most central aspects of the discussion on
working methods continue to be transparency and the
possibility of non-members to interact with the members
of the Council in a substantive way. That is why note
515 is important and encouraging. With the Council's
commitment to enhancing its interaction with Member
States, as well as with other United Nations entities
and regional and subregional organizations, it is our
hope that more concrete steps will be forthcoming. The
issue now is the implementation of the commitments
contained in the notes that have been adopted over the
past years.

We continue to underscore the need for regular,
informative briefings to non-members of the Council,
and welcome the wrap-up sessions that have been held
so far. As the Council continues to review the concept
of wrap-up sessions, we would suggest an interactive
model whereby non-Council members are invited to
participate. That relates to a number of situations, in
particular to discussions on peacekeeping missions in
which troop- and police-contributing countries should
be involved to the greatest extent possible. We welcome
the most recent note S/2013/630 in that regard.

There is also room for improving the quality of
open debates by ensuring that concept papers and
outcome documents reflect the input of all participating
countries. The adoption of note S/2012/922 on ways to
improve open debates is welcome in that regard.

The Nordic countries welcome all efforts to
enhance transparency. Therefore, we continue to
support the work of Security Council Report, which
provides valuable insight and knowledge about Council
activities, including working methods, to the wider
membership.

Given the ever-increasing workload of the Council,
let me also stress the importance of efficiency. We
encourage the continued implementation of note
S/2012/402, including technical improvements, such
as the more frequent use of video-teleconferences.
Efficiency also relates to the internal distribution of
labour among Council members. We welcome the
adoption ofnote S/2012/937 focusing on the selection of
chairs of the subsidiary bodies. We still encourage the
Council to be more forthcoming with the scheduling of
those meetings in order for the broader membership to
be better informed.

The discussion on penholding should also continue.
In our view, elected members of the Council could have
a greater role in drafting and presenting products of the
Council.

Nothing is more important for the Council than
to prevent and respond to conflict. The Council
should continue to actively seek ways to improve its
ability in that regard. We would therefore encourage
the Council to return to horizon-scanning briefings
at the beginning of every month. That concept offers
the Council a chance of early warning, and thus the
possibility of acting before a conflict erupts. A broader
approach to prevention and conflict resolution also
relates to the connection between thematic issues and
country-specific situations. The Council could do more
to integrate those perspectives.

In closing, the Nordic countries call on the Council
to continue on its path of reforming its working
methods. There is still plenty to do.

