Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Palestine congratulates
Nigeria on its skilled stewardship of the Security
Council this month. We also express appreciation to
Lebanon for its efficient presidency in September,
including its responsible handling of Palestine's
application for United Nations membership, which was
conveyed to the Council on 23 September by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon (see S/2011/592).

I also reiterate our appreciation to the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. B. Lynn
Pascoe, for his briefing and for all the efforts being
carried out by the Department of Political Affairs,
including by the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, on behalf of the
Secretary-General.

Palestine would like to convey its condolences to
the people and Government of Turkey on the losses
resulting from the earthquake that recently struck the
country. We would also like to convey our condolences
to the people and Government of Saudi Arabia on the
death of Crown Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud.

We meet in this debate at a historic moment,
when the Security Council is considering the
application submitted by Palestine for admission as a
Member State of the United Nations (S/2011/592). It is
a moment long overdue in the tragic history of the
Palestinian people and this prolonged conflict. And it is
a moment requiring Council members to demonstrate
the utmost responsibility in upholding their Charter
duties and their legal obligations with regard to the
question of Palestine, in line with the relevant United
Nations resolutions.

We believe that it would not be overstating the
case to say that the Palestinian people, the peoples of
the region and virtually the entire international
community have joined in an appeal to the Council at
this moment to do justice by Palestine and fulfil its role
in the attainment of a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution that will finally make peace and security a
reality between Palestine and Israel and throughout the
Middle East.

We reflect today on that which has brought us to
this stage in our long quest to realize the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people and achieve a peaceful
solution to the conflict. To date, 130 countries have
recognized the State of Palestine. Those countries have
taken a principled stand in support of our people's right
to self-determination and in line with countless United
Nations resolutions, from resolution 181 (II) of 1947 to
the present. We are grateful for their recognition and
support, which constitute an investment in peace
consistent with the two-State solution on the basis of
the pre-l967 borders, a solution that is internationally
supported and endorsed.

At the same time, over the past two years, we
have seen significant progress in the building and
strengthening of Palestinian national institutions with
the implementation of the Palestinian Authority's two-
year plan to prepare our institutions and infrastructure
for the independence of our State. It is a massive
project, undertaken with the strong support and
funding of countries from around the globe. Despite
the many obstacles and the dysfunction caused by the
Israeli occupation, this project has been a success, as
affirmed by international institutions and as recently
reflected in the 18 September conclusions of the Chair
of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of the International Assistance to Palestinians, which
reaffirmed that we are able to govern ourselves with
viable, effective institutions that are above the
threshold for a functioning State.
In addition to those two processes, we have
witnessed the repeated and regrettable failures of the
peace process. For nearly two decades, the negotiations
undertaken by the Palestinian leadership in a spirit of
historic compromise and good faith have been
undermined, obstructed and stalled as a direct result of
Israel's intransigence, its egregious violations of
international law and human rights and its refusal to
commit to the most basic principles and parameters
essential for the achievement of a just and lasting
peace.

The consequences of its actions have not,
however, been borne by the occupying Power, which
continues to act with total impunity. Instead, they have
been borne by generations of Palestinians, who
continue to suffer the hardships of ongoing
dispossession and exile and the brutality of the Israeli
occupation in all of its manifestations; by the region,
which continues to suffer from the insecurity and
turmoil generated by this conflict; and by the
international community, which continues to feel the
wide-ranging impact of tensions and instability in the
region and which continues, to no avail, to expend vast
efforts and resources to resolve the conflict and
alleviate its consequences.

All of those dynamics have led us to this
moment - a moment in which we insist that
international law and the relevant resolutions,
including those of the Security Council, be upheld and
that the status quo no longer be maintained, for it is
unacceptable, illogical and unjust. That is what brought
President Mahmoud Abbas to the United Nations on
23 September (see A/66/PV.19) with the application of
the State of Palestine for admission as a Member State
and his historic statement to the General Assembly on
that day. Here, we express our deep appreciation to the
United Nations Secretary-General and the Legal
Counsel for verifying Palestine's application and
conveying it without question to the Security Council
for its consideration. We believe that this reflects the
strength of Palestine's application and its fulfilment of
the required criteria for this important step.

The Council has been debating our application
for nearly a month, which we believe is sufficient time
for its thorough consideration. We are aware of the
deliberations taking place in the Committee on the
Admission of New Members and express our gratitude
for the principled positions of support affirmed by
many delegations.

We also express appreciation for the efforts of the
Non-Aligned Movement caucus of the Council in

addressing this issue. It is time for the Security Council
to shoulder its responsibilities by approving our
application and making a positive recommendation to
the General Assembly for Palestine's admission to
membership. That would be the most just and
appropriate outcome of this process. We reiterate our
belief that actions undertaken at the United Nations,
the centre of multilateral activity in our world, can and
must contribute towards the peace we all seek and will
not obstruct the realization of this objective.

Of course, we are aware of the difficulties, but we
cannot accept attempts to extend or postpone this
exercise indefinitely at the expense of the merits of
Palestine's application and its long overdue and
rightful inclusion in the community of nations. We
believe that this exercise should be brought to closure
with a clear outcome. In this regard, we stress that we
see no contradiction between the possibility of a
resumption of negotiations between the two sides,
which the Quartet is seeking to arrange, and the
Security Council's responsible consideration of
Palestine's application. In fact, these processes, which
share the objective of actualizing the two-State solution
of Palestine and Israel living side by side in peace and
security on the basis of the pre-1967 borders, should be
viewed as mutually reinforcing.

Palestine's recent efforts, including President
Abbas's speech before the General Assembly and the
submission of our application, have contributed to a
growing momentum that underscores the urgency of
bringing an end to the occupation that began in 1967. It
is time for the Palestinian people to live in freedom and
dignity and for a new era of peace and security to
prevail in our region. That momentum, which led to the
introduction of the French proposal by President
Nicolas Sarkozy (see A/66/PV.11) and to the
23 September statement by the Quartet, has given
added impetus to Governments and civil society
worldwide to bolster their support for the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people at this critical
time.

The Palestinian leadership's core understanding
of the Quartet statement is that negotiations are to
commence on the basis of the 4 June 1967 borders and
that Israel is expected to meet its legal obligations,
including those under the Road Map, to halt all
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. Clearly, no credible
peace process can proceed in the absence of such a
basic understanding. If the Quartet succeeds in
securing a commitment from the Israeli side on this
basis, then the Palestinian side is willing to resume
negotiations in accordance with the agreed terms of
reference reflected in the resolutions of this Council,
the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Road Map.

Here, we reiterate that there is no contradiction
between resuming negotiations in this framework and
the Palestinian efforts to become a State Member of the
United Nations. This is particularly clear, since the
two-State solution enjoys global consensus and the aim
of both processes is the long overdue independence of
the Palestinian State - a right denied for over 63 years
since partition - and the achievement of a just and
lasting peace.

The current reality of the Israeli occupation and
the situation of the Palestinian Authority cannot be
sustained. Israel cannot continue to exploit and benefit
from the occupation without consequences, absolved of
its responsibilities as an occupying Power. Either the
current situation must change, or Israel must assume
full responsibility as the occupying Power. I would like
to repeat that. Either the current situation must change,
or Israel must assume full responsibility as the
occupying Power. The status quo cannot be maintained
as we move forward, for it is absolutely untenable.

Indeed, the situation on the ground continues to
worsen and tensions continue to rise. In the midst of
the serious diplomatic efforts being exerted by all
concerned parties, Israel has instead intensified its
illegal settlement campaign in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, gobbling up more
Palestinian land with its construction and expansion of
settlements and the wall, destroying more Palestinian
homes and properties and displacing more Palestinian
families, as well as permitting the terror rampages of
the Israeli settlers against our civilians, their homes,
their lands and trees, and their mosques. Such actions
by Israel must be seen for what they are: a concrete,
negative reaction to the efforts of the international
community, including the Quartet, in favour of its
occupation and expansionist annexation agenda.
How else can one explain the provocative and
arrogant declarations in just the past three weeks
regarding the construction of nearly 4,000 more
settlement units? How else can one explain the
deliberate planning and expansion of settlements and

the attempts to entrench settlement outposts through
legislation, particularly in occupied East Jerusalem and
Bethlehem? All these measures are severing the
northern and southern parts of the West Bank,
encircling occupied East Jerusalem and separating it
from its natural Palestinian environs, and totally
undermining the contiguity and viability of our State.
There is no justification for those illegal Israeli
measures and no explanation for them other than that
this Israeli Government is interested in neither the two-
State solution nor in peace and security, and that it has
chosen instead to continue its occupation and
subjugation of an entire nation of people and to
prolong the conflict.

That obstruction of peace has also been
underscored recent days by the occupying Power's
intensification of the mistreatment and abuse of the
thousands of Palestinian civilians who remain
imprisoned in its jails and detention centres. In a series
of letters, we have drawn the Council's attention to
their plight, including the hunger strike that began on
27 September, and we call on it to uphold international
law vis-a-vis the situation of our prisoners. The
international community, including the high
contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention,
must demand that Israel comply with its legal
obligations and cease its abuse of Palestinian
prisoners - who include hundreds of children, some as
young as 12 years old - and that the International
Committee of the Red Cross be given unfettered access
to them. In that regard, the recent prisoner exchange
was a very important development. We welcome the
release of hundreds of Palestinian prisoners and await
the release of the thousands of others who continue to
unjustly languish in Israeli prisons.

Yet another unsustainable situation is the Israeli
blockade of the Gaza Strip, which has inflicted so
much suffering on the Palestinian civilian population.
All pretexts for continuing that illegal blockade must
be rejected. The international community must
unanimously demand that Israel fully lift the blockade
and allow the sustained and unfettered movement of
persons and goods into and out the Gaza Strip in order
to permit the reconstruction of destroyed homes,
properties and infrastructure, as well as the
rehabilitation of our society there, which has been so
damaged by that vicious form of collective punishment
by the occupying Power.

The Palestinian leadership remains committed to
peace and to negotiating seriously all final-status
issues - the Palestine refugees, Jerusalem, settlements,
borders, security and water - when the appropriate
environment is secured. However, we will not enter
into negotiations for the sake of negotiations. The
situation on the ground and the two-State solution itself
are too fragile to withstand further delays and
sabotage. Israel, the occupying Power, must be
speedily compelled to commit to negotiations along the
clear parameters to which we have already committed.

While committed to the peace process, we must
reiterate clearly that the right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination, freedom and independence is not
up for negotiation, nor will it be the product of
negotiations. It is an inalienable right and the sole
domain of the Palestinian people. It has never been an
issue for negotiations with Israel, nor will it ever be.
Negotiations on the core issues and the expression of
our self-determination should not be confused by
Israel, or others, as one and the same, because they are
not. Israel, as the occupying Power, should not be
allowed to continue obstructing and dictating the terms
of our exercise of that inalienable right.

We are determined to achieve that right and all of
the legitimate national aspirations of our people. We
are determined to bring an end to the injustice endured
by our people, including the grave injustice inflicted on
our refugees. We are determined to peacefully achieve
the independence of the State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, based on the pre-1967 borders.
That achievement will be the core of a just and lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, and the
Arab-Israeli conflict as a whole. We are grateful for the
long-standing support of the international community
in that journey, and urge that no effort be spared at this
critical crossroads to make that a reality. It clearly
requires that the Security Council responsibly uphold
its Charter duties.

