Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I am grateful for the holding of this debate.
Allow me to thank the Secretary-General and the
briefers for their interventions.

As the Secretary-General said, quoting
Desmond Tutu,

"There is no handy road map for reconciliation.
There is no shortcut or simple prescription for
healing the wounds and divisions ofa society in the
aftermath of sustained violence."

Creating trust and an environment that fosters mutual
respect and resilience in the face of intolerance is an
extremely difficult challenge. However, it is essential
to promoting lasting peace and restoring the social
fabric. Examining a painful past, acknowledging
and understanding it and, above all, transcending it
together is the best way to ensure that it does not happen
again. Transitional justice processes, we believe, can
contribute to that.

Reconciliation is an issue that has affected us all
at different times. My own country began a process
of reconciliation after the two World Wars that has
repercussions to this day. Reconciliation is a complex
exercise, and there is no single formula for it. However,
history shows us that reconciliation is indeed possible.

Each society must find its own way to reconciliation.
It involves a very long and painful process, which
must respond to the pain and suffering of victims,
understand the motivations of those who have violated
the rights of others, bring divided communities closer
together and seek to find the path to justice, truth and,
ultimately, peace. A series of measures can be taken
in the short, medium and long terms to achieve that,
and each country emerging from conflict must strive
to find the right combination of measures to prevent
new conflicts. For, as many have said this morning,
reconciliation is the best way to achieve prevention.
Some factors can increase the chances of success in
reconciliation processes. Let me mention three of them.

First, a victim-centred approach must be taken
to reconciliation. Victims often demand recognition
of what they have been subjected to, and even some
form of reparation; those elements can complement
the action of the criminal justice system. Such an
approach must necessarily take into account the local
and human dimensions of conflicts. For example,
as part of the peace agreement in Colombia, a large
number of local reconciliation initiatives have been
taken, such as Cinema for Reconciliation in Meta
and the Paddling for Peace project in the Caqueta
department, which brings Victims and ex-combatants
together in a rafting tournament. Those initiatives
are helping to restore social relations where they were
previously impossible. And then there are inclusive
processes. As others who spoke before me have said,
women, young people, children, refugees, displaced
persons, minorities and other vulnerable groups may
all have dealt with particular experiences during
conflict and may therefore have specific needs within
the reconciliation process. Their experiences must be
heard and taken into account, and their participation
should be more than merely symbolic.

Thirdly, it is important to restore the trust of citizens
in their institutions. In that regard, it is important to
address the feeling of insecurity and mistrust that
some may have towards the police, the judiciary or
other public institutions. The Security Council has
been well aware of the contribution of transitional
justice to reconciliation efforts, since as long ago as
2004, in a presidential statement adopted on 6 October
(S/PRST/2004/34), it drew attention to the full range
of justice mechanisms that could be considered
during periods of transition, including international,
national and mixed criminal tribunals and truth and
reconciliation commissions. It also included the
promotion of transitional justice measures in various
forms in the mandates of several peace operations,
in support of national capacities. In that context, it
is a positive that the new integrated standards for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration are now
also just as focused on transitional justice. The same
should apply to exit strategies for peace operations.

On the basis of those various experiences, we could
conduct a broader review in order to identify some key
principles for guiding the Security Council in its future
decisions in this area. Belgium believes that when
circumstances permit, transitional justice is a tool that
the Council should continue to consider as part of its
mandate to maintain international peace and security.

