Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): As I believe that this is the first open debate of
the Security Council on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question, since the
Annapolis conference was held a year ago, perhaps it
might be useful for us to consider the negotiation
events of the past year and to draw certain lessons from
them.

As Mr. Qurai', head of the Palestinian delegation,
said about the negotiations, "I do not know if there

were any agreements or possible agreements during
that period." However, everyone is aware of what has
been taking place on the ground, which clearly
indicates the political will and serious resolve to bring
an end to the occupation and the continued suffering of
the Palestinians, which has lasted for more than 60
years.

Many people have cited statistics. Very briefly, I
would like to cite a few statistics of my own to remind
us of what has taken place on the ground since
27 November 2007. Over the past year, Israeli attacks
against Palestinians increased by 300 per cent. The
Israeli army carried out more than 1,700 operations in
the West Bank and more than 1,363 in the Gaza Strip,
195 of them during the calm period. Those operations
claimed the lives of 544 persons, including 71 children,
and left more than 2,362 injured. The Israeli authorities
destroyed 332 Palestinian homes and in turn authorized
the construction of 2,210 dwellings in the West Bank
settlements. The number of barriers restricting the
movement of Palestinians in the West Bank increased
from 581 to 630. Israel continued to build the wall,
with all that that entailed in terms of the confiscation
of Palestinian land - including recently the land of the
village of Azzoun - given that 84 per cent of the wall
is located in the territory of the West Bank. The
Judaization of Al-Quds Al-Sharif was intensified;
Israeli authorities continued to detain more than 11,000
Palestinians, including hundreds of children. It is
regrettable that only one case of an Israeli detainee was
highlighted but not those of thousands of Palestinians.
While it is true that Israel freed 990 Palestinians during
the same period, it also imprisoned another 4,950.

Those are only a few statistics. Unfortunately,
they do not tell the whole story, so I shall make a
number of clarifications, relying on Israeli testimony as
appropriate. First, what Palestinians in the West Bank
are experiencing in their daily lives are humiliation and
mistreatment, restrictions on their movement, attacks
by the Israeli army and settlers, and racial
discrimination. Here, I shall quote from an account by
an Israeli human rights organization: "The
discrimination practiced by Israel in the West Bank
increasingly recalls the apartheid system that prevailed
in South Africa". That is a quote from an Israeli source.
Here is a quote from another Israeli source:

"In the areas occupied in 1967, the concentration
of settlements in the occupied territories and the
policies being implemented have created a
situation of apartheid and discrimination in the
institutions, and the principle of equality has been
annihilated in the region. Two groups of citizens
under the same legal authority experience two
different systems of law: one group enjoys all its
civil rights, while the second group is deprived of
its rights. Thus, Israel has created a huge modern
road network in the West Bank, but that network
is for the use of Israelis alone, while Palestinians
are forced to travel on dangerous and tortuous
roads. The Israeli planning agency imposes
restrictions on construction in Palestinian towns
and villages, in contrast to the flexibility given to
Israeli settlements. While the amount of water
supplied to the settlements makes it possible to
plant grass and fill pools, many Palestinians have
to buy drinking water."

Therefore, we wonder: what is the objective of
those practices in the West Bank, if not to make life
impossible for Palestinians so that they must leave,
joining the 6 million other Palestinian refugees, thus
creating a reality that would make it impossible to
establish a Palestinian State? These are not my words;
they come from an Israeli human rights organization,
which says, "The great change brought about by Israel
in the mapping of the West Bank precludes any real
possibility for the establishment of a Palestinian State."

Secondly, with regard to the total siege imposed
on Gaza by the Israeli authorities, we all know that the
general calm achieved in June was fully respected by
the Palestinians. On 4 November, the Israeli army
carried out an incursion into eastern Gaza, killing six
Palestinians in an attack, so it was only natural that
there should be a reaction from the Palestinians. Since
5 November, Israelis have openly imposed a total land,
air and sea siege against Gaza, even denying entry to
trucks of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. And perhaps
members heard today's announcement that assistance
to more than 750,000 Palestinians was being suspended
because of an interruption in supplies. Of course, it is
true that Israeli authorities open certain crossing points
from time to time, but we wonder if that is only for
propaganda purposes.
As a result of the siege, there has been a total
paralysis of economic activity. Eighty per cent of
Palestinian families now live below the poverty line.
There has been a total collapse of drinking water and
sanitation services; drinking water stations and

sanitation facilities cannot function properly, and the
Council can imagine the result. There is an almost total
shortage of medical supplies in hospitals. There are
also obstacles to the proper functioning of the banks
and electricity stations that provide about 50 per cent
of Gaza's electricity requirements. How can they call
those actions and practices? They are what the Special
Coordinator has described as "a flagrant violation of
human rights" in Gaza, and I think that is the truth.

Over the course of the year, we witnessed
something that we had not seen before - restrictions
imposed on Palestinians and attacks against
Palestinians. There are 650 settlers in Hebron - a
town whose population includes more than 150,000
Palestinians - and that town is experiencing nearly
daily attacks against Palestinians by settlers who
destroy their homes and their property and do whatever
they want under the protection of 2,000 Israeli soldiers.
That is an outline of the results of Annapolis - the
expansion of settlements, the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation, human rights violations and
increased violations of international law on the part of
the occupation. All of that is unfolding within the
silence of the Council, which can be understood by the
victims only as a form of collusion, discrimination,
bias or double standards being used against them.
Those practices and the silence of the Council can only
fuel hatred, frustration and despair. How can we follow
the path to peace and coexistence in that manner?

If the Council seeks to guarantee the minimal
conditions for peace in the region, the very least it
could do would be to condemn the occupation and the
settlements and halt their expansion; lift the siege on
Gaza; stop extremist settler activities in Hebron,
protect the Palestinians, and take into account the
words of Bishop Desmond Tutu and Richard Falk that
all of those who have committed crimes against
humanity must be brought to justice.

