Let me first of all welcome President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz to this video teleconference of the Security Council. We have carefully studied their report (S/2020/309, annex). The Mechanism was created in 2010 to be a "small, temporary and efficient structure". I would emphasize the word "temporary" in that definition. It began its operations in 2012; therefore, it has been active for eight years and has undergone two reviews of its work, with the third being under way. In that regard, we expected that the year 2020 would, as indicated by the principals of the Mechanism, be a milestone for the body. All cases would be completed according to the stated timelines and the Council would finally be able to deal with the legal closure of the Mechanism. Unfortunately, that stage has yet to be reach, in part because of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and its consequences. The Mechanism's current two-year mandate ends on 30 June. By the end of June, the terms of office of the judges from the roster, the President and the Prosecutor will expire as well. This month, the Security Council is engaged in reviewing the Mechanism's activities and will reflect the results of the review in a resolution, the adoption of which is sine qua non for extending the mandate of the Mechanism for another two years. We have carefully studied the conclusions and recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) in respect of the Mechanism. They confirm what our delegation has referred to on numerous occasions - the criminal tribunals set up by the Security Council do not have a judicial planning system as such, and all the forecasts were made at random. Thus, the conclusion of the inspectors that "Tt]he Mechanism was not systematic in presenting focused projections, insofar as they declined to methodically predict the future progress of a trial or estimate a completion date at the start of proceedings" (SS/2020/236, para. 26) is of particular relevance. We fully support the OIOS recommendation that the Mechanism provide and adhere to clear and focused projections of completion timelines at the earliest stage possible in its reports. The recommendation must be duly reflected in a resolution of the Security Council on the review of the Mechanism. We understand that the current circumstances are extremely unusual. Nevertheless, we urge the management of the Mechanism to rectify the situation and reduce the projected deadlines for completing the trials. We look forward to the results during this year. Another point of particular importance for our delegation is the protection of rights of persons detained on the authority of the Mechanism, especially with respect to access to timely and qualified medical assistance. We are all aware of the sad record of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in that regard. Today, in the time of COVID-19, this issue has become even more relevant. In particular, the poor state of health of Ratko Mladi¢ is very well known. We therefore call on the Mechanism to pay special attention to the state of health of the detained, provide them with appropriate medical assistance and consider favourably the offers of respective assistance from Member States. In conclusion, I would like to acknowledge the work of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism in ascertaining the fate of the two persons accused by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the apprehension of one of them, Mr. Kabuga, in France. In that respect, we would encourage the Mechanism, and also the Council, to look into options for delivering justice without overburdening the Mechanism and indefinitely prolonging its functions.
