Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to warmly thank Ms. Bintou Keita for her important
and enlightening briefing. Her joint mission to Darfur
with Assistant Secretaries-General Fernandez-Taranco
and Wahba is an initiative that I commend. It is a
good practice, in conjunction with efforts to ensure
genuinely integrated United Nations action, which is
particularly essential in the post-conflict transitional
phase and in line with the reform of the United Nations

system sought by the Secretary-General and supported
by Member States in promoting synergies among the
various pillars. This good practice could be usefully
replicated elsewhere. I would like to focus today on
three points.

The first is that the improvement of the situation
in Darfur must not eclipse the importance of the
remaining challenges. The Secretary-General's latest
report (S/20l9/44) shows that the security situation in
Darfur is relatively stable. However, we deplore the
recent clashes in Jebel Marra starting last year, which
have led to the displacement of thousands. France is
also alarmed by the high level and seriousness of human
rights violations, and in particular the ongoing sexual
violence we have witnessed. We call for the perpetrators
of that violence to be brought to justice and punished.

The Sudanese authorities and armed groups must
necessarily make progress in the peace process. They
must put an end to hostilities, but also must address
the root causes of the conflict. France welcomed the
signing, on 6 December in Berlin, of a pre-negotiation
agreement between the Government and certain armed
groups to resume the peace process. Unfortunately,
negotiations have since been postponed.

That postponement is taking place in the context
of social strife, which the Sudan has been experiencing
since 19 December, and which France is following
very closely. We have taken note of the declaration of a
state of emergency and call on the Sudanese authorities
to guarantee the right to the freedom of assembly,
association and expression, in accordance with their
international commitments. All parties should exercise
restraint and refrain from any further use of Violence,
so as to calm the situation.

My second point is that, due to this precarious
situation, the withdrawal of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) must
be undertaken in a prudent manner and adapted to
the situation on the ground. In that context, we must
ensure that it is gradual and cautious, as the situation
on the ground permits. In its presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/19, adopted in December, the Security
Council recalled that particular consideration should
be given to certain elements, including the situation
of internally displaced persons and refugees, respect
for human rights and respect for the rule of law. It is
also important that UNAMID remain operational and
actively participate in the stabilization of Darfur until
its closure. In that regard, I welcome the mediation
efforts of UNAMID, which have been very useful in
resolving and avoiding local conflicts.

Finally, we must now prepare for the post-UNAMID
period in order to make a successful transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding. The main challenge
for all of us today is to ensure that the situation in
Darfur remains stable after the mission's departure.
We must now prepare for the post-UNAMID period.
As indicated by the Secretary-General in his report,
the issue of funding will be crucial, as the departure of
the peacekeeping operation will mean the cessation of
mandatory financial contributions and the transition to
voluntary contributions for the country team's activities.
We must tackle this issue head-on, in a responsible way.
That is also in keeping with our commitments under
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative. We have indeed
pledged to support United Nations country teams
in transition periods to enable them to continue to
assist host countries in peacebuilding efforts. We also
encourage UNAMID and the country team to work
together as much as possible in order to best prepare for
that transition.

It is also important that the international community
be able to monitor developments in Darfur. The country
office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights will play an essential role. The
Peacebuilding Commission can also be a relevant
forum for constructive dialogue with the Sudanese
authorities on peacebuilding in Darfur. We must pursue
those discussions with the Sudanese authorities, and in
close consultation with the African Union, which is,
and will continue to be, a key actor in peacebuilding
efforts in Darfur.

