The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Rwanda and Serbia and Montenegro in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Judge Theodor
Meron, President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991.

It is so decided.

I invite Judge Meron to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council decides to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Judge
Erik Mose, President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
and 31 December 1994.

It is so decided.

I invite Judge Mose to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Carla Del Ponte, Prosecutor of the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991.

It is so decided.

I invite Prosecutor Del Ponte to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Hassan Bubacar J allow, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994.

It is so decided.

I invite Prosecutor Jallow to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2004/420 and S/2004/34l, which contain
letters dated 21 May 2004 and 30 April 2004 from the
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and from the President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, respectively.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the President and the Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, as
well as by the President and Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

At the end of those briefings, I will give the floor
to Council members who wish to make comments or
ask questions.

As there is no list of speakers for Council
members, I would like to invite them to indicate to the
Secretariat if they wish to take the floor.

I now give the floor to Judge Meron, President of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.


