Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome the Timor-Leste
delegation to today's meeting. We have carefully read
its assessment and listened to the ideas put forth by
several interested delegations.

The Russian delegation participated actively in
the work of the Security Council mission to Timor-
Leste that took place from 24 to 30 November. We
would like to express our particular gratitude to
Ambassador Kumalo, Permanent Representative of

South Africa, and the representatives of the Secretariat
for the successful organization and conduct of the trip
and the preparation of the report (S/2007/711). We are
of course grateful to the entire delegation of South
Africa for all their work to prepare and carry out the
mission. We are pleased to note that the tasks entrusted
to the mission were carried out effectively.

The visit to Timor-Leste by members of the
Security Council bore witness to the support of the
United Nations and the international community for the
first steps of that young country in strengthening its
sovereignty and independence and developing
democratic institutions. The leaders and people of
Timor-Leste are working to lay down the foundations
of Statehood and a modern civil society. The country
has just held open and fair parliamentary and
presidential elections. In meetings with representatives
of political parties and civil society, we were able to
assure ourselves of their determination to move ahead
to effective State-building.

However, as a State that became independent just
five years ago, Timor-Leste continues to confront
serious challenges, including the dire socio-economic
situation, the weakness of its national and security
institutions, the lack of professional workers and the
problem of petitioners and internally displaced persons.
It is clear that a solution to those problems will be
impossible without political consensus and national
dialogue and reconciliation.

It is of course important that we continue to
provide Timor-Leste with the necessary international
support, including through the United Nations. We note
with satisfaction, as we saw for ourselves in
Timor-Leste during the Security Council's mission,
that the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste is effectively carrying out the tasks
entrusted to it and enjoys widespread support and
authority among both the country's leaders and its
people. I would like to note in particular the great role
played by the Mission to support the rule of law and
provide good offices in the process of national
reconciliation and dialogue. In addition, the
International Stabilisation Force is making a useful
contribution to the stability of Timor-Leste.
Through Russia's participation in the Security
Council's mission, we were once again able to see for
ourselves the need for extending the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste,
given the specific desire expressed by the leaders of
the country. Strengthening the independence and self-
sufficiency of Timor-Leste will depend directly upon
the willingness of national security bodies to maintain
law and order. Accordingly, we place great hopes on
the speedy training of Timor-Leste's police by the
United Nations police component.

Looking ahead, the main thrust of the activities of
the United Nations in Timor-Leste should be to
encourage that young country to resolve the problems
it faces itself. The primary responsibility for the
country's future lies with the people of Timor-Leste
themselves.

