Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I take this opportunity to express the condolences
and solidarity of the Government of Mali to the
Government and the people of Turkey, a brotherly and
friendly country, following the deadly attack in Istanbul
yesterday. I also extend wishes for a speedy recovery to
all the wounded, and reiterate the firm condemnation of
the Government of Mali of such terrorist attacks.

My schedule does not allow me to attend this
meeting in person at this historic adoption of resolution
2295 (2016), which renews the mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). The adoption of the
resolution is a Vital issue for Mali, as expressed by the
Prime Minister and Head of Government, Mr. Modibo
Keita on 16 June (see S/PV.7719) on the occasion of the
consideration of the Secretary-General's report on the
situation in Mali (S/2016/498).

In his address to the Security Council and during
the Council's spirited debate, Mr. Keita recalled the
expectations of Mali and the tremendous hope that the
people and Government of Mali pinned on MINUSMA's
future mandate. These expectations consist of a more
robust and proactive MINUSMA mandate, with
strengthened operational capacities and adequate
equipment; increased support to the armed and security
forces of Mali, which, I recall, are on the front lines
of this fight, as well as operational coordination with
international forces; and support for regional counter-
terrorism initiatives, including those ofthe Sahel Group
of Five (G-5 Sahel), the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union.

The Government of Mali is pleased to note
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2295 (2016),
extending the mandate of MINUSMA until 30 June
2017. I thank all Council members for the consensus
reached regarding my country. The new MINUSMA
mandate incorporates the expectations of the
Government of Mali, providing innovations that will
enable the Mission to fully accomplish its mandate and
assume its role in supporting the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and
all stabilization efforts within Mali, to which Council
members have contributed significantly.

We all know that this new strengthened and robust
mandate provides the Mission with the means to fulfil
its mandate in an environment of exceptional security
challenges, characterized by asymmetric attacks.
Mali welcomes the adoption of the resolution, whose
strategic objective remains the restoration of State
authority throughout our national territory, particularly
in the northern regions affected by the crisis.

I should like, on behalf of the people and
Government of Mali, to extend to all States members
of the Security Council our heartfelt gratitude not only
for this historic act, but also for the important progress
which its adoption represents and above all for sending
a strong signal to all the enemies of peace that the
United Nations, Mali and the forces of peace will not
roll over and will respond in kind in order to continue
along the path for peace.

In this regard, I commend the courage and sense of
responsibility of the Security Council, which continues
to fully assume all its responsibilities in meeting
threats to peace, security and international stability.
On behalf of Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, President
of the Republic of Mali, I should like to express our
appreciation to President Francois Hollande and
France, in its capacity as President of the Security
Council, for their unwavering commitment to Mali
and their efforts to promote peace and stability in the
Sahel. The gratitude and deep appreciation of Mali also
go to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and our brother,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mahamat Saleh Annadif, for their tireless efforts on
behalf of peace and stabilization of our country.

I would be remiss if I did not thank Algeria,
Chairman of the Monitoring Committee for the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali ,
ECOWAS, the African Union, the countries of the G-5
Sahel, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the
European Union, the United States of America and
all troop-contributing countries for supporting the
necessary adaptation of MINUSMA'S new mandate
to the security environment in which it operates. I am
also duty-bound to honour the memory of all the Blue
Helmets who have lost their lives in Mali, and recognize
all the sacrifices that have been made for the stability
of my country.

I conclude by reiterating the firm commitment and
determination of the President of the Republic of Mali,
Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, to make every effort to

expedite the full implementation of the Agreement on of the Council, will assume its full responsibilities in
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, the outcome of the bringing Peace and stability '0 Mali, (0 the hem/"fit Of Algiers process. The Government of Mali has played all its citizens.

and will continue to play its part, and with the help The meeting rose 1121055 am.
