The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

First, I want to acknowledge the presence of
Mr. Ivica Dacic', First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia. I thank him for
sharing his perspectives with the Council. I also thank
Mr. Hashim Thaci for his statement.

I want to thank in particular Special Representative
ofthe Secretary-General Zarif for his insightful briefing
on recent developments in Kosovo. We are in his great
debt for the dedication and sprit of perseverance that
he has demonstrated in fulfilling his mission. While
we wish him well in his next assignment, we welcome
very warmly our colleague Mr. Tanin, as his worthy
successor in Kosovo.
We believe that when Belgrade and Pristina
endorsed the First Agreement of Principles Governing
the Normalization of Relations on 19 April 2013, the
stage was set for a visible and sustainable improvement
of relations between Serbia and Kosovo. Today, we are
encouraged by the continuation of the technical and
high-level dialogue between the parties in addressing
the outstanding issues related to the Agreement.

There is, however, a risk of reversing the gains
achieved thus far in peaceful intercommunity
relations if the parties are unable to achieve consensus
in implementing its outstanding provisions. The
conflicting interpretations by both sides on the issue
of the formation of the association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities constitutes an obstacle
to the full implementation of the agreement. That is
why we underscore the need for the parties not only to
exercise flexibility, but also to remain steadfast in their
commitment to the process.

It is significant that the technical talks between
the parties in the framework of the customs agreement
are witnessing continuing progress, with the support of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX). The dialogue has been successful in reaching
agreement for the opening of two interim border
crossings by 2016. Through that mechanism, hitherto
controlled goods, including much-needed medicines,
will be transported freely across boundaries, thereby
promoting increased commercial opportunities and
providing relief to the sick.

The relationship between justice and reconciliation
is another important dimension of Serbia-Kosovo
relations. Let me emphasize the nexus between
justice and reconciliation. There is an inextricable
link between them. In ensuring that the success of
reconciliation is complete, it is imperative that the
families of the victims of the Kosovo and Metohija
conflict receive justice. That is why, in our view, the
establishment of a specialist court to try war crimes is
an important and significant development. We expect
that the findings of the EULEX Special Investigative
Task Force concerning the inhumane treatment of
people and illicit trafficking in human organs will lead
to the prosecution of the perpetrators.

Genuine reconciliation remains crucial to
strengthening cohesion and laying the foundation
for peace and progress. The confidence-building
projects embarked upon by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) have been
appropriately designed to achieve that objective. They
are facilitating dialogue not only between faiths but
also between cultures, and are already yielding tangible
results. Let there be no doubt about the pivotal role
of UNMIK in the promotion of security and stability
in Kosovo - it cannot be ignored. UNMIK remains
the bridge and the bridge-builder. We encourage the
Mission and the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Tanin, to be unrelenting in their
quests for the achievement of the mandate in Kosovo.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The representative of Serbia has asked for the floor
to make a further statement. I now give him the floor.

