Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to express my deep appreciation to
the Gabonese presidency for convening this debate. I
would also like to welcome Deputy Secretary-General
Asha-Rose Migiro, Mr. Antonio Maria Costa,
Mr. Sergio de Queiroz Duarte and His Excellency
Mr. Louis Sylvain-Goma.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made later on by the representative of the
European Union.

Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons poses a
real and tangible threat to the security and
humanitarian situation and the social and economic
development of the Central African region. We are also
deeply concerned about the impact that the illicit trade
in small arms has on human rights, as small arms are
being used by armed groups against civilian
populations, in particular in terrible practices of child
recruitment and gender-based violence. Furthermore,
the illicit trade in small arms also represents one of the
major obstacles to United Nations international troops
who are seeking to establish or maintain peace and
security. It can seriously undermine peacebuilding
efforts, poverty reduction strategies and human
security frameworks.
We therefore believe that particular attention by
the Security Council is essential in order to end those
serious Violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law and to provide an environment
conducive to the effective implementation of the
relevant United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding mandates.

Bosnia and Herzegovina underlines the
importance of the full implementation by the States of

the region of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which was
adopted on 20 July 2001 by the United Nations
Conference. Furthermore, we believe that the adoption
of the Code of Conduct for the Defence and Security
Forces in Central Africa will be another practical step
in confidence-building in the region. We therefore
encourage Member States to act in that direction.

We would also like to call on Member States to
make further efforts to elaborate a binding legal
instrument and to develop modalities for its
implementation, in order to ensure the monitoring of
small arms and light weapons in the subregion.

Improving national transparency and oversight
over light weapons through further harmonization and
tightening of national legal frameworks regulating
small arms and light weapons, including domestic laws
on gun purchasing and ownership, require
Governments to increase cooperation and information-
sharing.

Adequate customs policies and strengthening
national border controls to reduce illegal activities and
to combat cross-border trafficking in small arms and
light weapons is another area where regional
cooperation is needed. The recent finalization and
installation, in the United Nations Regional Centre for
Peace and Disarmament in Africa, of software for
regulating small arms and light weapons brokering in
Central Africa is a good example of a concrete
contribution to advancing regional networking and the
monitoring of small arms flows.

Bosnia and Herzegovina would also like to stress
the importance of cooperation among Governments of
the Central African region aimed at the establishment
of a register within the Economic Community of
Central African States. Such a regional inventory could
also supplement global efforts to expand the United
Nations Register on Conventional Arms to include all
light weapons and small arms transfers.

In that context, we would like to stress the
importance of providing the necessary financial and
technical assistance for the implementation of all
activities related to the issue of fighting illicit arms
trafficking in the Central African region. Creating a
favourable security climate is one of the crucial
prerequisites for the countries of the region to achieve
the Millennium Development Goals and ensure
stability, self-sustainability and social and economic
development.

The preliminary draft of the legal instrument
presented at the twenty-ninth Ministerial Meeting of
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, held in
N'djamena, is a significant step. Once adopted, that
legal instrument for the control of small arms and light
weapons, ammunition and any equipment that could be
used in their manufacture in Central Africa will address
the crucial issues to which I have referred and provide
a proper regional framework for tracking and securing
the trade in small arms and light weapons in the region.

We very much hope that upcoming Ministerial
Meeting of the Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, to be held in
Kinshasa from 26 to 30 April, will result in concrete
actions aimed at strengthening cooperation at the
regional and international levels, thereby contributing
to arms control and disarmament in Central Africa and
to the achievement of lasting peace and stability in that
region.

