Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): At this first formal meeting of the Security
Council in January 1995, may I begin by congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency and
wishing you all success in carrying out this responsible
mission. I would like to assure you that you can count on
our support.

I would also like to ask the Rwandan delegation to
convey our gratitude to the Permanent Representative of
that country, Ambassador Bakuramutsa, for the intensive
work he carried out, together with his delegation, in
presiding over the Security Council last December.

I would also like to join those colleagues who have
expressed gratitude to the representatives of the States
that were non-permanent members of the Security Council
in 1993 and 1994 for cooperating in our work, and would
like to welcome the new members. May I also, through
the Italian delegation, convey our gratitude to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Italy, Mr. Antonio Martino, for his
statement.

Today marks the expiration of the first hundred days
from the date of the partial suspension of sanctions
against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY). When
resolution 943 (1994) was adopted a fundamental factor
in the position of many States was the thought that the
policy of the Government of the FRY should be judged
not on the basis of words but on the basis of concrete
deeds, which must be taken into account when decisions
are made as to the further suspension of sanctions. As
previous speakers have said, no one is left in any doubt
that the FRY Government's announced intentions have
been matched by concrete deeds. The Council has
received four reports from the Co-Chairmen of the
Steering Committee of the International Conference on
the Former Yugoslavia (ICFY), corroborating the
effective implementation by Belgrade of its decision to
close the border with Bosnia and indicating a high degree
of cooperation by the FRY authorities in the solution of
problems as they arose. Such assessments are based in
particular on information provided by the international
members of the ICFY Mission, who are deployed on the
very border and are in full control of the situation,

 

extending cooperation in the delivery of humanitarian
supplies across the border.

It is also important to bear in mind the political
aspects of the question. During the past hundred days all of
us have become convinced that the constructive line of the
Yugoslav Government is yielding practical results. The
economic agreements signed between the Croatian
Government and the local Serbian authorities in the United
Nations Protected Areas mark the attainment of the long-
awaited objective of the establishment of a modus vivendi
in the Republic of Croatia. Two weeks ago an agreement
on the complete cessation of hostilities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina entered into force. Lastly, encouraging changes
have occurred in the attitude of the Bosnian Serb leadership
towards the peace plan of the Contact Group. All this
positive change unquestionably became possible to a large
extent thanks to the constructive and consistent line of the
Yugoslav Government.

Russia is convinced that for all these reasons there
were more than adequate grounds for agreeing on new
measures to encourage Belgrade, in accordance with
paragraph 5 of resolution 943 (1994), in which the Security
Council clearly stated its decision
"to keep the situation closely under review and to
consider further steps with regard to measures
applicable to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) in the light of further
progress in the situation".

We believe that progress was there for all to see, and the
Security Council could already as a minimum decide on the
indefinite extension of the measures provided for in
resolution 943 (1994) and also consider a further easing of
sanctions.

In this connection, we proceed from our position of
principle, which assumes a need for an adequate and timely
reaction to positive changes occurring in the policies of all
States to which sanctions are applied. To our great regret,
the Council could not agree on a draft resolution which
would have provided for further measures of
encouragement and thereby give impetus to the peace
process. Indeed, the draft resolution before us provides for
a number of completely unwarranted innovations, which run
counter to the recommendations of the Co-Chairmen of the
ICFY, and which we fear are capable of threatening the
gains achieved through the efforts of the Contact Group. In
the consultations we clearly stated our concerns, but, to our
great disappointment, they were not taken into account. For
this reason, in unreservedly favouring the extension of the
partial extension of sanctions, Russia cannot share
responsibility for the possible negative consequences of
the adoption of this draft resolution in its current form,
and cannot support it.

We hope that the principle already agreed upon in
the Security Council - that a deserving party should be
encouraged - will be implemented in the future more
consistently. This is essential, both for the sake of
contributing to the peace process and for reasons of
elementary justice. Russia intends to continue cooperating
actively with our partners in the Contact Group and with
all the members of the Security Council in the settlement
efforts for Bosnia and the former Yugoslavia as a whole.

