Mr. Romero-Martinez (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation wishes to thank you warmly,
Sir, for the initiative to convene an open debate on
such an important issue early this year, 2007. Your
initiative, and the concept document prepared for the
debate (S/2007/72, annex) reflect an intelligent effort.
We believe they merit public recognition and are a
useful basis for our debate. The concept paper is a
significant theoretical and philosophical contribution to
our discussion and promotes dialogue on security and
on the role of the Council in that area. It is a holistic
vision of the quest for security, which involves the
internal security of our States in guaranteeing
international peace and security.

From reading the document, and on the basis of
our national experience, we can see that implementing
the process will require a great deal of national
determination. The United Nations system is an
important factor in building such determination, and
we are certain that, together, it will be possible to reach
the objective we seek in the long-term. Honduras
believes that national strategies should be coherent,
precise and in full compliance with national and
international law; in particular, they should be human-
centred.

Inter-institutional cooperation at the national
level has a principal role to play. It is therefore
important that there be a genuine and practical
interaction between the justice system, the defence and
national security machinery and, especially, the role
played by the State through, in our case, its executive,
legislative and judicial branches.

In our view, citizens in the broader sense of the
word - including civil society and many other
national institutions that are concerned with issues of
national welfare - should participate actively in the
process.

In that context, we have always pointed to the
need to achieve, as soon as possible, sustainable
development, the eradication of poverty and above all,
an international commitment to achieve the proper
balance between peace and development, which will
enable us to make sure progress towards overcoming
obstacles and ensuring respect for human dignity.

We fully agree with the concept document that
consensus must be reached as soon as possible on a
concept of security sector reform. To that end, we
respectfully suggest that a broader debate be held in
the General Assembly to share ideas and exchange
experiences and, in particular, as a way to achieve
consensus, with the ultimate goal of establishing a
comprehensive strategy in which everyone participates.
We believe that the Economic and Social Council
should carry out its own exercise in that regard, in
consultation with all organs of the system, such as the
Human Rights Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission. As a result of such sectoral debates, we
could perhaps define a universal response.

I wish to congratulate the Secretary-General on
the launching of the Counter-Terrorism Online
Handbook (www.un.org/terrorism/cthandbook) on
16 February. That initiative, in our view, is in keeping
with what we are discussing here today: providing
Member States with mechanisms for coordination,
training and consultation and for sharing their national
experiences - mechanisms that can enable them to
undertake better-coordinated action with the
Organization.

Initiatives such as those that we are discussing
today should be undertaken at the national and

subregional levels on every continent. That would
contribute greatly to a universal culture of peace. The
delegation of my country, Honduras, reaffirms its
commitment to contribute. We are prepared to lend our
full cooperation in the development of this process.

Our peoples are waiting for concrete responses to
many of their daily worries. Employment, education,
anti-corruption efforts, housing, health, security, peace,
poverty eradication and, above all, the defence of
human rights are among the many issues to which we
committed ourselves in the 2005 Outcome Document
(General Assembly resolution 60/1) and the
Millennium Declaration (General Assembly resolution 55/2). Those realities and aspirations, in addition to
being reflected in these important official documents,
are profoundly reflected in every hopeful look of a
child, every sigh of an elderly person and the heart of
every tormented human being. We cannot disappoint
them.

