Mr. Fischer: Emerging from the biggest
catastrophe of the twentieth century - a war in which
altogether 50 million people lost their lives - the
United Nations was founded to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. The Security
Council was entrusted with the responsibility to
maintain international peace and security. Over the past
65 years the Council has made an enormous
contribution to that noble goal. For those affected by
armed conflict, this often is a question of life and
death, of security and development and of respect for
the rule of law and human rights. No continent has
been spared.

While in its early years the Council had to deal
primarily with inter-State conflicts, the nature of
conflicts has changed significantly in recent times.
Intrastate conflicts involving non-State actors, as well
as transnational threats such as terrorism, organized
crime, drug trafficking, proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, et cetera, have created new
challenges for the United Nations and the Security
Council.

Peacekeeping, which as far as I know was not
foreseen in the Charter of the United Nations, has
developed into a particularly successful crisis-
management tool. Over the past decades the character
of peacekeeping has changed. After monitoring
ceasefires and interpositioning, peacekeepers today
find themselves in the midst of conflicts and facing
complex tasks and challenges.

Recognizing the importance of United Nations
peacekeeping, Austria began contributing troops,
police and experts to United Nations operations
immediately after joining the Organization. Altogether,
90,000 Austrians in the service of peace since 1960 are
proof of our unwavering commitment to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Our willingness to assume global responsibility
furthermore manifests itself in our third term as a
member of the Security Council. Confronted with
today's threats, we identified the protection of civilians
in armed conflict as one of the key priorities. The
effective protection of the civilian population is the
precondition for sustainable peace, and as long as
United Nations peacekeeping missions are involved, it
is also a question of the credibility of the Council.

Resolution 1894 (2009) provides a solid basis for
further enhancing the protection of the most
vulnerable. Creating a favourable protection
environment goes beyond protection from physical
violence. It must be complemented by activities in the
fields of the rule of law, human rights, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, and the empowerment
of local society. The swift implementation of resolution
1894 (2009) will therefore make an important
contribution to the Council's effectiveness in this core
area.

An equally important topic is the role of women
in peace and security. We must seize the unique
opportunity of the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000) this October to renew our commitment and
work towards the increased participation,
representation and full involvement of women in
preventive diplomacy, mediation, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. In this context, I would like to
commend Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
strong leadership and encourage him to continue to
promote the cause of women.

These efforts must be accompanied by an
increased protection of women and girls, especially
from sexual violence. The Security Council has several
times reaffirmed its role in fighting impunity for such
violations. Let me also thank Uganda for its
commitment to further advance the implementation of
this landmark resolution during its presidency of the
Council in the month of October.

The systematic consideration of topics like the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, children and
armed conflict or woman, peace and security
demonstrates the ability of the Council to respond
effectively to today's challenges. Peacekeeping and
peacebuilding need to go hand in hand.
Finally, I would like to emphasize that prevention
is the most effective and efficient way to manage
conflicts. We therefore highly welcome the efforts by

the Secretary-General to strengthen the United Nations
capacity in early warning and conflict prevention and
to continue his good offices and mediation activities.
As a member of the European Union, we strongly
believe in the partnership between the United Nations
and regional organizations in this regard.

In conclusion, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on organizing this summit and preparing
a presidential statement that enjoys our full support.
Let me close by reiterating that the Council will
exercise its role in a most effective and credible
manner when the guiding principle of its actions is the
rule of law - clear and foreseeable rules equally
applicable to everybody.

