Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): At the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the current month. In View of your skill and
your high degree of professional and diplomatic experience,
we are fully convinced that under your leadership the work
of the Council will be successful. We also wish to convey
our appreciation to the delegation of Botswana, and in
particular to Ambassador Legwaila, and our congratulations
on the successful work accomplished during the month of
March.

Afghanistan is suffering an interminable civil war that
has undermined its economy and brought its population to
the limits of poverty and hunger. For the last two years the
country has been tormented by fighting between Afghan
factions and by foreign interference, and the diplomatic
efforts of the international community have not so far been
able to secure a cease-fire or bring about a substantial
exchange of views between the Afghan Government and the
armed opposition in order to solve this the problem.

Despite the efforts of the United Nations special envoy
to reach an agreement between the parties on the
composition of a provisional council as a step towards the
establishment of a broad-based representative Government,
and despite the fact that the Afghan Government, the
Taliban movement and the Dostum faction have expressed
their readiness to enter into talks, the prospects for peace
and stability in Afghanistan seem to be fading, as the
Afghan leaders continue to resort to military solutions in
trying to achieve their objectives.

My delegation regrets the loss of human life that the
present conflict is causing in Afghanistan. We are
concerned that the city of Kabul has been under
bombardment by the Islamic Taliban movement in a new
attempt to capture the city and overthrow President
Rabbani. My delegation believes that recourse to force is
not the only option for finding a solution to the Afghan
conflict. The parties should opt for peaceful means and,
as soon as possible, enter into substantive talks with a
view to a broad political settlement enabling them to
restore peace and leading to national reconciliation.

In addition to the dialogue which must take place
between the parties, it is important for the Government of
Afghanistan to hold talks with the Governments of
neighbouring States in order to promote peace and
regional stability. The territorial integrity and national
sovereignty of Afghanistan must be respected, and
interference in its internal affairs must cease.
An unprecedented human rights catastrophe
continues to unfold in Afghanistan. Arbitrary and
deliberate executions, illegal detention, torture and rape
are carried out by practically all armed political groups.
As there is no civilian political structure with sufficient
authority, nor a judicial system in most of the country,
these groups are acting with total impunity. Thousands of
people have been illegally detained for political, religious
or ethnic reasons and have been put in prisons run by the
Mujahidin factions. Hundreds of people are missing, and
tens of thousands of civilians have been killed or
wounded as a result of deliberate artillery attacks on
residential areas. More than 3 million Afghans have left
the country as refugees as a result of the civil war or in
an attempt to escape the systematic violations of human
rights.

My delegation believes that the international
community must not allow political events in Afghanistan
to continue to aggravate the human rights situation in the
country. We appeal to the Afghan parties to respect the
human rights of the civilian population and strictly to
observe international humanitarian law.

Finally, the current state of civil war and political
instability in Afghanistan has led to a widespread feeling
of insecurity throughout the country. This feeling is
strengthened by the steady flow of arms and ammunition
from other countries to the Afghan factions. It is therefore

 

appropriate to recall here the need to meet the aims set out
in the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly dealing
with illicit arms trafficking.

The resolution of the present conflict in Afghanistan
requires major efforts. My delegation reiterates the need for
the parties to show a clear desire for peace and national
reconciliation and that they cooperate with the United
Nations Special Mission to achieve this end.

