Mr. Ney (Germany): Germany fully aligns itself
with the statement made by representative of the
European Union. As a member of the Group of Friends
for Children and Armed Conflict, we are pleased to
also align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends.

Let me start by extending my gratitude to the
Secretary-General and to his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Coomaraswamy, for
their dedicated engagement and leadership in taking
this important issue forward.

Germany attaches great importance to the
protection of the rights of children in situations of
armed conflict and is one of the main donors in this
field, both bilaterally and multilaterally. We welcome
the most recent report of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict (S/2010/181) and fully
endorse all the recommendations contained therein.

However, in our view the Security Council could
strengthen the United Nations protection framework
for children affected by armed conflict. The report of the
Secretary-General contains valuable recommendations
in this regard. Let me concentrate on three.

First, with regard to strengthening accountability
for persistent perpetrators, the most recent report of the
Secretary-General names 16 parties to conflicts that
have been repeatedly listed for grave violations and
non-compliance with the United Nations for at least
five years. However, the credible threat of forceful
action by the Security Council against persistent
perpetrators is key if we want parties to conflict to
engage in time-bound action plans with the Special
Representative to stop the violations and abuses for
which they are cited. Like other speakers before us, we
therefore call upon the Security Council to consider
stronger measures, including targeted sanctions,
against those parties to conflict listed in the annexes of
the reports of the Secretary-General that persistently
ignore calls by the Security Council to cease their
illegal practices with regard to children in armed
conflict.

The second recommendation concerns an
increased collaboration of the Working Group with
relevant sanctions committees. In our view, the regular
sharing of information between the Working Group and
the sanction committees of the Security Council could
considerably strengthen the United Nations child
protection framework. One way to achieve this might
be to invite the Special Representative for Children in
Armed Conflict to brief the relevant sanctions
committees on a regular basis. In this context, we
welcome her recent briefing of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
an important first step. The Security Council should
also start considering means by which targeted
measures may be applied against perpetrators in
country situations not covered by existing sanction
committees.

Thirdly, with regard to mainstreaming in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, the Security Council
should remain fully engaged in mainstreaming the
issue of children in armed conflict into all United
Nations peacekeeping and political operations. In this
regard, we welcome the deployment of an increasing
number of child protection advisers in peacekeeping
operations and the adoption of a child protection policy

directive by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support on
mainstreaming the protection, rights and well-being of
children affected by armed conflict within United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

As a last point, I would like to join other
members of the Group of Friends in calling for the
provision of administrative support for the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, as requested in
resolution 1882 (2009) and as is currently provided to
other subsidiary bodies of the Security Council.

Let me conclude by reiterating our firm support
for the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative. Germany stands ready to join hands
with all those striving to improve the situation of
children affected by armed conflict worldwide.

