Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your country, Colombia, on presiding
over the Security Council.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela endorses the
statement delivered by Ambassador Mootaz Ahmadein
Khalil, Permanent Representative of the Arab Republic
of Egypt, on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Venezuela notes with concern the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
Building ajust, comprehensive and lasting peace in that
region is now one of the most urgent challenges for the
international community. Many resolutions have been
adopted by the Council since 1947 on the Palestinian
issue, and none of them has been complied with by the
State of Israel. In fact, the political and military elite
of Israel have established a new apartheid in Palestine:
roads for the exclusive use of the settlers, separate
policies for Palestinian settlements and villages,
endorsement of the aggression of the settlers against
the Palestinian population and segregationist controls
and checkpoints.

The existing illegal settlements, which are
promomoted by the occupying Power, are sabotaging
the peace process. They constitute a grievous violation
of international law and must cease immediately.
Those inhuman practices are implemented by a State
that, paradoxically, calls itself democratic. We express
our deep concern at the tragic plight of thousands of
Palestinian civilians, including children and teenagers,
incarcerated by the Israeli Government without charges
or a fair trial. Those prisoners are kept in inhumane
conditions under the policy of administrative detention.
We stand in solidarity with them and demand their
immediate release.

Unfortunately, there are Powers that support these
abuses, which, by all accounts, violate the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
humanitarian law, particularly the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Times of War. Venezuela has repeatedly
called on the Security Council to consider, by virtue
of the competencies granted to it by the Charter of
the United Nations, Israel's failure to comply with its
resolutions on peace and security in the Middle East,
which is causing a humanitarian tragedy with dire
consequences.

Israel's frequent violations ofLebanese sovereignty
and occupation of the Golan are of great concern. We
demand an end to its blockade of the Gaza Strip, which
has been repudiated by the international community.

We reiterate the urgent need for the Council to
recommend to the General Assembly the admission of
Palestine as a full Member State, in reaffirmation of
the international recognition that the concert of nations
has granted progressively and in greater numbers to
Palestine over more than two decades, and which has
been rightly reflected in forums such as UNESCO. We
firmly support the establishment of an independent,
viable and territorially contiguous Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

The conflict affecting the peace-loving Syrian
people is painful and regrettable. The Council must
unambiguously support the implementation of the
six-point plan presented by Joint Special Envoy Kofi
Annan, which has been welcomed by the Syrian
Government. Attempts to undermine that facilitation
and the peace efforts are causing grave concern.
Warmongers do not want peace in Syria. Instead, they
seek to bolster their geopolitical interests through
regime change that, should it materialize, would
destabilize the Middle East region.

Historical experience has shown that resorting
to sanctions and foreign military intervention in the
internal affairs of a sovereign country does not settle,
but instead aggravates, domestic conflict.

Venezuela emphasizes the need to promote a
negotiated solution among the Syrians themselves.
In that context, a ceasefire is urgently needed. It is
deplorable that, rather than encourage peace and
support the efforts of those sincerely seeking peace,
foreign factions are inciting the most extremist factions
that consider violence the only means of achieving their
purposes. We reiterate that only political dialogue and
diplomatic negotiations can contribute to settling the
grave conflict affecting the Syrian people.

We salute those countries that, with respect to
Syria, have firmly defended before the Security
Council the principles of sovereignty, independence,
self-determination and territorial integrity enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations. We also salute those
countries that are committed to peace and to promoting
dialogue among the parties, and have continued to make
balanced proposals to address the Syrian situation.

