Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, I
would like to thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for the
presentation of his tenth report pursuant to resolution
1593 (2005), by which the Security Council referred
the situation in Darfur to the ICC. Austria is a long-
standing advocate of the rule of law and the fight
against impunity and is a strong supporter of the ICC.

In its resolution 1894 (2009), on the protection of
civilians in situations of armed conflict, which was
adopted last month, the Security Council once again
affirmed its strong opposition to impunity for serious
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights and drew attention to the full range of justice
and reconciliation mechanisms, including international
and mixed criminal courts and tribunals. The Council
also recalled the inclusion of war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide in the statutes of ad hoc
tribunals and the Rome Statute of the ICC, and
emphasized in that regard the principle of
complementarity.

Since the last report of the Prosecutor, in June,
the Court has continued to work on the Darfur

situation. In a positive development, to which other
delegations have already referred, rebel leader Abu
Garda, who is suspected of responsibility for the
Haskanita attacks against African Union forces, once
again voluntarily appeared before the Court for a
confirmation-of-charges hearing, in October.

More than four years have passed since the
adoption of resolution 1593 (2005). We recall the
presidential statement of 16 June 2008 (S/PRST/2008/21),
which urged the Government of the Sudan and all other
parties to the conflict in Darfur to cooperate fully with
the Court, consistent with resolution 1593 (2005). The
European Union has also issued a number of clear
statements in that regard. On 15 September, the
Council of the European Union underlined that
impunity for international crimes can never be
accepted, reiterated its support for the ICC and called
upon the Government of the Sudan to cooperate fully
with the Court, in accordance with its obligations under
international law.

We remain deeply concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation and the violence in the region.
Notwithstanding the efforts by the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and others, we have still not been able to overcome the
negative consequences of the expulsion of
non-governmental organizations in March 2009. The
United Nations and other international actors,
including the European Union, have repeated their
calls on the Sudanese Government and all other parties
to the conflict to ensure, in accordance with their
international obligation, that humanitarian assistance
reaches the most vulnerable people in the Sudan.

In October, the High-Level Panel on Darfur, led
by former President Thabo Mbeki, first presented its
report on Darfur, entitled "The quest for peace, justice
and reconciliation" (S/2009/599, annex I), which was
endorsed by the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union. We commend the efforts of the High-
Level Panel. We welcome the wide consultations
undertaken by the Panel in the preparation of the
report. We also welcome its interaction with the
Prosecutor of the ICC.
The High-Level Panel's report sets out a number
of recommendations to promote justice and
reconciliation in Darfur, including proposals to expand
and strengthen the system of the Sudan's special courts
to deal with crimes committed in the conflict in Darfur,
to establish a hybrid court for the most serious crimes
and to establish a truth, justice and reconciliation
commission. Austria looks forward to the presentation
of the report by President Mbeki in the Security
Council later this month. That will give us a chance to
learn more about envisaged steps and measures to
implement the Panel's recommendations and their
practical implications. We believe that measures to
ensure accountability will be fundamental to achieving
lasting peace and reconciliation in Darfur and in the
Sudan as a whole. We welcome and support all efforts
that contribute to that end.

Austria encourages continued dialogue and
diplomatic efforts among the Court, the African Union
and the League of Arab States in order to ensure broad
support for the Court in its aim to promote the rule of
law, protect human rights and combat impunity within
the framework provided by the Rome Statute. Austria
is convinced that peace and justice are in no way
contradictory goals, but rather mutually reinforcing
imperatives. It is our joint responsibility to address
both.

