Mr. Ivanou (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus has been closely following the
developments relating to Iraq, as well as consideration
of this issue within the United Nations. We welcome
the format of today's meeting of the Council.

Noting that it is necessary for Iraq to implement
the United Nations Security Council resolutions, the
President and the Government of the Republic of
Belarus welcome the decision made by the Iraqi
leadership on the resumption of the work of United
Nations inspectors in that country without any
preliminary conditions. Through this decision, Iraq has
demonstrated its aspiration for a constructive dialogue
with the United Nations and the international
community. Belarus calls upon the States members of
the Security Council to support this constructive
approach, opening up a political way out of the present
complicated situation. We support the outcome of the
consultations on this problem held in Vienna.

Belarus cannot agree with the position taken by
those States that see the settlement of the Iraqi issue
only through the use of force. We support political and
diplomatic means for the settlement of this issue under
the auspices of the United Nations and stand against
any unilateral military actions without relevant United
Nations Security Council mandate.

According to the United Nations Charter, the
Security Council is the body bearing primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. In this connection, the Council
should not allow a military action against Iraq, which
could result in a major international conflict with
unforeseen consequences.

Constructive dialogue between the Iraqi
leadership and the United Nations Secretary-General
and the international community as a whole and
ensuring the unimpeded work of United Nations
inspectors are, in our opinion, the key guidelines of
agreed international efforts on the road towards a
peaceful settlement of the Iraqi issue.

The Republic of Belarus welcomes the adoption
by the Security Council of resolution 1409 (2002),
which considerably simplified the implementation of
the oil-for-food programme. We call for further step-
by-step mitigation of the United Nations regime of
sanctions against Iraq, which undermines the social and
economic situation in that country and has led to
serious humanitarian consequences for its population.

Belarus seeks political settlements to all disputes
on the international agenda. We express hope for an
objective consideration of the Iraqi issue and call upon
the Security Council to take a balanced decision in the
interest of peace and security, not only in the Middle
East but on a global scale as well.

