Mr. Kastberg: Let me begin by endorsing the
gratitude expressed by Mr. Morris to you, Sir, and to
the rest of the Council. Our colleague from the World
Food Programme (WFP) is very humble; I do not think
that ever before in history so much food has been
moved in such a short time under such circumstances.
The WFP is doing brilliant work.

Let me also reinforce all the points that my
colleagues have made on the issue of coordination. We
are not only working very well together; we also
happen to be very good friends. Ramiro Lopes da
Silva, our Humanitarian Coordinator, is certainly an
old colleague and friend. But this coordination also
extends to the broader community of the Red Cross
movement and to non-governmental organizations. A
delegate from Oxfam, for instance, is doing the water
coordination on behalf of the system. So we are open to
a much broader community as part of a greater
collaborative effort.

In terms of the questions regarding funds, 50 per
cent of the Flash Appeal has been funded as it relates
to the United Nations Children's Fund, and we are
extremely grateful for that. But obviously we are only
half way there. We have a relatively short timescale, so
we are looking at strengthening that part.

China, Russia and France raised the issue of the
recent resolutions - 1472 (2003) and 1476 (2003). We
adopted 19 contracts under that oil-for-food
programme to a total value of $40 million, and
certainly in the context of the new resolution we hope
to strengthen routine immunization and additional
contracts, at least in water and sanitation, as well as,
perhaps, in other areas.

Let me turn briefly to three other areas. Syria
raised the question of education; the United States
made suggestions about reducing malnutrition; and the
United Kingdom and Germany spoke about issues of
security.

With regard to the question from Syria about the
rates of enrolment, certainly before the war it was in
the region of 75 per cent, which was too low in our
opinion. The normalization process has not been
completed, and the enrolment rates are therefore still
very low - below the earlier figure. We see a need to
strengthen that. I would like to make some remarks in
that regard. Much of the school system has been
dilapidated for years. We have noted that when a
school is improved physically, the enrolment rate is
higher. That is certainly one area in which we will need
to work. In fact, on average we have seen a 35 per cent
attendance increase when the physical facilities are
improved.

Much more work needs to be done in terms of
modern teaching methodologies. The curriculum has
not been updated for 20 years, and we also know that
there are gender discrepancies, with many girls not
going to school. We have some schools that are in
dangerous locations at the moment because of the
problem of landmines and unexploded ordnance. These
are issues that will need to be tackled. Certainly there
will also be a need for additional schools, because
many schools are doing a double shift at the moment.
As for the software aspect, the top-down style of
teaching certainly needs to be changed in order to
promote children's participation. That is a generic type
of recommendation that we work on in many places.

On secondary education, regrettably,
examinations were disrupted. An examination board
could not be constituted and therefore it has not been
possible to design an examination. That is bad news on
the secondary education side.

On the primary education side, we are at the
moment actually printing the examination booklets and
materials for the annual exams, which are supposed to
take place quite soon. We hope that at least that part
will progress.

Again, security questions were raised in relation
to school attendance. I will come back to the question
of security. In terms of oil-for-food requirements, we
would certainly welcome investments in education. I
have given examples of some areas that we need to
strengthen.

Let me turn to the question posed by the
representative of the United States regarding our
advice on reducing malnutrition. First, we are
appreciative of the brilliant work of the World Food
Programme, which provides the general food basket.
There are certainly a number of areas outside the food
area that we need to tackle. The number-one priority is
water and sanitation. It is the disruption in that area
which, combined with the infant formula - the second
point - is causing an enormous increase in diarrhoea.
So we will be working with our colleagues in the
World Food Programme and the World Health
Organization on phasing out the infant formula. It
cannot be out immediately, but it needs to be phased
out. It needs to be put into more of a therapeutic-type
category, or at least combined with an attempt to
encourage breastfeeding.

The third area is the need to ensure a therapeutic
feeding referral system that functions. Obviously that
is constrained at the moment because of security
considerations. I think that down the line the whole
question of the availability of fresh food, and the
income to be able to do that, will have a bearing on
nutritional levels. Given recent events, the operations
of the 3,000 community child centre units have been
disrupted. Trying to get them operational again will
require outreach to children throughout the country at
the community level.

Those are some suggestions, and we certainly
welcome further dialogue on concrete suggestions.

With regard to the questions from Germany and
the United Kingdom on the impact of security and how
it is felt more keenly, from our perspective, certainly,
the fear felt by women and girls about going out is a
major constraint. Obviously there is a hesitation on the
part of parents to send children to school, and threats to
girls by some communities to try to prevent them from
going to school are obviously also a concern.

Another element is the limitations on the
movement of United Nations staff, in terms not only of
long-distance travel but actually of travelling inside the
cities, which obviously creates difficulties by limiting
the outreach of humanitarian actions. A broader type of
area security that enables United Nations humanitarian
action to engage with local communities is obviously
important, therefore, in enhancing freedom of
movement.
A further point is the repeated lootings. We have
improved a number of water treatment plants,
generating plants, pumps and so forth. We have made
improvements, but they have been looted again. So
obviously we are proceeding more keenly on security
issues.

Other aspects of questions asked by the
representatives of Mexico, Germany and other
members have been covered by other colleagues, and I
will not repeat their replies.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having taken the initiative to convene this meeting.
Certainly we will convey with appreciation the
Council's interest to our colleagues in the field.

