Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I thank you, Sir, and
High Representative Petritsch for coming to brief us this
morning. I have to say that, like Ambassador Chowdhury
of Bangladesh, I found his contribution thoughtful,
insightful and the basis for what I hope will be a
stimulating continuing consideration of the complexities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina by this Council.

Mr. Petritsch and his team have clearly been
working hard over the last six months. The United
Kingdom particularly supports his efforts to focus the
agenda on economic reform and to ensure that the
leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina take real
responsibility for the future of their country. That is the
only sustainable way forward. The international

community - as other representatives have pointed
out - cannot forever take the difficult decisions in
Bosnia.

That is why we share Mr. Petritsch's concern at the
inability of the leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
take their political responsibilities. To paraphrase him, an
ethnic agenda cannot be allowed to take precedence over

 

what is best for the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
lack of implementation of the New York Declaration is,
frankly, depressing.

As Mr. Petritsch makes clear, there is some way to go
before we can be confident of long-term stability in Bosnia.
Institutional reform must be accompanied by economic
restructuring and progress on human rights. I would like to
address briefly some of the areas where problems remain
and ask for Mr. Petritsch's views on the next steps.

First, Mr. Petritsch has expressed frustration at the
Parliamentary Assembly's failure to pass the election law.
We share his concerns. This is an example of a broader
problem - a tendency by the collective Bosnian leadership
to duck the really difficult problems, as we also saw over
the border service. We are concerned that Serb
obstructionism in the Constitutional Court and on the
constituent peoples decision is restricting our options. I
should be grateful for the High Representative's views on
how this issue can be tackled.

Secondly, and as Mr. Petritsch has said, we face
serious challenges on the economic front. Although the
economy has registered stronger than expected rates of
growth, serious underlying weaknesses remain. We must
make clear to the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina that
they face a serious economic downturn if structural reform
is not implemented. Again, this will require difficult and
sometimes courageous decisions by the Bosnian leadership.
We can only hope they will face up to them.

Thirdly, we must make progress in dealing with the
inheritance of war. The United Kingdom welcomes the
arrest of Momcilo Krajisnik, This sends a clear message
that indictees of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 should be
under no illusions. They will be held to account. The
United Kingdom also welcomes the increased pace of
return of minority refugees and internally displaced persons
this year. We hope that the new Government in Croatia will
have a positive effect on regional refugee return.

We also commend the Office of the High
Representative and the Independent Media Commission on
their comprehensive media reform programme, particularly
the successful action against the illegal broadcasts by
Erotel. But we remain concerned by the continued
intimidation of independent media by established Bosnian
political parties.

To return to what has become a constant theme of
my - and, indeed, Mr. Petritsch's - interventions,
senior Bosnian political leaders should take concrete steps
to fulfil their responsibilities in this regard.

