Mr. Kickert (Austria): At the outset, Austria
warmly welcomes today's adoption of resolution 2388
(2017), which we gladly co-sponsored.

Austria aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier today by the observer of the European Union.

Conflict and post-conflict settings often create
conditions where civilians are increasingly exposed
to the risk of becoming the victims of trafficking. We
would like to highlight three issues in that regard.

First, with regard to persons belonging to vulnerable
groups, in situations of conflict women and girls are
far too often sexually exploited, forced into marriage
and abused for domestic work. Terrorists capture
women and girls, sell them or offer them as rewards
to the fighters of terrorist organizations. Similarly,
children are particularly vulnerable to becoming
victims of trafficking in conflict settings. Thousands
of them have been recruited by armed groups and used
as child soldiers, human shields or suicide bombers.
Furthermore, unaccompanied children on the move are
particularly at risk. In armed conflict, trafficking in
persons is also used as a strategy to target ethnic and
religious minorities. Through its General Assembly
resolution presented again this year, Austria continues
to advocate for the protection of persons belonging to
minorities and for their rights.

Secondly, to combat trafficking in persons, Austria
follows a victim-centered approach based on rights and
the rule of law. Therefore, we put the focus on preventing
trafficking in persons, identifying and protecting
the victims of trafficking and other serious forms of
exploitation. Bringing the perpetrators to justice and
ending the climate of impunity is of utmost importance.
In post-conflict settings, accountability and transitional
justice mechanisms, including at the international level,
are key elements in sustaining peace.

In view of the transnational nature of the offence,
we would like to stress the need for the closest possible
cooperation among all relevant stakeholders, at national
and international level. While the work of international
organizations remains key in the fight against human
trafficking, we would also like to again highlight the
indispensable role of non-governmental organizations
and civil society, in particular with regard to providing
valuable assistance in enhancing the identification, care
and referral of victims. We must therefore continue to
pursue an inclusive, comprehensive approach and step
up cooperation with non-traditional partners.

Thirdly, with its portfolio of technical assistance
programmes, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) continues to be a central
partner for assisting the States Members of the
United Nations in implementing practical measures
to combat trafficking in persons. We encourage
States to make use of UNODC's expertise. Capacity-
building programmes for criminal justice practitioners,
support in the development of legislation and national
referral mechanisms to identify and assist the victims
of trafficking, as well as the development of training
modules for law enforcement, are a few examples of the
kind of assistance provided. We also welcome the focus
of today's debate on fostering cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations in order to
eradicate trafficking in persons.

In that regard, we would like to highlight the
important work done by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). During our
OSCE chairmanship this year, Austria has made the
prevention of and fight against trafficking in human
beings a priority. We strive to strengthen the OSCE's
commitments to combating trafficking in persons, also
in the context of crisis situations, and to build on the
momentum created by resolutions 2331 (2016) and 2388
(2017).

Finally, we call on those States that have not yet
done so to ratify or accede to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and its Palermo Protocol. We encourage everyone to
contribute to the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund
for Victims of Human Trafficking, Especially Women
and Children, and thank Italy for its leadership and
recent generous contribution in that regard.

