Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to welcome South Africa's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to wish you every success, Sir, in your duties
conducting the important work on our agenda over the
month of October. Similarly, we once again commend
the Russian Federation's conduct of the Council's work
over the preceding month.

Peru welcomes the convening of this important
meeting on the consideration of young people as
promoters of peace and development in Africa, in
particular in the context of the Silencing the Guns by
2020 initiative, endorsed by the Council. We welcome
the informative presentations and stirring personal
accounts shared by the guest speakers.

First, we highlight the noble and ambitious goal,
set by the African Union in 2013, aimed at achieving
a conflict-free continent, which is consistent with the
efforts of the international community to promote
sustainable peace. Its success is closely linked to the
active participation of younger generations. That was
recognized in resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018),
which recognize the substantive contribution that
young people can make to peace in all its phases, from
conflict prevention to peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
as emphasized in the 2018 Independent Progress Study
on Youth, Peace and Security.

That enormous potential is also applicable within
the context of the Sustainable Development Goals.
The proper implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development will also help tackle the
root causes - such as poverty, lack of employment,
access to drinking water, and natural disasters, among
others - whose effects may in many cases lead young
people to radical responses.

Those objectives commit us to, among other
things, creating decent employment for young
people, guaranteeing equal opportunities, promoting
peaceful societies and promoting human rights while
safeguarding diversity and combating discrimination.
There are 1.2 billion young people around the world,
half of whom live in violent and conflict zones. In
Africa, young people account for a large percentage
of the population. The World Youth Report: Youth and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development notes
that for some young people armed conflicts represent
the main source of employment; in many cases, social
status and capital are closely linked to possession of
a weapon.

We therefore welcome the efforts of the African
Union to establish the Youth for Peace initiative,
under the African Governance Architecture, aimed at
establishing guidelines for the participation of young
people between the ages of 15 and 35 at the local,
national and continental levels, and at removing barriers
limiting their opportunities to take on leadership roles.
That approach seeks to redefine the mistaken traditional
perception of young people as perpetrators or mere
victims of violence, refocusing it instead on their status
as agents of peace who represent a valuable resource
to be leveraged to achieve and consolidate sustainable
peace on the continent.

To that end, we would like to underline the
importance of revising regional policies to highlight
the visibility and rights of young people and promote
their active participation towards the goal of silencing
the guns. In particular, we believe that the participation
of women must be encourage more vigorously in
that context.

It is also important to reflect on young people who
find themselves in situations of vulnerability owing
to their status as refugees or internally displaced
persons, frequently living below the poverty line and
exposed to situations of xenophobia, discrimination
and exploitation. There could be no more important
contribution to rectifying that situation than to find a
lasting solution to the armed conflict that generated
that situation and thereby facilitate their return home.

From another point of view, having lived first-hand
the consequences of conflict, those people are well
placed to contribute to efforts to solve conflicts, which
is something we should take advantage of. Another
element we wish to highlight is the need to establish
synergies between African Union initiatives and those
developed at the global level. We believe that the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and Agenda 2063
of the African Union should reinforce each other's
work towards the ultimate goal of addressing the root

causes of conflict, while establishing inclusive and
accountable institutions.

We emphasize in conclusion the importance that the
Security Council remain firmly seized of this matter,
which is central for the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, for justice, for reconciliation and for building
a lasting peace. We therefore look forward to the
forthcoming report of the Secretary-General that is
expected by May 2020.

