Mr. Effendi (Indonesia): Let me begin by extending
to you, Mr. President, our appreciation for convening this
open meeting on an issue of such great importance.

It is indeed disturbing, as the world moves towards
the twenty-first century and a new millennium of hope
and great expectation, that the international community
finds itself ever more frequently faced with civilian
casualties, including children, in armed conflicts - all the
more so as this year we observe the fiftieth anniversary
of the Geneva Convention.

Even more tragic is the fact that, while the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War is founded on the principle that the
humane treatment of inhabitants serves the values of
humanity and decency to which all sides may subscribe,
we find that in contemporary warfare combatants have
deliberately targeted civilians as a means of pursuing their
objectives.

Thus, while the international community has crafted
a rather comprehensive framework of international
humanitarian law, the rights of displaced persons and
refugees and the human rights of civilians in situations of
armed conflict are often neglected. Therefore, the stress
is and should be on their implementation. In this context,
as international law does not take precedence over
national law, a balance must be sought so as not to
violate national sovereignty or the purposes and principles
of the United Nations Charter. Experience shows that in
the long run, such violations will only exacerbate the
situation and worsen conditions.

Of equal concern to the international community is
the growing threat faced by humanitarian workers, who
risk their personal safety for the noble purpose of
alleviating suffering and hardship. Assaults on
humanitarian operations are particularly threatening in the
light of the fact that the vast majority of conflicts occur
within States. They are almost always accompanied by

 

large-scale internal displacement and refugee flows and call
for a United Nations presence and a rapid and effective
response by its various agencies and funds. We must secure
the protection of humanitarian personnel if this aspect of
the Organization's work is to successfully continue.

In this regard, we concur with the assertion of the
President of the International Committee of the Red Cross
that the bottom line for any action by humanitarian
organizations is that it must have received the consent of
each and every party concerned.

Many have called for the root causes of conflicts to be
addressed and have clearly voiced their view that a link
exists between social and economic development and peace
and stability. Indonesia concurs that effective measures for
that purpose could be achieved through close cooperation
between the Security Council, the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council, and that none is
equipped to exclusively and comprehensively deal with
those issues.

When they met in Durban in September last year, the
heads of State or Government of the non-aligned countries
stressed the need to differentiate between peacekeeping
operations and humanitarian assistance. Indeed, they are
two different kinds of responses to two different kinds of
situations. In the past few years we have witnessed that
peacekeeping operations have little chance of success when
addressing humanitarian situations. On the other hand, it is
very difficult for humanitarian organizations to maintain
their impartiality and neutrality if escorted by armed guards.
This dilemma is not new, as our predecessors would have
testified 50 years ago in Geneva. But the United Nations is
equipped to address this very difficult but very important
issue.

In concluding, I should like to reiterate Indonesia's
strong support for the humanitarian operations of the United
Nations, as well as the need for the Organization to
strenuously work to uphold established international
humanitarian law. We will continue to contribute to that
effort.

