Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco, for his presentation. I also
thank the Permanent Representative of the State of
Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for
their statements.

I will begin with some words on Lebanon. We
welcome the establishment of the new Lebanese
Government, which began its work after presidential
declaration adopted in December. The visit to France
by Mr. Saad Hariri, President of the Lebanese Council,
accompanied by several ministers, was an opportunity
for the French authorities to express their support for
bolstering the Lebanese State and its institutions, for
implementing the reforms that the country needs and
for continuing the implementation of United Nations
resolutions, particularly Security Council resolution
1701 (2006).

We believe that Mr. Hariri's visit to Syria is also
a step in the right direction. The normalization of
relations between the two countries is an opportunity
for the region, and we hope it will continue and that it
will go all the way. I am thinking in particular of the
demarcation of the border between the two countries,
in conformity with Security Council resolutions.

Resolution 1701 (2006) must be fully
implemented. In that regard, contacts between the
United Nations and the Israeli authorities should
continue on the question of Ghajar. We believe a
withdrawal would contribute to the easing of tensions
in that sector.

I move now to the Israeli-Palestinian dossier, and
I wish to bring out four points.

First, our objective is clearly the relaunching of
the peace process. There is no other option but a return
to negotiation, aimed at the creation of a viable,
independent and democratic Palestinian State living
side by side with Israel with secure and recognized
borders based on Security Council resolutions and the
Arab Peace Initiative. That is also the position of the
European Union, as the head of that delegation will
state in his remarks, with which France associates
itself.

The international community should commit
itself to participating in the negotiations between the
two parties and to guaranteeing the parameters of a
final accord that will allow both parties to re-engage.
We resolutely support the efforts being undertaken by
the United States. The European Union is ready to play
its full role, and we will call on the Arab States to
associate themselves with those efforts.

The second point is the need for progress on the
ground. As those who spoke before me have stressed,
settlements remain a major obstacle on the road to a
solution. The decision of the Israeli Government to
announce a 10-month moratorium on new settlements
and on new building permits in the West Bank is a step
in the right direction. However, no peace will be
possible without a complete cessation of construction
in the settlements, including in East Jerusalem. They
are illegal. As the President of the Republic has
recalled, settlements make the prospects for a
Palestinian State more difficult, and they do not
contribute to Israeli security; on the contrary, they
increase the dangers.

In that context, with regard to Jerusalem, all
forms of provocation should be avoided. We call on the
Israeli authorities in particular to cease the destruction
of homes and other evictions in East Jerusalem. There
cannot be a peace that excludes Jerusalem, which - as
President Sarkozy said in his statement to the Knesset
on 23 June 2008 - is destined to become the capital of
two States.

The Palestinian Authority, for its part, should
continue with its efforts to bolster the security sector
and to implement the rule of law. Continuing the fight
against terrorism, without mercy, should remain a
priority.

Thirdly, beyond humanitarian matters that
continue to be of concern to us, to forget Gaza would
be a political mistake. We call for the full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009), including
with the immediate lifting of the blockade - which
hits the territory hard with regard to humanitarian aid,
commercial goods and the movement of people - but
also with a halt to the illegal arms trafficking in Gaza.
We regret that the State of Israel continues not to allow
the implementation of resolution 1860 (2009).

We also call for the immediate release of
Corporal Gilad Shalit, a matter that France follows
with the greatest attention.

With regard to the Goldstone report
(A/HRC/12/48), I recall the consistent position of
France. International humanitarian law must be
respected in all places, in all circumstances and by all
parties to a conflict. That applies equally in Gaza and
in southern Israel. In that regard, I recall how
important it is for both parties to carry out an
independent inquiry process consistent with
international standards, regarding alleged violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights
during the Gaza crisis.

Fourthly, and finally, the international community
should provide strong support to the Palestinian
Authority and Mr. Mahmoud Abbas with a view to
strengthening the institutions of the future Palestinian
State. It is also for Israel to play its role with far
greater resolve. Gestures have been made on the
ground, but these remain insufficient. The Palestinians
must be able to perceive that developments on the
ground are moving towards an end to the occupation,
including in the areas of freedom of movement and
access. Here, financial support for the Palestinian
Authority is an essential element which has political
implications.

Yesterday evening the French Minister for
Foreign Affairs chaired another meeting to follow up
the international Donors Conference for the Palestinian
State, which was held in Paris in December 2007.
Following the Paris Conference, $5.2 billion was
allocated to the Palestinian Authority. France attaches
particular importance to the fulfilment of these
commitments. Participants in yesterday's Paris meeting
included Mr. Salam Fayyad, the Palestinian Prime
Minister; Ms. Catherine Ashton, European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy;
Mr. Tony Blair, Quartet Special Representative; and the
Norwegian and Egyptian Ministers for Foreign Affairs.
The Palestinian Prime Minister's plan, which we
support, was much discussed at the meeting. That plan
falls within the framework of the Paris Conference,
whose outcome would be the establishment of a
Palestinian State.

I repeat: our principal objective is the urgent
resumption of negotiations. This involves the Israelis
and the Palestinians, but we must not forget the other
regional tracks of the peace process. In that regard, we
are also working to create conditions conducive to a
return to talks between Syria and Israel.

The international community and the Security
Council have an important role to play, because the
situation in the Middle East concerns us all. France is
ready to fully play its role in this effort. That is why
President Sarkozy has proposed a peace summit, which
would support United States efforts and would support
the resumption of peace negotiations; it would be
prepared in consultation with all relevant actors.
