Mr. Baum (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Important financial resources have been dedicated to
the management of conflict, but the funds invested in
the prevention of wars and crises have remained
modest. This, despite the fact that effective conflict
prevention would save not only innumerable lives but
also reduce excessive spending. Thus, we consider the
subject of today's debate very timely and we thank you
for the concept paper you have provided us.
Switzerland, which is Co-Chairperson of the Group of
Friends on conflict prevention, is grateful to you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity you have given us to
take up this very important issue. Today I shall focus
on institutional aspects.

First, cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union to resolve the conflict in Darfur
is an example of a productive and innovative
partnership between the two organizations. Switzerland
welcomes the joint communique issued by the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union on 16 June 2007. My country
encourages the Security Council to continue to explore
ways of strengthening cooperation and improving the
sharing of tasks with the African Union.

Secondly, preventing, managing and resolving
conflicts begins at the local and regional levels and
must involve all parties concerned - in particular,
civil society, women, young people and the victims of
violence. Ceasefire and peace agreements must be
based on an inclusive approach and be acceptable to
all. Reconciliation cannot be based solely on the
establishment of a new order; it must also ensure that
past injustices and abuses be brought before the courts
and that fair compensation is provided. It is for that

reason that the Secretariat should maintain regular
contacts with the regional organizations and
institutions concerned, so as to think these matters
through together and identify best practices and
innovative approaches.

Thirdly, the Department of Political Affairs
should be strengthened in order that it can fulfil its
mandate in the area of conflict prevention. The
establishment of a Mediation Support Unit is a first and
very important step towards that end. Switzerland will
continue to support those efforts. However,
strengthening capacities for conflict prevention,
mediation and good offices alone cannot depend upon
the good will of contributors. New resources in the
form of assessed contributions will also be necessary.
Conflict prevention should not merely be a desirable
activity for the United Nations, it should have the
status of a principal activity of the Organization.

Switzerland supports a strong and effective role
for the Security Council in the area of conflict
prevention. We also believe there is a need for a well-
informed and structured debate on how to strengthen
the institutional capacity of the United Nations in this
area. We think that the time has come for the General
Assembly to seriously take up this issue, during its
sixty-second session, on the basis of the Secretary-
General's most recent report on the prevention of
armed conflict.

