Mrs. Puerschel (Germany): Like others, I would
like to commend Poland for convening today's debate
on this very crucial topic and to thank this morning's
briefers. We were especially moved by Judge Meron's
statement reminding us of the atrocities of the Second
World War, which are at the basis of why Germany
is a staunch support of strengthening our rules-based
international order. Germany is strongly committed to
supporting, defending and developing that order. Our
campaign for a seat on the Security Council for the
2019-2020 term reflects that commitment.
International peace and security can be achieved
only if we respect and adhere to international law and
the rules-based international system that we as States
have built together. We have a responsibility not only to
create law but also to respect and implement it. That law
includes first and foremost the Charter of the United
Nations, which entrusts the primary responsibility
for upholding international peace and security to the
Security Council and keeps at hand a whole system of
measures, in Chapters VI, VII and VIII of the Charter,
to be deployed to that end. Upholding international
law also means respecting and implementing Security
Council resolutions and international agreements.

Unilateral breaches undermine the entire system.
It is deplorable that we still witness breaches of
international law on a daily basis. It is not hard to
list numerous breaches of human rights law and
international humanitarian law 4 for example, in the
ongoing conflicts in Syria, Yemen, Myanmar and other
places around the world. We can also list violations of
sovereignty and territorial integrity 4 for example, in
Ukraine with regard to Crimea and Donbas.

We need to adhere to what has been agreed on,
including upholding the consolidated international
position on Jerusalem embodied in resolution 478
(1980). Addressing breaches of international law that
pose a threat to peace and security is key to preventing
conflicts early on. The Security Council needs to be
informed at an early stage of such breaches and take
early action.

There is a close correlation between protecting
human rights and safeguarding peace and security.
Repeated, grave or systematic violations of human
rights are crucial early-warning signs for crises. For
that reason, human rights situations should be brought
before the Security Council. The Council should also
work more closely with the Human Rights Council and
its mechanisms. In the past, clear warnings have not
always been registered by the Security Council. The
situation of the Rohingya is just one example. Since
2014, the Human Rights Council has time and again
called on the international community to react to the
grave situation in Myanmar.

In addition to investigations, Article 33 of the
Charter provides numerous other instruments for
the prevention of conflicts, of which mediation is
one. Peace mediation is an essential instrument of
Germany's crisis and stabilization policy, and it has
significantly strengthened its mediation efforts over the
past three years.
Let me also highlight judicial settlement as a
means of prevention, which was also mentioned by
a couple of colleagues today. Germany shares the
opinion that international courts and tribunals, such
as the International Court of Justice, the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea and other tribunals and
arbitration mechanisms, can and should play a more
important role in the peaceful settlement process. For
that to happen, Member States must also respect and
implement their decisions.

Another aspect of prevention is deterrence.
Germany is strongly committed to the fight against
impunity and to advancing international criminal law.
We are the second-largest financial contributor to the
International Criminal Court (ICC). In the twentieth
year since the adoption of the Rome Statute, we believe
that the International Criminal Court is more important
than ever, and its work sends an unequivocal signal
to perpetrators and potential perpetrators of the most
serious and horrific crimes that they will be held
accountable. It also sends a message of hope to the
victims of atrocity crimes that they will not be forgotten
by the international community.

Allow me to illustrate that point with an example.
When the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia closed its doors last December, none
of the 161 indictees were still at large. The Tribunal
concluded proceedings in all its cases. Ninety
people were convicted, among them Heads of State,
ministers and generals. The Tribunal proved that the
law can prevail even against perpetrators who once
seemed untouchable.

Germany believes that the Security Council
should refer situations to the ICC in the case of
serious allegations of breaches of human rights and
international humanitarian law. The use of chemical
weapons constitutes a serious violation of international
humanitarian law. Those responsible for such crimes
must be identified and held accountable by all means at
our disposal. We sincerely urge the Security Council to
live up to its responsibility and establish an independent,
impartial and objective attribution mechanism for the
situation in Syria.

In conclusion, I would like to add that I fully
support what the observer of the European Union and
the representative of Belgium said on sanctions.

