Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone): In the 1990s, Sierra
Leone was embroiled in a brutal civil war, which left
tens of thousands of people dead and hundreds of
thousands displaced. At the end of the war, the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission for Sierra Leone was
set up to not only expose perpetrators and identify
victims, but also to serve as a mirror through which
all Sierra Leoneans examined their own roles in the
conflict. The dialogue helped the victims to face their
perpetrators, as well as to reconcile and move on with
their lives.

The findings of the Commission encouraged
Sierra Leoneans to believe that the past must never
be forgotten. The Commission's recommendations
touched on every aspect of the lives of Sierra Leoneans.
Its final report served as a road map for building a new
society in which all Sierra Leoneans can walk unafraid
with pride and dignity. Together with the Commission,
the Special Court for Sierra Leone was established,
through the partnership and assistance of the United
Nations, to bring to justice those who bore the greatest
responsibility for the serious crimes committed during
the war. It achieved that objective and completed its
operations in Sierra Leone in 2013.

The Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone
was established 2013 to oversee the continuing legal
obligations of the Special Court for Sierra Leone. We
are indeed grateful to United Nations Member States
for their continued support in terms of the subvention
to the Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone under
the item "Proposed programme budget for the year
2020" on the agenda of the Fifth Committee of the
General Assembly.

The Special Court represents an acknowledgement
of the intrinsic link connecting reconciliation, justice,
the need to fight impunity, the promotion of the rule of
law and the preservation ofpeace and stability in Sierra
Leone. Sierra Leone is therefore proud to be a pioneer
that puts into practice two transitional mechanisms. We
took that unfamiliar path because of our genuine desire
to consolidate peace and seek justice for victims. The
two mechanisms have unquestionably been a positive
force in terms of sustaining peace for our country.

It is critically important that we understand and
address the ways in which mutual mistrust, suspicion,
anger and animosity spill over into the priorities of
national development, such as fighting corruption
and attracting foreign investment. In that regard, my
Government has identified strengthening national
cohesion as a top priority for promoting unity within
the country. With that in mind, in May we launched a
presidential initiative that was heralded by a national
conference on peacebuilding, diversity management
and rebuilding national cohesion. That will soon be
followed by the creation of an independent commission
for peace and national cohesion, to be established by
an act of Parliament later this year or early next year.
The support of the United Nations in that regard will be
highly appreciated.

In building peace and national reconciliation and
avoiding polarization, it is critical that all stakeholders,
citizens, Governments, politicians, civil society, the
private sector, women and young people are all engaged
in the national development process. Finally, as the old
cliche goes, there can be no peace without development
and no development without peace. Together we are
stronger, and it is much easier to sustain peace with
all stakeholders on board than when some are excluded
and marginalized.

