Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We also
thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu for her important briefing.

We note with deep concern the growing number
of allegations of the use of chemical weapons against
the civilian population in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Peru condemns those atrocious acts wherever they
occur and considers them to be in open defiance of
the non-proliferation regime and the maintenance
of international peace and security. We are also
concerned about the continued discrepancies, errors
and omissions in the Syrian declaration. The recent
information provided by the Government of Syria to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) was once again insufficient. We reiterate that
the Syrian authorities are legally and morally obligated
to cooperate fully in order to clarify the remaining
discrepancies and that the Council is responsible for
safeguarding the non-proliferation regime.

Moreover, we wish to reaffirm our confidence in
the work being carried out by the OPCW Fact-finding
Mission, whose professionalism and technical rigour
have made it possible to determine that chemical
attacks have occurred in Syria. We look forward to the
findings of its final report on the events in Douma and
its account of several additional incidents that have been
reported regarding the alleged use of chemical weapons
in Syria. We would also like to highlight the progress
made by the OPCW in terms of logistical planning for
the effective implementation of the decision adopted
on 27 June at the special session of the Conference of
States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention. We
consider it of the utmost importance that investigations
enable the OPCW to identify the perpetrators of those
barbaric acts. We stress that identifying those resposible
and conducting fair trials that lead to punishing
those responsible will enable justice to be rendered
to the victims, while also effectively discourage the
repetition of those atrocious crimes and safeguard the
non-proliferation regime. That also means restoring
the rule of law, which is required to build sustainable
peace, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

