Ms. Mindaoudou (spoke in French): I would like
thank the Council for this opportunity to speak before
the Security Council this morning in order to present
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Cote d'Ivoire (S/2014/342), dated 15 May, and to provide
an update on recent developments in the country.

Cote d'Ivoire has started on the path towards
sustainable stability. The economic growth rate is
significant. The infrastructure is rapidly developing
and private investment, attracted by a very
favourable business environment and encouraged
by the Government of President Alassane Ouattara,
is increasing. Thanks to those positive economic
developments and the increase in the minimum wage,
the Ivorian people are beginning to share the dividends
of peace.

As the report before the Council underscores, the
reconciliation process has gained new momentum
with the extension of the mandate of the Commission
on Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation in February.
The Commission has continued its public hearings
throughout the country so as to hear approximately
60,000 people before its mandate expires in September.
The expectations for the Commission, which will make
recommendations to the Government on compensation
and other measures for the victims of the crisis in order
to promote the reconciliation process, are immense.

In the context of the ongoing efforts to strengthen
reconciliation and national cohesion, President
Ouattara continues to reach out to those associated
with the former regime, stressing that every Ivorian has
a positive role to play in the country's future. At his
request, several hundred people who left voluntarily,
including senior officials of the Government of
former President Laurent Gbagbo, have returned to
C6te d'Ivoire, The Government of President Ouattara
also continues to implement significant actions to
reduce tensions with the former ruling party, the Front
populaire ivoirien (FPI), by granting bail to those
still detained and by unfreezing the bank accounts of
associates of the former regime. In addition, a number
of homes belonging to those associated with the former
President and occupied by the Forces republicaines de
Cote d'Ivoire (FRCI) since the post-election crisis, have
been abandoned and returned to their owners.

The process of strengthening the dialogue between
the Government and the political opposition faces
a number of challenges. As the report before the
Council underscores, in April the Front populaire
ivoirien stopped taking part in the dialogue with the
Government, invoking the decision of the authorities
to transfer the leader of the Young Patriots, Charles
Ble Goude, to the International Criminal Court at The
Hague. The FPI has also called on its militants to no
longer participate in the national processes, such as the
public hearings of the the Commission on Dialogue,
Truth and Reconciliation and the population census
currently under way.

That said, I am pleased to report that significant
progress has been made in the political dialogue,
including in the discussions to identify and to draw up,
by mutual agreement among the parties, a list of the
associates of the former regime in detention and the
bank accounts that are still frozen. Formal dialogue
between the Government and the FPI was resumed
on 22 May. That resumption of dialogue was followed
by the publication of a joint statement in which the
Government announced the provisional release of
150 people close to the former regime. Although the
resumption of dialogue is a very positive development,
some human rights defence organizations expressed
concern that the decision to release those detainees
following political discussions could indicate a lack of
separation between executive and judiciary powers.

The presidential election in October 2015 is on the
horizon, and the political environment is fluid. Four
figures, including President Ouattara, have announced
their candidacies, and the process of establishing a legal
framework for the election is ongoing. On 20 May, the
National Assembly adopted a draft law amending the
composition of the Independent Electoral Commission,
which will now have 17 commissioners who will
represent the President of the Republic, the President of
the National Assembly, the ruling coalition, the political
opposition and civil society. It is important to note that
the members of the Independent Electoral Commission
themselves will elect the President of the Commission.
Several opposition parties have expressed reservations
about the composition of the Independent Electoral
Commission, and, in the context of the continuation
of this process, it is important that all parties work
together to agree on the rules and operating procedures
of the body as well as other necessary measures to
ensure the transparent and inclusive nature of the
electoral process.

Promoting a culture of respect for human rights is
essential for the success of the national reconciliation
process. That requires immediate measures aimed at
ending impunity by bringing to justice perpetrators
of violations of human rights, regardless of their
political affiliation. Important steps have been made
in that direction, with, for example, the extension
and strengthening of the mandate of the special unit
responsible for investigating post-election violence in
a fair and impartial manner. There are still challenges,
however, and the Government continues to work
on them, in particular justice, dozos and the Forces
republicaines de Cote d'Ivoire.

Although the security situation has improved
considerably since 2011, armed robberies, banditry
and other criminal activities continue to contribute
to instability throughout the country. Significant
challenges remain in the west of the country, where
some people still have claims in the areas of land
tenure and nationality, which are issues related to the
root causes of the Ivorian crisis. The national police and
gendarmerie are not sufficiently deployed or do not have
the equipment necessary to maintain order and enforce
the law in many communities in the west of the country.
Some FRCI personnel responsible for ensuring security
in those areas have marred their legitimacy after acts
of extortion and armed robbery that were committed
against the very people they were supposed to protect.
At the same time, there is a strong commitment on
the part of the highest authorities of the Government
to promoting security sector reform. However, some
people's lack of confidence in the national security
institutions limits the possibilities of effective
democratic control of the sector, which is a threat to the
country's consolidation of stability. In several areas,
dozos, who are traditional hunters, perform security
tasks and have, on many occasions, committed acts of
violations of human rights. The Government continues
to encourage dozos to return to their traditional
activities and is working to establish an appropriate
legal framework for the management of the issue.
Restoring public security throughout the country,
which is an immediate priority, requires significant
advances in the field of professionalizing defence and
security forces through reforms designed to increase
their legitimacy and effectiveness while including the
participation of women in security institutions.

President Ouattara has set his Government the
ambitious goal of disarming all ex-combatants before
the end of June 2015. There has been significant
progress; to date, 30,000 of the 70,000 ex-combatants
identified have received support from the Government
or the United Nations for their reintegration. With
additional support from other partners, the Government
should be able to achieve the goal of concluding the
process of inclusive disarmament by offering all ex-
combatants opportunities for sustainable reintegration
before the 2015 elections.

After a year marked by a general calm in the border
areas with Liberia, there were two attacks against Forces
republicaines de Cote d'Ivoire positions in western
Cote d'Ivoire. During the last attack, the assailants
expelled the FRCI from a village called Fete, exposing
the population to unspeakable brutality. United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) troops intervened
immediately, exchanged gunfire with the attackers,
ousted them from the village and released the people. By
that time, the attackers had already killed and maimed
three soldiers and 10 civilians, including two children.
I am proud to say that our troops have responded with
bravery, even when they were directly exposed to

enemy fire, which shows their strong commitment to
protecting civilians.

We are investigating the attack to determine if its
perpetrators had crossed the Liberian border to enter
into Ivorian territory. It is important to learn more
about the identity of the attackers and their motives
in order to prevent such attacks in the future. Our
initial assessment is that such attacks highlight, on
the one hand, the need to make further progress in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and, on
the other hand, the importance for Cote d'Ivoire to have
professional security forces capable of better protecting
civilian populations.

We are also working with the United Nations
Mission in Liberia to strengthen our cooperation. We
are on the verge of finalizing a new strategic framework.
Among our priorities, and in order to support our
respective national partners, we are looking at how
we can contribute to the strengthening of national
capacities to better secure the borders. Strengthening
security cooperation between the two Governments
has contributed significantly to improving security in
the border areas. In that regard, it is equally important
to encourage the efforts made to empower local
communities and include traditional leaders, youth and
women in initiatives designed to promote stability, in
the light of the close family and historical ties between
the peoples living on both sides of the border. We
also encourage the implementation of the transborder
security strategy developed by the Mano River Union
and endorsed by the Economic Community of West
African States.

UNOCI has restructured its military component and
has consolidated its presence in the west and other high-
risk areas, in accordance with the Security Council's
request. Since the end of December 2013, national
security institutions are now entirely responsible for
the security of senior Government officials and other
political figures. At the end of May, we completed the
withdrawal of 1,700 troops, pursuant to resolution 2112
(2013). Those reductions in military personnel were
possible because of the significant progress made,
which we welcome. However, we are aware that the
upcoming elections in 2015 will be an important step
for the country and will be conducted in a sensitive
environment. It is therefore important, as recommended
by the Secretary-General, to adopt a cautious approach
with respect to the upcoming force reduction. However,
we are striving to do more with less and believe,
therefore, that it will be entirely possible to implement
our mandate while further reducing the number of
troops by 1,100.

Our vision regarding the use of our uniformed
personnel during the election period is based on a new
concept of mobility for operations, which is aimed at
strengthening the capacity of our combat forces. The
key to implementing the new concept of operations
will be the creation, within UNOCI, of a quick-reaction
force that will help us to bridge the gap in some areas
of the country where there is no permanent military
presence. Mobility, including the ability to deploy
helicopter elements, is essential to the success of that
project. In May, UNOCI organized a series of military
exercises designed to develop the capacity to respond
within 12 hours to any emergency situation anywhere
in cote d'Ivoire. In addition, the United Nations police
is working closely with national partners to find ways
to support the development of key strategic priorities
such as security checks, training and mentoring for the
national police and gendarmerie. The objective is to
prepare them to resume their traditional role of policing
and strengthening the rule of law in C6te d'Ivoire.

One of UNOCI's main concerns remains the
restoration of confidence between the Ivorian people
and the security forces in order to achieve a lasting
peace. To achieve that goal, the security forces must
meet standard norms in terms of professionalism and
ethics. Our police forces will continue to provide
second-string support to national law enforcement,
which is a particularly important role in some areas of
the country where there is no military presence, and
during the electoral period.

Peacekeeping is a unique partnership, a
collaborative effort for the cause of peace. I would
like to conclude by expressing my sincere gratitude
for the effective partnership that we have established.
The Council, the Secretariat, UNOCI, our troops and
troop- and police-contributing countries and the United
Nations country team all work closely with the people
and Government of Cote d'Ivoire, and we support them
in their efforts to build a lasting peace.

