Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): First of
all, on behalf of my delegation, I should like to thank
you, Sir, for having convened this meeting. I welcome
Deputy Minister Covie and Mr. Michael Steiner to the
Council, and I think that they have given us valuable
input for our debate. I have to say that their statements
have given us grounds for optimism, in that we can see
that there is greater cooperation between the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the Serbian Government.

As a country associated with the European Union,
Bulgaria fully associates itself with the statement that
will be made shortly by the representative of Denmark
on behalf of the Union, and so I shall confine myself to
a few comments in my national capacity.

Bulgaria welcomes the developments in Kosovo
that have strengthened regional security and stability.
The final establishment of the provisional self-
government institutions and the fact that they have
actually begun their activities, including the adoption
of a programme of work, are successes that should help
to resolve the practical problems faced by all the
inhabitants of the province.

Bulgaria welcomes the work of the Special
Representative aimed at better coordinating the
activities of UNMIK and the province's provisional
institutions. That cooperation is particularly important,
because it can lead to positive, tangible results in all
aspects of social life, on the basis of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) and of the Constitutional
Framework.

The measures taken in the economic area are very
important because they can help to improve the
economic situation in the province, and particularly in
reducing unemployment - the real scourge of Kosovo.

Privatization must be carried out in a transparent
manner, enabling the international community to
follow it closely, so as to make sure that the interests of
all participants are protected, as well as those of
creditors.

Bulgaria welcomes UNMIK's determination to
take effective action in the areas of security, the combat
against terrorism and organized crime, and in affirming
the primacy of the rule of law. What Mr. Steiner said in
this respect was very eloquent, and we would like to
thank him for the energetic manner in which he is
combating organized crime.

We note the important achievements in this area,
such as the arrest of former members of the Kosovo
Liberation Army (KLA) accused of war crimes and of
torturing some of their fellow citizens in Kosovo, as
well as the start of the process of prosecution and trials
related to terrorist activities.

Setting up an effective judiciary is the keystone
for the smooth functioning of authority, good
governance and socio-political life in Kosovo. The
building of local capacities for law and order - joint,
specialized and multi-ethnic police services to be
monitored by UNMIK - is of paramount importance.
This would strengthen the confidence of citizens of all
communities in the judiciary and in law and order.

Strengthening the police force and the judiciary
will require the support of the international community
and a growing awareness among the people of Kosovo
that only respect for law and order can bring normalcy
to the province.

We therefore welcome Mr. Steiner's news about
the Italian Guardia di Finanza in Kosovo, which has a
long tradition and is an excellent instrument for
achieving the rule of law. In view of the improved
climate Bulgaria continues to stress the need to
complete the investigation into the cruel murder of
Valentin Krumov, a Bulgarian citizen, in 2000 and the
arrest of those responsible for the attack.

We welcome the cooperation between UNMIK
and the Belgrade and Skopje authorities, which helps in
resolving the practical problems in Kosovo, including
the fight against terrorism, organized crime and the
creation of opportunities to establish normal economic
relations. We believe that the development and the
adoption of standardized regulations governing
international communication, with the powers of the
provisional authorities clearly defined, acceptable to all
the parties involved will contribute to avoiding
unwanted international misunderstandings. Resolving
this matter is very important to ensuring freedom of
movement for Kosovar citizens outside the region and
to ensuring that neighbouring States honour their
international commitments.

In conclusion, Bulgaria believes that important
progress has been made in Kosovo recently. Yet,
despite the positive developments - and Deputy Prime
Minister Covic' and Mr. Steiner spoke about that - we
are still far from the time when the complete
devolution of powers by the international community
to the Kosovars themselves can be completed. Much
remains to be done to achieve the benchmarks
elaborated by Mr. Steiner. The accelerated return of
refugees is a precondition for reaching that stage.

I listened with great interest to the conclusions set
out by Mr. Steiner in his statement. I think we all agree
that the future of Kosovo must be multi-ethnic. To that
end, it is very important that all the inhabitants of
Kosovo feel at home there.

