Mr. Madeira: I thank you, Sir, for another
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in Somalia. Addressing the Council remains
a great honour for me.

I bring the Council greetings from the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, who acknowledges the immense efforts that
the Council, the Federal Government of Somalia and
the African Union are making to restore peace, security
and prosperity to Somalia and its people.

Since my last statement to the Council (see S/PV.7905), Somalia has witnessed political and
security developments, which had a considerable
impact on the country, and on our joint endeavour to
contain Al-Shabaab and put an end to insurgency and
Violent extremism in the country and in the region. The
signing at Villa Somalia in Mogadishu on 6 December
2017 of the peace, unity and reconciliation agreement
between the President of Galmudug, Mr. Ahmed Duale
Geele "Xaaf", and the leader of Ahlu Sunna Wal
Jama'a, Mr. Sheikh Mohamud Shakir, and the high-
level ceremony on 18 January in Dhusamareb, marking
the beginning of the implementation of the agreement
in the presence of President Farmajo, the Head of State
of the Federal Republic of Somalia, is a very positive
development in the reconciliation process among the
political class in Galmudug. That important event, which
also included a reconciliation tour by President Farmajo
of towns and villages in Puntland and Galmudug,
is a clear demonstration of the determination of the
Somali people to strive to put aside their differences
and concentrate on the factors that unite them in order
to allow peace, unity and stability to be restored not
only in Galmudug, but also in the entire territory of the
Federal Republic of Somalia.

In that vein, we congratulate President Mohamed
Farmajo for using his wisdom to convene and chair
a nine-day high-level consultative meeting with the
country's top political leadership, thereby helping to
ease the difficult political environment surrounding the
crisis, and allowing for a profound and comprehensive
engagement by the political class and agreements to
be reached on the way to handle a variety of issues of
central importance for the future of the country. Those
agreements, which sought the most suitable ways to
improve security in the country and eliminate terrorism,
promote the federal system, fast-track the review of the
provisional constitution, adopt a unified approach to the
2020 electoral process, strengthen cooperation between
the Federal Government and the federal member states,
create development projects and provide humanitarian
assistance, highlight the importance of bridging gaps
in the national security architecture, accelerate the
formation of an integrated national army, reconfigure
defence forces and establish a technical committee of
the National Security Council to work on police force
and coastguard allocations, are central to our joint
efforts to approach security in a comprehensive manner
and to ensure lasting stability for the country.

The strong manifestation of unity of the Somali
political leadership is central and indispensable
to the success of our collective efforts in Somalia.
Extreme poverty, insurgency, intolerance, entrenched
community grievances, ideological competition, violent
extremism and terrorism are some of the important
factors influencing the persistent volatile political
and security environment in the country. The newly
found unity of the Somali political leadership needs to
be harnessed. It is needed for these challenges to be
tackled and addressed comprehensively, concurrently
and with renewed determination.

Currently, the security situation in Somalia remains
volatile. A1-Shabaab attacks in the form of very crude
bombs. Improvised explosive devices, ambushes,
targeted assassinations and grenade attacks are being
registered with concerning regularity. On 14 October,
we saw the horrific example of the destruction that
Al-Shabaab can bring to Somalia and its people when,
in a cowardly attack, the group drove a large bomb that
exploded at the busy Zobe intersection in Mogadishu,
killing more than 500 people and injuring many
hundreds more.

The Zobe massacre was Somalia's deadliest
terrorist attack and its scale shocked many beyond
Somalia and the region, yet, in the true spirit of the
brave Somali people, the massacre not only sparked
widespread protest against Al-Shabaab, but it also
united all the Somalis. Indeed, winning the people to
our side and denying Al-Shabaab territorial space and
shelter among the Somali communities is key to success
in our common endeavour to restore comprehensive
peace and security in Somalia. At a time when Somalia
was at its lowest, following the attack, we saw the
immediate and appropriate response from the Federal
Government. Not only did President Farmajo rally the
country behind a united front, but he also called for
an extraordinary session of parliament to direct both
houses to strategize on what additional courses of action
needed to be undertaken to effectively fight a common
enemy. We also note the President's commendable
efforts to consult with and garner support from the
troop-contributing countries of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) following the attack.

This year is a crucial one for the African Union
and AMISOM. in Somalia. This is tied to our current
mandate under resolution 2372 (2017), which requests
that AMISOM's troops be drawn down, its police
personnel scaled up and offensive operations conducted
against Al-Shabaab. In spite of the burden this has
placed upon AMISOM. and Somalia, AMISOM's troop
levels have gone down and currently stand at 20,537
following its drawdown in 2017. We have also seen the
additional deployment of police from Nigeria and, in
the coming weeks, we expect another formed police
unit from Sierra Leone.

As AMISOM. prepares for its eventual exit from
Somalia, we are in regular contact with the Federal
Government, consulting on how to ensure that
AMISOM's transfer of its security responsibilities
is not only seamless, but also conditions-based and
responsible, as mandated by the Council in August.
That is why the African Union and AMISOM. have
continued to engage the Federal Government on the
transition process. In that vein, both the African
Union and AMISOM. offered valuable observations
on the Government's transition plan and co-chaired
the Government's transition planning meeting of
15 January, which led to the establishment of a
transitional plan core group.

On the African Union and AMISOM's part, we
wish to see coherence among various stakeholders
in Somalia's transition plan. We also wish to see an
appropriate mechanism for leading the transition
plan that avoids duplication of efforts and takes into
consideration the 1 December 2017 decisions, in
particular the operationalization of the Somali-African
Union joint task force.

AMISOM. looks forward to achieving a realistic
and responsible transition. We will work with the
Somali National Army and other stakeholders to
undertake robust operations against Al-Shabaab. We
will continue to secure main supply routes, protect
population centres and build infrastructure - such
as key bridges - in order to link population centres
and support humanitarian activities. These operations,
however, are all subject to the availability of requisite
support and force enablers and multipliers.

Permit me to remind the Council that the plan for
transition from AMISOM. to the Somali security forces,
as requested in resolution 2372 (2017), anticipated a
national army built on the basis of the principle of four
As - a Somali army that is acceptable, accountable,
affordable and able. With the release of the Federal
Government's frank and transparent operational
readiness assessment report in December, the African
Union and AMISOM. share the Government's assessment
that the Somali National Army, in its current state of
readiness, is not in a position to assume responsibility
from AMISOM. forces currently deployed in Somalia.

The main objective of the operational readiness
assessment has been achieved to determine the current
operational capability of the Somali National Army and
its readiness to assume AMISOM's responsibilities.
However, the African Union and AMISOM. consider
the operational readiness assessment to be a process
that identifies gaps in the Somali National Army that
must be addressed before AMISOM. can effectively
and responsibly transition. AMISOM, by far, carries
the burden of security in Somalia. We will continue to
mentor the Somali National Army and the Somali Police
Force, as requested by the Council resolution, until a
time when the conditions are deemed appropriate for
Somalia to have a transition to full sovereignty of its
security responsibility. Those must include operational
readiness assessment for the regional forces in the
coming weeks and months.

Resolution 2372 (2017) called for a revision of
AMISOM's concept of operations. In the light of the
challenges faced by AMISOM. in the implementation of
the current concept of operations, the Heads of State,
the Heads of Chiefs of Defence staff of the troop- and
police-contributing countries held a meeting in Addis
Ababa on 1 December 2017. They recommended
that the African Union Commission review the
Mission's concept of operations, in collaboration with
other relevant stakeholders. We intend to work with
everybody. We will exclude no one, and we intend to
make sure that the concept of operations is in line with
the Government's transition plan. We need a common
vision and approach so that the transition plan that the
Government of Somalia announced on 4 December is
one that we all share and are ready to implement. While
the consultations for a new concept of operations have
begun, the completion of the operational readiness
assessment exercise will be crucial to developing a
final transition plan that will inform a revised concept
of operations for AMISOM.

In spite of the realities that the operational
readiness assessment has made us all confront, the
Federal Government continues to show some progress
on the common approach to security, notably the
operationalization of the National Security Council and
the chairing of the first meeting of the Executive Group
by Prime Minister Khayre in November 2017. While
that meeting was held to update the international donor
community on the progress of the various strands of the
common approach to security, more progress is needed
on strands l and 2, which, as far as we are concerned, are

two sides of the same coin, since enabling AMISOM. to
undertake robust operations, protect population centres
and secure and protect the main supply routes makes
sense only if we enable the Somalis to undertake these
operations alongside us and eventually take them over.

In order to achieve those goals and not risk a
reversal of the gains made by AMISOM. and its Somali
partners, predictable and sustainable funding must be
made available not only for AMISOM. but also for the
Somali security forces. We therefore welcome the joint
decision of Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of
the African Union Commission, and Secretary-General
Anto'nio Guterres to appoint Mr. Ramtame Lamamra
and Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno as AMISOM's financing
envoys. They must be listened to very carefully. They
are genuinely trying to help overcome a problem that
has posed so many challenges to us in Somalia. We
expect that generous contributions will come out of
their efforts. Their role will be crucial in the coming
months as our partners deliberate on AMISOM's
funding and as the two envoys set out the parameters
for possible options for that funding in the future, as
well as that of the Somali National Army.

