Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First and
foremost, Sir, may I extend a welcome to you in the
Council and express the honour and satisfaction we
feel at seeing you chairing this important debate, the
theme of which is of great significance to us. Likewise,
we wish to acknowledge the Secretary-General's
contribution and those of the other staff members who
have addressed us. We also acknowledge and
appreciate the role that they play in dealing with the
question of children and armed conflict.

Including the item of children and armed conflict
on the Council's agenda reflects a clear evolution in
what we nowadays define as a threat to peace. Beyond
that, the work of the Council on the issue has made it
possible to raise the world's awareness of the plight of
children in situations of armed conflict and their rights
in such situations.

However, the Council has dedicated its work
almost exclusively to six grave violations and their
respective recommendations, when the issue should, in
fact, be viewed more broadly without divorcing the
rights of children in armed conflict from the rights of
all children in general. The Council and its Working
Group must examine the issue in depth, lest we
squander an entire generation and jeopardize those that
follow.
Panama views with enormous concern the fact
that, notwithstanding the headway made in
international standards on the protection of the rights
of the child, those children continue to be deprived of
their rights during armed conflicts, in which they are
compelled to take part or become Victims of
unspeakable atrocities. Those children are deprived of
the opportunity to enjoy the most sacred treasures of
childhood, namely, a future and hope, and their
frustration and despair are such that violence and the
resurgence of conflict inevitably ensue.

That trend is especially manifest in children
displaced by conflict. Unlike refugees, they are bereft
of any international legal status, and consequently
there is no guardianship of their rights if the
institutions of the State do not have the necessary
resources to protect them. Therefore, it is imperative to
create reintegration programmes and policies with a
special emphasis on the status of children as subjects
of law, on the specific needs of victims and the
education of the communities, with a view to forgiving
child soldiers and reintegrating them into their
societies.

The international community must tackle even
more urgently a global situation that makes the effects
of conflict on vulnerable populations even more
adverse. The food crisis today threatens to exacerbate
the already meagre levels of child nutrition. The United
Nations, standing for the citizenry of the world, must
set itself up as the prime advocate in redressing that
gap. Its success will depend on the coordination
amongst its own bodies, agencies and funds, as well as
cooperation with Governments, non-governmental
organizations and the efforts of local communities.

It is difficult to broach the question of children
and armed conflict without referring to the necessity of
putting an end to impunity. My delegation reiterates its
support for the efforts of the International Criminal
Court to bring to justice all those who perpetrate grave
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights, in particular the rights of the child.

Furthermore, Panama considers that in situations
of armed conflict, for which there are sanctions
committees, this Council should add to the list of
individuals subject to sanctions those guilty of grave
violations against the rights of the child.

