Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Madam President, I
thank you for convening and for presiding over this
debate, to which we all attach importance. We believe
that the debate today on the interlinkages between
security, development and the root causes of conflict is
apt and timely. I wish to also express my appreciation
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, to Ambassador
Olaf Skoog, Permanent Representative of Sweden and
Chair of the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), and to Ms. Bouchamaoui, the Nobel Peace Prize
laureate 2015, for their compelling briefings. As a
member of the PBC, my delegation fully endorses the
statement delivered by Ambassador Skoog.

I wish to make additional points focusing on three
issues, namely: timing and process issues; the security
and development nexus; and, in the context of the
response by the United Nations, breaking down silos
and addressing fragmentations. My focus will be more
on the structural or systemic aspects rather than the
substantive issues, with a view to highlighting areas to
which the Council should give more attention.

If one takes an expansive view of lessons learned
from the conflicts today, it is not inconceivable that in
the medium to long term, new or increased pressures
and stresses on institutions and society at different
levels will continue to be the main drivers of conflict in
various situations and scenarios around the world. To
counter that dire prognosis, we firmly support urgent
improvements to make prevention capacities more
effective at all levels, especially at the United Nations.
In that connection, our discussion today affords a timely
opportunity to take stock and further discuss possible
measures to improve the Council's effectiveness in
maintaining international peace and security. At the
same time, the ongoing review processes of United
Nations peace operations, peacebuilding architecture
and women and peace and security could also benefit
from the outcomes of this discussion.

This Council has an important role to play in security
and development in the context of nation-building and
the maintenance of international peace and security,
which are two sides of the same coin. A possible
opportunity to be explored would be the integration
of development considerations into peacekeeping or
political missions from the outset. That ties into the
vision of holistic missions, with clear time frames.
for stabilization activities alongside peacebuilding
activities, including to strengthen the rule of law and
security institutions, among others. However, that does
not imply that such activities should or do happen in a
linear or sequential manner. I should rather emphasize
that at the point of going in, we should be clear that the
United Nations cannot be in a country indefinitely. In
our View, the discussions initiated by Slovakia and South
Africa under the auspices of the Group of Friends of
Security Sector Reform, particularly their latest round,
held on 2 October, as noted in document S/2015/868,
have yielded interesting and relevant proposals on how
considerations of the security and development nexus
could be practically integrated into current frameworks
and structures.

In terms of policy and coordination, the Council
should be at the forefront in creating conditions that
can enable the PBC to fulfil its mandated tasks,
including by working in a coherent manner alongside
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. The PBC is the bridge linking security and
development at the structural and institutional level. As
such, its role must be reinforced so that its potential
for assisting countries in transitions and in emerging
from conflict can be maximized. At the same time, the
importance of coherence and coordination with other
actors and partners cannot be overstated. In our view,
by connecting more frequently and substantively with
partners such as the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization
and other relevant agencies, the Council could better
examine and analyse specific scenarios and situations.
Horizon scanning could prove useful and would be
worth revisiting as soon as possible.

Among the core messages of the report of the
Advisory Group of Experts on the peacebuilding
architecture review (see S/2015/490) is that a focus
on sustaining peace should be a common element
throughout all activities covered under the three
pillars of the United Nations - peace and security,
development and human rights. In regard to how the
Council can play its part by further breaking down silos
and addressing fragmentation at the intergovernmental
level, we are of the view that the recommendations
of the report, especially in paragraphs 132 to 135 and
paragraphs 160, 169, 179, 187, 189 and 190, among
others, merit serious attention.

In conclusion, while we recognize that ensuring
coordinated action on the part of and between United
Nations agencies and partners has always been a key
challenge, we believe that it is critical as a first step
in ensuring coherence within currently ongoing review
processes. As members of the United Nations, we
should all seize the opportunity to address this systemic
problem so as to enable the United Nations to deliver
better and as one.
