Mr. Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): We
meet today in exceptional international and regional
conditions, as the Arab world is experiencing serious
challenges and decisive transformations.

The situation imposes on us significant
responsibilities to our people and future generations.
On that basis and the basis of our principles in general,
my delegation believes that our responsibilities
requires us to condemn the massacre and targeting of
innocent civilians. These practices are prohibited from
a moral, humane and legal point of view. They are
banned by religious and secular law, run counter to
humanitarian international law and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, and must therefore be
subject to national and international legal accountability.

Jordan considers that, despite all of the current
developments in the region, the Palestinian question
remains the main and central issue in the Middle East.
That belief sparked the recent Jordan initiative to start
12-30747
initial exploratory negotiations by bringing the two
parties together to support the efforts of the
international Quartet and to move on from the impasse
in which the negotiations are bogged down.

In that regard, Jordan welcomes the letter of
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas addressed to Mr. Benjamin
Netanyahu, the head of the Israeli Government. We
reaffirm by the same token the contents of this letter,
and we hope that there will be a positive response from
the Israeli side.

(spoke in English)

The Permanent Representative of Israel
mentioned in his statement this morning that the West
Bank was part of Jordan from 1948 to 1967 and that
"the Arab world did not lift a finger to create a
Palestinian State". I regret that he made this remark,
which represents a sterile and somewhat dated
argument long put forward by the neo-revisionists in
Israel, which prompts me to note the following.

First, the act of union of 1950 was agreed to
without prejudice to the rights and aspirations of the
Palestinian people. Perhaps the clearest demonstration
of this fact was the attendance of his late Majesty, King
Hussein, at the opening ceremony marking the creation
of the Palestinian Liberation Organization in 1964.
Secondly, to cover the deeper implications behind this
Israeli assertion, I wish to state that what was
non-Israeli territory prior to 1948 remains non-Israeli
territory today.

Let us assume that the status of the territory from
1950 to 1967 remains in dispute - a dispute between
us, the Jordanians and the Palestinians. What is not in
dispute is that, however we argue about it, we all agree
that this territory was non-Israeli territory, and this
remains so today. In actual fact, there is no dispute.
The Security Council and the International Court of
Justice have affirmed repeatedly in the case of the
Council that the territory is and has since 1967 been
occupied Palestinian territory.

I also wish to deal with another incomplete
assertion. The Permanent Representative of Israel made
the point that we closed the holy sites in Jerusalem to
Jews during the period of Jordan's administration, but
he did not say why. The action was taken by us because
Christian Palestinians had not been permitted by Israel
to travel to Nazareth. In other words, we responded to
a prior action undertaken by the Israeli Government. If
the Ambassador of Israel wants to assert the truth, he
needs to assert all of it.

(spoke in Arabic)

As regards the prevailing situation in the
brotherly country of the Syrian Arab Republic, our
position is to find a political solution to the Syrian
crisis and to provide our support to the mission of the
former Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan. Jordan has
extended its hand to the brotherly Syrian people and
will continue to do so. We appeal for the Syrian people
not to be abandoned in this very difficult time. We also
call for an end to the targeting of innocent Syrian
civilians and the start of a serious dialogue between the
Government and the opposition to put an end to the
cycle of violence and destruction and to protect the
cultural and humanitarian heritage of the Syrian Arab
Republic for its sake and for the sake of humanity. The
Syrian Arab Republic is our neighbour, and so are its
people, with their deeply Arab roots. Syria's security is
our security, and its interests are also ours.

