Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I would like to thank
all speakers for their interventions. Sustaining and
consolidating peace is a central objective of the United
Nations peace and security architecture. It is our
collective responsibility to consolidate the gains that
we have achieved and to prevent post-conflict countries
from sliding back into violence. The sustained attention
and consistent commitment of the international
community and strong national ownership are critical
to achieving lasting peace.

Lithuania recognizes the importance of the
main elements contained in the 2012 report of the
Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the aftermath
of conflict (S/2012/746), namely, inclusive processes,
instituition-building and sustained international
support, accompanied by strong national ownership.
The international community should also devote
enhanced attention to minimizing the impact of external
stresses such as cross-border conflict and the possible
spillover of threats posed by international criminal
networks. Internal factors, such as political exclusion,
real or perceived discrimination against social groups,
corruption, high levels of youth unemployment and
unequally distributed natural resources could also be
profoundly destabilizing for countries that have weak
institutions and are politically and socially fragmented.

In my remarks, I would like to focus on two
elements: institution-building and the rule of law. Under
last month's Lithuanian presidency, the Council held an
open debate (see S/PV.7113) and adopted on a presidential
statement on the rule of law (S/PRST/2014/5). That
exercise emphasized, once again, the importance of
the rule of law as one of the key elements of conflict
prevention, peacebuilding, conflict resolution and
peacekeeping. Moreover, it unfolded around the idea
that early peacebuilding starts with peacekeeping
missions and that their support to strengthening
rule-of-law institutions should lay foundations for
long-term peacebuilding objectives. In that context, the
role of the effective management of transitions, as well
as the importance of partnerships and cooperation with
Member States, regional, subregional and international
partners, was underlined. The Council also reiterated
that national ownership, responsibility and political
will were critical in building sustainable peace.

Strengthening formal and informal institutions,
restoring core governance functions and equitable
service delivery, and strengthening domestic
accountability systems in countries emerging from
conflicts are practical expression of sustainable peace.
Institutions take a long time to develop into a solid
forum for inclusive political participation and for the
delivery of security, social services, justice, education
and economic opportunities. The capacities of
Governments to sustain and empower such institutions
remain a key challenge for countries emerging from
conflicts. Strong leadership and political will are
crucial.

Another important element for the peacebuilding
is inclusivity. Elected Governments must keep various
societal and political forces engaged and include them
in the decision-making process. A very important
aspect of inclusivity relates to the participation of
women and youth. We constantly urge the inclusion of
women in peacebuilding processes, but what does that
mean in reality? Women are powerful agents of change
in rebuilding communities affected by conflict. Women
bring their experiences of war to the conference table.
Women make up 80 per cent ofrefugees. They are often
victims of sexual violence, and war widows. When they
are combatants, they also have different needs and
experiences from those of male combatants. Democratic
governance, security sector reform, land tenure, justice
and the protection of human rights are key elements for
sustainable peace where women's interests and gender
perspectives should be taken into account.

It is very important to follow the United Nations
seven-point action plan on women's participation in
peacebuilding, in which the United Nations committed
to ensuring women's participation in conflict resolution,
post-conflict building and mediation. It also promotes
women's representation in post-conflict governance.

Today the Council referred to resolution 2122
(2013), which remains a key element in the expanding
framework for women's contribution to peace.

In order to more effectively help countries affected
by conflict, the efforts of the international community
should be guided by a spirit ofpartnership that enhances
and better coordinates the links among the United
Nations civilian capacity, Member States, regional
organizations, international financial institutions and
civil society. I cannot stress enough the role of the
Peace-building Commission (PBC) in coordinating
and reinforcing the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture in that regard. Increased interaction and
cooperation with the World Bank and collaboration
on the ground are required. The PBC role must not be
reduced to that of a mere fundraiser. The discussion
on how to deepen and focus the advisory and support
role of the PBC is very timely and, in that context, its
upcoming mandated review next year is very important.

The PBC clearly adds more value to our deliberations
in the Security Council. The country-specific
configuration Chairs of the PBC could participate in
Council meetings at which the situation concerning the
country in question is considered. There could also be
greater coordination before and during country visits
by PBC Chairs and Council members.

Finally, we look forward to the Secretary-General's
next report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of
conflict later this year, which we trust will provide a
basis for our deliberations on the lessons learned from
the United Nations response in countries affected by or
emerging from conflict.

