Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Bangladesh is
highly appreciative of the role played by High
Representative Wolfgang Petritsch in an exceedingly
difficult and complex mission. We are grateful to him
for his eighteenth report, sent to the Council in
document S/2001/2l9. The report provides a detailed
analysis and information on all issues relating to the
implementation of the Framework Agreement. His
briefing this morning, which we appreciate, traces the
difficulties faced and the challenges ahead.

It is important that we recall the Srebrenica
tragedy when we discuss the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We commend Mr. Petritsch for the
decision on the cemetery and memorial for the victims
of the Srebrenica massacre. As he noted, this has been
essential in helping Bosnia and Herzegovina come to
terms with its past. He should have the fullest support
of the local authorities and the international community
in implementing the decision as soon as possible.

We have noted the progress made and the
difficulties encountered in implementing measures in
the three key areas identified by the Peace
Implementation Council last May: consolidation of
institutions, refugee return and economic reforms.

I turn first to the question of institutions. The 11
November general elections, which the Council had
welcomed, marked a significant development. For the
first time since the signing of the Peace Agreement, the
moderate forces established their majority.

The establishment of Constitutional Commissions
is a major achievement. It is important that the
constituent peoples and others be protected against
discrimination. The entity parliaments should engage,
without wasting time, in the debate on amendments to
their respective Constitutions.

The setting up of the Independent Judicial
Commission last December represented important
progress. As we all know, establishing the rule of law
and good governance is at the core of the socio-
economic challenges facing Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We have followed the recent conclusion of the
special relationship agreement between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republika Srpska. The
agreement should be consistent with the Peace
Agreement and supportive of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
High Representative will have all our support in
addressing the matter.

It is a matter of serious concern that at a time
when State and entity-level governments are being
formed through a democratic process, moves are being
made to undermine the peace process. In this context,
we denounce the unilateral decision to establish Croat
self-rule by the so-called Croat National Congress.

The second question is that of the economy. The
consolidation of peace in that war-ravaged country will
depend largely on the recovery of its economy. We
have noted the measures taken by the High
Representative to address matters within his
competence. The Bosnian economy is extremely
fragile. It is plagued by too many factors, and the
unemployment rate is between 40 and 50 per cent. We
encourage the international community to further
strengthen its efforts to help the economy to recover.
As Mr. Petritsch stressed, the work must not be left
half done.

Third, refugee return. The progress in refugee
return has been very slow. We have noted 67,000
minority returns over the past year; a modest 26,000
more than in 1999. The fact that returns have taken
place in several localities is a good sign. It is
encouraging to note that returns have picked up this
year. However, it is worrying that five years after the
war there is still about a quarter of a million people
outside the borders, and three-quarters of a million
remain internally displaced. The return of refugees, as
the High Representative underlined, has to be
facilitated by targeted programmes, including for the
creation of economic opportunities to make them
sustainable.

In conclusion, I would like to ask two questions.
The Council extended the mandate of the mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina until 21 June 2001, against the
backdrop of visible and encouraging signs of progress
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Special Representative
Jacques Klein had, against the backdrop of the positive
developments last year, suggested that the end of 2002
should be the target date for the completion of core
mandates of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We would like to know how Mr. Petritsch
sees the possibility of meeting the objectives of the
implementation of the Framework Agreement and the
conclusion of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

My second question concerns relations with
Belgrade. The changes in the political landscape in the
Balkans last year had raised hopes for a speedier
implementation of the Dayton Agreement. President
Kostunica declared during his visit to Sarajevo that he
would defend the Dayton Agreement and expressed his
desire to normalize relations with Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In this connection, we would like to
know more about the High Representative's contacts
with Belgrade.

