Mr. Vohidov (Uzbekistan) (spoke in Russian):
Mr. President, may I extend to you and, through you, to
the Government of Russia and to the Russian people
our sincerest condolences in connection with the deaths
caused by yesterday's tragic air crashes in Russia.
Turning to the items on today's agenda, I would
like to express gratitude to you once again, Sir, for
bringing this item up for discussion in the Security
Council and for enabling us to speak here. I would like,
first of all, to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean Arnault, for his thorough
briefing on the current situation in Afghanistan.

We welcome the progress achieved in
implementing the outcomes of the Berlin conference
with respect to achieving effective State
administration; establishing such components as an
army, law enforcement agencies and a justice system;
furthering social and economic development; and
continuing the implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme.

The positive processes currently under way in
Afghanistan not only make it possible for the peaceful
rehabilitation of the country, but also open up prospects
for its participation, inter alia, in integration processes
in Central Asia. However, although there have been
initial successes in rebuilding the State of Afghanistan,
the difficulties that have arisen in organizing general
elections are a cause for concern. These relate to the
worsening security situation, increasing narcotics
production, and the slow implementation of agreements
entered into by the Afghan Government and the
international community within the framework of the
Berlin conference, relating to political, social and
economic reform and the provision of financial and
other types of assistance.

We believe it is important to point out that the
conclusions in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2004/634) pertaining to ensuring security and
stability in the country are in consonance with the
consistent position of Uzbekistan that the international
community's main efforts should be directed at
continuing to combat terrorism, extremism and the
illegal drug trade, and at enhancing the authority and
capabilities of the central Government of Afghanistan.
In that connection, we have no doubt that the United
Nations must play a coordinating role.

Allow me to refer to the following elements of
Uzbekistan's vision for continuing the peace process in
Afghanistan.

The first element involves efforts to disarm
military-political factions. We must speed up the
process for relinquishing arms and expand activities for
the reintegration of demobilized soldiers and officers
into the national economy. We must create a regulated
and well-provisioned law enforcement agency and,
above all, a unified national army subject to the central
authority.

The second element is the subordination of
political authority in the regions of Afghanistan to the
central Government. We cannot fail to express concern
at the worsening security situation in regions that
previously were relatively calm.

The third element is to strengthen the
international community's campaign to eliminate
terrorism, extremism and illegal drug trafficking. We
express our concern at the increasing number of raids
carried out by subversive forces and bandit terrorist
elements within the country with the aim of preventing
the stabilization of Afghanistan and the holding of
general elections. We see internal and external forces at
work in those activities. In that context, we believe it is
important to draw the Security Council's most serious
attention to the threats posed by radical and extremist
religious organizations such as Hizb ut-Tahrir and urge
the Council to impose the most robust sanctions against
terrorist organizations.

The fourth element is consistent implementation
of the decisions of the Tokyo and the Berlin
conferences, including the pledges for financial
assistance to Afghanistan.

Fifthly, neighbouring and other States should
refrain from interfering in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan.

We are seriously concerned at the record harvest
and processing of opium poppies in Afghanistan. In
order to prevent a scenario in which drugs ultimately
undermine the country's economy, we need to speed up
implementation of far-reaching structural reforms of
the Afghan economy, thus ensuring employment for its
people, above all, for its volunteer army. In addition,
given that drug trafficking needs to be countered in the
Central Asian region, we are counting on increased
support from the international community to establish a
Central Asian regional information coordination centre
to combat trans-border crime linked to illegal drug
trafficking.

Normalizing the situation in Afghanistan,
including in the social and economic areas, will ensure
not only the security and well-being of Afghanistan but
also regional and international stability. In that context,
Uzbekistan considers Afghanistan to be an integral part
of the Central Asian space and encourages its
participation in processes for regional integration.

I would like to draw attention to the importance
of using the resources of neighbouring countries to
effectively support the reconstruction of Afghanistan's
economic infrastructure. Uzbekistan is assisting the
Afghan people in rebuilding and restoring
communication infrastructure, roads, bridges and
railroads and electricity infrastructure in order to create
more favourable conditions for the transit of deliveries
sent to Afghanistan. The Government of the Republic
of Uzbekistan, together with the relevant United
Nations agencies, has established a mechanism to
coordinate the flow of deliveries from international
organizations and donor countries. More than 2.5
million tons of goods have been delivered to
Afghanistan by way of the Termez-Jeyretan bridge.
Uzbekistan has taken measures to lower the cost of
transporting goods and improve its infrastructure.

We are still far from restoring complete peace and
stability in Afghanistan. However, we have every
reason to believe that after what we have gone through
together, the international community cannot allow the
positive process for the peaceful rebuilding of
Afghanistan to be turned back. I am certain that the
conclusions of the report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Afghanistan will be taken into account
by the international community and will serve to
enhance the effectiveness of efforts to rebuild
Afghanistan under the coordination of the United
Nations.

