Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on Cote d'Ivoire's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December and express my gratitude to you for the
convening of this debate on the important topic of the
role of States, regional organizations and the United
Nations in conflict prevention and resolution. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General, the President
of the Commission of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the Chairperson
of the Commission of the African Union (AU) for their
insightful briefings.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Namibia is currently the Chair of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC). Within the
United Nations framework, we are working towards
holding subregional dialogues and briefings with United
Nations agencies, which will allow for greater learning
opportunities for the countries of the region, as well
as frank and open dialogue and greater cooperation.
We encourage other subregional organizations to
conduct similar meetings to strengthen cooperation and
coherence between subregional organizations and the
United Nations.

There is long-standing cooperation between the
United Nations and SADC on electoral partnership
initiatives. In April, the Organization and SADC
successfully held a joint Building Resources in
Democracy, Governance and Elections regional
training workshop on gender and elections. The
workshop aimed to provide electoral stakeholders with
an opportunity to explore the role of women in electoral
and political processes in the SADC region and to
address ways of enhancing women's participation in
those processes. SADC is engaged in the electoral
process in Madagascar and is looking forward to a
peaceful outcome to the country's elections, which are
on course for 19 December. We also look forward to the
holding of additional workshops and other important
discussions within our region, in the interest of peace
and security.

SADC plays an important role in maintaining
peace and security in the region. In Lesotho, the
SADC Preventive Mission has generated a stable and
secure environment that now paves the way for the
implementation of constitutional and institutional
reforms, as recommended by SADC. Crucial elections
will be held in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in less than two-weeks' time. Those elections will
mark an important step for the country, the region
and the continent. The contribution of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to the region is important for
the region's social and economic development. Both
the African Union and SADC are actively cooperating
and monitoring to ensure the successful holding of
peaceful elections.

The open debate held last month in the Chamber
on strengthening peacekeeping operations in Africa
(see S/PV.8407)highlighted the increased cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU in the context of
peacekeeping operations. Many delegations, including
Namibia, singled out the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, signed in April 2017. The
Framework provides guidance for deepening peace and
security cooperation between the two organizations at
all levels. Numerous Security Council resolutions have
also underscored the important United Nations-AU
partnership in the context of peacekeeping cooperation.
Delegations also mentioned the successful partnership
between the organizations with regard to the African
Union Military Observer Mission in Somalia and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. Your country, Mr. President, also serves as
an excellent example of successful cooperation and
working relationship among the United Nations, the
AU and ECOWAS, as demonstrated by the successful
ending of the peacekeeping United Nations Operation
in Cote d'Ivoire in June 2017.

African-led peace support operations authorized
by the Security Council are an essential and vital
component in ensuring peace and security on the
African continent. Given Africa's decision, taken at
the highest level, to bear financial responsibility for
25 per cent of its peace activities, which further attests
to its unflinching commitment to securing peace in
the continent, and the fact that more than half of the
top 20 countries contributing troops to United Nations
peacekeeping operations are African, Namibia fully
supports the call by the AU and the African members
of the Security Council for those operations to have
access to United Nations-assessed contributions, on a
case-by-case basis. That would ensure sustainable and
predictable financing for those operations, which is
critical for their success.

In the annual open debate on women and peace and
security held recently (see S/PV.8382), we recognized
that progress had been made in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) since its adoption 18 years ago.
However, Member States underscored that much still
remained to be done. Women need to play a greater
role in peacekeeping operations - in mediation and
negotiations and in the post-conflict and peacebuilding
phases. Namibia is playing its part. This past month,
we achieved the target set by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations of 15 per cent of women
participating in peacekeeping missions. In January,
15 police officers, including three women, will be
deployed to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur.

Furthermore, in the lead-up to the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
Namibia will host the third capital-level Focal Point
Network Meeting in Windhoek from 10 to 11 April next
year - the first ofits kind on the continent. All Member
States and civil society are invited to participate.

