Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): My delegation,
too, aligns itself with the statement to be made by the
Ambassador of Austria on behalf of the European
Union.

Like others, I want to begin by thanking Mark
Malloch Brown for his briefing. I think that this has
helped the debate here in the United Nations come
back to ground. It has reminded us of the actual
findings of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
(OIOS) report and the actual problems it has identified.
The briefing this morning has, I believe, also helped us
also focus on solutions.

I welcome, too, the fact that the views of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) on
the OIOS report will be available to Member States so
that we can have the fullest possible picture.

I wanted to begin where Mark Malloch Brown
ended. The Security Council sends United Nations
peacekeepers to do what others cannot or will not do.
For the international community, this is an
indispensable function that the United Nations
performs. We have been reminded again this morning
of the rapid growth in United Nations peacekeeping in
recent years, including in its procurement functions,
and it is worth recalling the challenge of operating in
places where no other military will go, not just because
of the difficult environment but because the United
Nations is by definition operating multi-nationally and
without the benefit of formed, trained forces that have
worked regularly together, and, similarly, trained
civilian personnel who have worked together.

I therefore would like to pay tribute to the
excellent work that United Nations peacekeepers do in
their often difficult circumstances. Despite the
problems that we are discussing today and, indeed, that
we will be discussing tomorrow, I believe that the
Security Council can and should have confidence in
United Nations peacekeeping.

But we are, I think, fundamentally talking about
an issue of confidence. The procurement concerns that
we are looking at are a very serious matter. Like sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations
peacekeepers, procurement mismanagement or, worse
still, fraud can erode confidence and therefore the
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping.

The briefing we have heard this morning and the
OIOS report suggest, among other things, lack of
adequate internal controls, procedural failings and lax
practices, lack of senior management oversight, control
and accountability, questionable delegation of
authority, lack of resources, an ill-suited regulatory
framework for field operations, potential waste, abuse
and even fraud.

My Government's policy towards United Nations
procurement, which has been consistently articulated
through the European Union in the General Assembly,
has included enhanced transparency, accountability and
ethical behaviour for staff, greater professionalism for
procurement staff and more effective training for them
and for their managers.

The fact that many of those elements are
highlighted by recent reports - Deloitte as well as
OIOS - as critical failings requiring urgent action is
more than disappointing. For confidence in United
Nations peacekeeping to remain as strong as it needs
and deserves to be, the effectiveness and probity of
United Nations peacekeeping procurement must now
be vigorously addressed.

I therefore welcome the General Assembly action
last year to put in motion the OIOS independent
review, which has exposed these weaknesses and which
has, among other things, led to this discussion this
morning.

I welcome the planned briefing by Mark Malloch
Brown to the Fifth Committee later this week in
follow-up, since there can be no substitute for
systematic consideration and action by the General
Assembly, its Fifth Committee, the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
and the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, which deals with the management of, and
resources for, United Nations peacekeeping.

I also welcome this open, inclusive exchange,
because the Security Council is responsible for the
mandates that send United Nations peacekeepers into
harm's way, and the Council needs to understand the
challenges and shortcomings of United Nations
peacekeeping in the field and at Headquarters if it is
responsibly and properly to do its job of delivering
effective mandates.

I also want to welcome the Secretariat's
commitment to zero tolerance, zero complacency and
zero impunity for procurement mismanagement and
fraud, as Mark Malloch Brown has promised us this
morning. I welcome also the continuing vigorous
investigations and the Secretariat's commitment to due
process, and I hope and believe that there will be
observance of the whistleblower protection policy
which was promulgated just last December.

Finally, I welcome the Secretariat's commitment
to reform of personnel and financial rules and
regulations bearing on United Nations peacekeeping
that may be suggested by the lessons learned from
these investigations. I hope that some of them at least
can be reflected in the recommendations that the
Secretary-General will be bringing forward at the end
of this month.

We expect those recommendations to build,
where applicable, on the many reforms already effected
in United Nations procurement practices and
procedures in recent years. We need to recognize that
there has been reform, even if it has been insufficient.

I am reassured by the Secretariat's statement this
morning of the action it is taking in response to our
procurement concerns, but, as the Ambassador of
Ghana has just said, this is also a matter for all
Member States. It is incumbent on all of us, through
the General Assembly and its subsidiary bodies, to
respond constructively to the recommendations arising
from the lessons learned from these investigations.

The investigations are still ongoing, but, in my
delegation's view, elements to consider include a
better, more formalized working relationship between
DPKO and the procurement division, which should
include a clear delineation of responsibilities and
accountability at all levels. We think that senior
managers in both departments should ensure that
practices conform with financial rules and regulations
while ensuring that expedient procurement in the field
can progress without undue delay. That, I think,
argues - as Mark Malloch Brown has argued this
morning - that we must once again look at the
regulatory framework for procurement in the field.

In addition to financial disclosure, ethical
guidelines need to be promulgated for United Nations
staff involved in procurement activities. There needs to
be enhanced, more targeted training for staff, both at
Headquarters and in the field, and a single, viable
information technology system capable of dealing with
all United Nations procurement activities while at the
same time itself providing more effective internal
controls.

Lastly, it is incumbent not just on the General
Assembly and its subsidiary bodies but also on the
Security Council to follow this work, to consider any
recommendations appropriate to it and to reflect
lessons learned in designing its future mandates, so
that we, too, in the Council contribute to the highest
possible levels of confidence in United Nations
peacekeeping.

