Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, let me extend
a particularly warm welcome to His Excellency the
Foreign Minister of Burkina Faso and thank him for
his briefing, and thank all of the other briefers for their
insightful presentations and information.

Germany attaches great importance to peace and
stability in the Sahel. Unfortunately, as we have been
repeatedly reminded today, the security situation
continues to deteriorate, and that worrisome trend is
also reflected in the Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2019/868), along with indications that the violence
may spread to the coastal States of West Africa and
the Gulf of Guinea. Unfortunately, the humanitarian
situation is worsening as well. That is why the
international community urgently needs to do more to
help stabilize the Sahel.

Several briefers have referred to the initiative
known as the partnership for security and stability
in the Sahel 4 an initiative launched by France and
Germany during the previous Group of Seven Summit
in Biarritz and presented to the General Assembly here
in New York in September. The partnership seeks to
enhance the support already provided to the Sahel by
focusing on all relevant security actors. It seeks to
improve coordination among the many donors and to
support the reform efforts of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel) countries in their security sectors.
Broad international participation, including that of
members of the Council, would be greatly appreciated.

Owing to the pressing challenges outlined once
again in today's briefings, we see the need for more
rapid progress with regard to the operationalization
of the Joint Force and the political integration of the
G-5 Sahel as a regional organization. Germany is ready
to consider ways to assist and attain those goals and
to increase United Nations support for the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force.

I would like to focus on four points that are a little
more specific in that regard.

First of all, Germany is a strong partner of the G-5
Sahel and has contributed about €28 million in support
of the Joint Force so far. The Joint Force now needs
to quickly increase its operational capabilities. One
such example is that the G-5 Sahel headquarters in
Bamako, which has been fully equipped and financed
by the European Union, needs to be used as soon as
possible. Making the G-5 Sahel Joint Force even more
operational obviously requires a joint effort. In that
regard, we would like to see stronger engagement from
all G-5 Sahel countries, and we call on all international
partners that have pledged their support to increase the
predictability of their funding for the Joint Force.

Secondly, Germany is certain that the Joint Force
has the potential to contribute to increasing security
in the Sahel. But we must realize and take note of
the fact that we are not quite there yet, and we need
to see considerably greater operational capabilities,
ownership and commitment from the G-5 Sahel
countries themselves in order to make the Force a
success. Unfortunately, the security situation in the
Sahel has markedly deteriorated in recent months,
as we have been reminded today by the briefers. The
Joint Force itself has repeatedly come under attack,
very prominently in October and again in November.
That is why we are convinced that there is a continuing
need for an international security presence in the Sahel
region for the time being. That includes the presence
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, which should be equipped
with the resources necessary to be able to implement its
current mandate in central Mali.

Thirdly, several briefers referred to the human
rights component of fighting terrorism. Germany
strongly believes that safeguarding human rights and
building inclusive societies are in fact prerequisites
to successfully countering terrorism and extremism.
Therefore, there cannot be any compromises when it
comes to respect for human rights. We fully support
the human rights and international humanitarian law
compliance framework of the Joint Force and thank the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights for its dedicated work on that issue.

Fourthly and finally, Germany is equally
convinced that an isolated military approach to fighting
terrorism and insecurity will not be successful. Human
security needs to be increased through civilian police
capabilities that remain engaged in order to ensure a
locally accepted State presence after the acute threat of
terrorism has subsided. We therefore support security-
related stabilization measures to strengthen domestic
security, such as police cooperation and training in the
context of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. That stabilization
approach also includes measures to build trust between
security forces and the population. In the long run, the
fight against extremism and terrorism and their root
causes requires an integrated approach consisting of
security measures, immediate stabilization efforts and
long-term development programmes in order to build
capabilities and resilience.

In conclusion, we need to strengthen the United
Nations country teams and make use of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and its
good offices. We would also like to encourage the
Peacebuilding Commission, given its track record of
working with the Sahel and West Africa, to provide
concrete input on questions of peacebuilding in
the region.

