Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): Mr. President, at
the outset, I wish to join previous speakers in
welcoming the presence in our midst of Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta, Senior Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste. We also thank
the Special Representative, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa,
for introducing the Secretary-General's report. We
commend both of them for their frank presentations
and especially for the clarity and objectivity with
which the current situation in Timor-Leste has been
assessed.

There is no doubt that the efforts of the United
Nations have helped greatly in defusing the volatile
situation that prevailed in Timor-Leste on 5 May 1999,
when it launched its national independence process.
Mainly as a result of the tireless efforts of the United
Nations, together with the active support of donor
countries, Timor-Leste is poised for the next phase of
the democratic transformation that is under way. My
delegation considers it appropriate to congratulate all
those who have worked assiduously and sacrificed
time, energy and resources to make Timor-Leste an
outstanding success story in nation-building for the
international community.

In saying this, I must also emphasize that there
are invaluable lessons for us all in the Timor-Leste
experience. No price is too high to pay for peace and
stability, which, in turn, can be guaranteed most
effectively by good governance, the rule of law and
improved living conditions. At the heart of the residual
problems of instability facing the Timor-Leste
Government is the unfinished business of creating
viable institutions that will enable the State to meet the
needs of its people.

It is indeed disheartening that the recent
demonstrations involving nearly 600 dismissed
military personnel degenerated into violence, leading
to the loss of lives. We are informed that the protests
were driven by deeply felt grievances resulting from
perceived acts of discrimination against segments of
the population. We can only hope that the governance
structures being put in place will lead to greater
transparency and inclusiveness. The role of the United
Nations in this crucial endeavour remains
indispensable, and my delegation supports the proposal
by the Secretary-General to establish a follow-on
integrated United Nations office.

Considering the sensitivities surrounding the
findings of the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation, it is also our view that only the United
Nations can help manage the delicate process of
balancing the imperatives of accountability with those
of positive engagement and fruitful cooperation
between Indonesia and Timor-Leste.

We welcome in this regard the determination of
Indonesia and Timor-Leste to place friendship,
cooperation and peaceful coexistence above the
bitterness of the past, and we urge them to resolve
expeditiously all outstanding issues relating to the
demarcation of their common border. In the meantime,
steps must also be taken to alleviate the suffering of the
refugees and displaced persons along the border.
Again, the sense of alienation felt by the inhabitants of
Oecussi, who apparently are cut off from the rest of the
country due to the poor infrastructure, does not augur
well for national stability and must be addressed
sooner rather than later.

Finally, while my delegation concedes that
considerable progress has been achieved in preparing
Timor-Leste for the disengagement of the United
Nations mission, we believe that the timing is crucial
and that, if we do get it wrong, all that has been
achieved could unravel. That is why we share the view
that the United Nations must remain actively engaged
beyond 2007 and see through not only the elections but
also the important capacity-building programmes that
are urgently needed to enable the people of Timor-
Leste to consolidate their hard-won independence. Let
it not be said that the international community left the
people of Timor-Leste in the lurch. The Security
Council should continue to support the Government
and the people of Timor-Leste and accede to the
request by the Secretary-General to establish an
integrated United Nations office along the lines set out
in his report.

