Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand,
too, welcomes the adoption of resolution 2304 (2016).
It is disappointing that the Council was unable to reach
unanimity on the text, but on issues as important as
this, sometimes that is just not possible. The Council
has nonetheless adopted this resolution under Chapter
VII of the Charter, as was the case for the earlier
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
resolutions, and we must give it our full support in
its implementation.

We thank the United States for its commendable
efforts and made in the negotiations on the draft and
the significant engagement of all Council members,
including the Russian Federation, for calling the
important discussion on the text at yesterday's
informal consultations.

New Zealand's vote in favour of the resolution
demonstrates our strong support for the Council's
response to the clear message we have received from
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the African Union that the Council needs to act urgently
and decisively to mandate a Regional Protection Force
within UNMISS. Any questions as to the need for this
force are comprehensively answered in the letter from
the Secretary-General to Council members earlier
this week.

In the deployment of peacekeeping forces, host
State consent is desirable and should be worked for
in every case. There is a clear practical reason why
this important. In this respect, we note and welcome
the in-principle consent given by the Transitional
Government of National Unity of South Sudan. But
consent to every aspect ofa peacekeeping mission is not
a requirement in a Chapter VII operation. The Council
must ultimately be prepared to take the tough decisions
in accordance with the Charter that are required for
the maintenance of peace and security and in the best
interest of the people of South Sudan and its region.

We very much hope that the Government of
South Sudan will cooperate with UNMISS. That is
in the interest of South Sudan's people as well as of
the United Nations. But it would be a mistake to allow
the Government of South Sudan, which was at least
partially responsible for the current situation, to dictate
the terms of the United Nations deployment.

More broadly, the ongoing obstruction of UNMISS
in the performance of its mandate, as evidenced by the
catalog of violations of the status-of-forces agreement,
is not acceptable. We welcome the clear signal in the
resolution that the Council will take action, including
through the establishment of an arms embargo, should
the obstruction of UNMISS continue.

