Mr. Danforth (United States): This subject,
justice and the rule of law, is so quintessentially British
that there is no wonder this month's presidency chose it
as the subject for open debate.

In the United States, first-year law students study
English common law, and American concepts of law,
government and individual rights, not to mention our
language, literature and basic values, derive from our
British heritage. Some of these points might be
disputed on the other side of the Atlantic, but over
here, Sir, your offspring are eternally grateful.

Today I want to highlight one aspect of the rule
of law, the importance of transparency. Transparency is
a true engine of the rule of law and can promote a
responsive and trusted judicial system in both stable
societies and those scarred by conflict. For the rule of
law to grow in a society, the people must know the law.
The law must be transparent to all citizens. This means
the judicial system, courts, police and prisons must be
open and visible. Making the law available means
educating the citizenry. It means the judges must reach
and publish reasoned decisions and cases. Star
Chambers are incompatible with the rule of law.

The law may seem to require special expertise to
understand, and if the law is not accessible to the
ordinary citizen, if the ordinary citizen cannot know
and trust the law, then the rule of law will be far out of
reach. Knowledge and openness are the best bulwarks
against arbitrary decision-making, whether by courts or
by Governments. The United Nations, in particular,
should marshal its resources effectively to help
societies emerging from conflict to develop their
national judicial capacities in a manner that is
accountable to their citizenry.

However, the rule of law cannot simply be
imposed by international bodies. To make the rule of
law effective, citizens must also know their own
Government. They must understand how it works and
how to influence it. While legal and judicial matters
necessarily involve certain confidences and restraints
on sharing of information, absolute secrecy can
encourage corruption. Transparency is an engine to a
modern economy and a participant in the global
economy. Access to information technologies plays an
important role in open and free societies, both to
stimulate economic activity and to provide citizens
with information to know and monitor their
Government, including their judicial systems.

Therefore, in addressing the problems of
countries that have been engulfed in conflict and are
seeking to build stable, peaceful and prosperous
societies, we should assist them to develop a judicial
system based on transparency and openness.

The Secretary-General's report on the rule of law
has some valuable insights and recommendations. It
rightly stresses the imperative of respect for the rule of
law in any democratic, peaceful and prosperous
society. It underlines the importance of fair criminal
justice. It catalogues useful actions the United Nations
Secretariat can take to make itself effective in
promoting the rule of law and helping countries build
the institutions necessary to have the rule of law.

The United States has long supported efforts to
hold responsible perpetrators of atrocities such as
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. We
supported efforts to create the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the Special Court
for Sierra Leone when countries were not capable or
willing to exercise national jurisdiction. In Iraq, we are
supporting Iraqi-led efforts to create the Iraq special
tribunal. In the Sudan, we have repeatedly urged
greater action to stop the atrocities.

We note, of course, that the report expresses some
views we do not share. The report does not properly
respect national decisions about criminal justice,
particularly sentences a particular society may deem
appropriate.

As this Council and the wider membership of the
United Nations know full well, the United States has
fundamental objections to the International Criminal
Court (ICC) created by the Rome Statute. Our
problems with the ICC concern the rule of law. We
believe the Court should not have jurisdiction over
citizens of States that are not parties to the Rome
Statute. We believe that the Rome Statute does not
reflect due process of law as we understand it, because,
among other things, it allows multiple jeopardy and
does not provide for jury trials, as our Constitution
requires.

We believe the ICC runs a high risk of
politicization and is not accountable. And we believe
the ICC clashes with the international system of the
United Nations Charter. It should come as no surprise,
therefore, that we do not endorse the report's embrace
of the ICC. We can accept the draft presidential
statement today, because it respects our inability to
support the ICC and does not explicitly or implicitly
endorse the ICC.

I commend the United Kingdom for its historic
leadership on this subject it has brought to the Council
for its attention.

