Mr. Bassil (Lebanon): I thank the Russian
Federation for convening this meeting.

Lebanon believes that the fight against terrorism
is an international one, considering that terrorism is an
international menace to peace and security. Eradicating
terrorism from the Middle East and North Africa is a
prerequisite for stopping its rapid expansion through the
world. The fight against terrorism in the Middle East
and North Africa cannot be won without the countries
of the region.

Lebanon has fully engaged in the fight to drag
our country and people away from radicalism and
fundamentalism. We have mobilized our troops and
our boots are on the ground. We have resorted to
our values of openness and tolerance to counter the
message of hatred and inhumanity. We have supported
actions aimed at defeating the ideological and financial
sponsors of these organizations. Lebanon is at the
forefront of this battle.

Daesh and Al-Nusra have been holding
hostages - 26 members of our armed forces - since
August 2014. Our troops have been engaged in daily
fights on our eastern borders, and our intelligence
services are tracking dormant and active cells inside the
country. Our strategy against terrorism is to engaged
in the fight for the promotion of our values and our
message. We are fighting to preserve the existence of
our people since the spread of terror, combined with a
mass influx of forcefully displaced persons, represents
an existential threat. We are fighting to protects the
rights of minorities. Diversity in the Middle East is at
the foundation of the region's identity. It is also a source
of inspiration for other countries and nations all over
the world.

The system of collective security set up in the
aftermath of the Second World War has failed to protect
us. Do we need to search for a protection system every
100 years, or do we develop our own self-protection
system through our scale of values and our ability to
live together, while preserving our rights and roles.
We have opted for the second. We are fighting to
safeguard our collective values and to demonstrate
that obscurantism cannot prevail over humanism. We
are fighting because we are convinced that the fall of
Lebanon, as the last bastion of diversity in the Middle
East, would inevitably lead to the uncontrolled spread
of terror to neighbouring Europe and, further, to the
rest of the world.

We are fighting to reverse the current trend that
is emptying the Middle East of its essential social
components. We believe that this phenomenon is
leading to irreversible changes that will affect all of us.
If the Middle East were to sink into perpetrual violence
between sectarian, closed entities, we cannot imagine
the world living peacefully. What would the world look
like if the message of Lebanon were to disappear?

We will keep on fighting, but we will not be able to
sustain the fight if we are left on our own - or rather,
betrayed. We will not be able to keep up the pace of our
struggle if the international community keeps on with
its policy of double standards, especially when it comes
to the Arab-Israeli conflict. We will not be able to win
if the major policy-movers remain shortsighted to the
implications of the spread of terror.

Combat was not our choice; it was imposed on
us. We believe in dialogue and we see in peaceful
engagement and in bridge-building the best answer to
Violence. We believe in political dialogue and we have
faith in diplomatic means to resolve conflicts. The
examples of the nuclear deal and the Cuban crisis are a
confirmation that confrontation is not an option, since
it will lead only to the victory of terrorism. We call for
political solutions. A forceful approach will not work.
A forced solution will not last. An induced political
solution will not flourish.

Only a solution from within - from the
people - will succeed and put us all at our ease. That
can be achieved only if we resort to democracy, offering
first to the people the freedom to choose their leaders
and their regimes and, secondly, respecting the choices
they make. The success ofthe fight against terror needs
the conjunction of two legitimacies. One is the moral
legitimacy of values, which we take for granted; the
other is the political legitimacy of regimes, and their
additional efforts are needed.

The clock is ticking and violence is spilling over.
Refugees are spilling over. This cannot be contained
geographically; it is an ideology that we contain and
counter through the antidote models like Lebanon. It is
the fragile balance between the peoples of the Middle
East that is at stake. It is peace in the world that is
threatened.

