Mr. Lancry (Israel) (spoke in French): If Israel
has felt it useful to speak in this discussion, it is
basically to resist the thoughtless intermingling of
ideas that lumps Iraq and Israel in the same category of
offender with respect to the implementation of Security
Council resolutions.

We wish to express our disagreement with regard
to Iraq by retracing a very evocative illustration of
Security Council resolutions on peace between Israel
and its Arab and Palestinians neighbours. It will be
said, as was done a few moments ago by the Permanent
Observer of Palestine, that beyond the principal
resolutions - resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) - there is a series of other resolutions,
touching on various aspects of the Israeli-Palestinian
dialogue, that require implementation. Undoubtedly,
such resolutions exist, but their existence is so bound
up in the context of earnest and responsible
implementation that they are at the very heart of
negotiations with the Palestinians. The final status of
Jerusalem, along with the question of refugees, the
issue of settlements and the definitive shape of the
borders of the Palestinian State are inscribed in the
framework of the final status stipulated in the Oslo
accords.

It should be noted once again that the Permanent
Observer of Palestine continues to be obsessed, in
defending and elaborating his argument, with forcing a
one-dimensional reading of the resolutions of the
Security Council that he cited earlier. For the
Permanent Observer of Palestine, those resolutions
concern Israel alone, while the Palestinians may ignore
them with impunity. Have we heard the Permanent
Observer of Palestine say a single word about the need,
as stipulated in those resolutions, to end the suicide
attacks and Palestinian terrorism in all its forms, or to
declare a genuine ceasefire between Israelis and
Palestinians? This is a slew of Palestinian obligations
with which the most recent series of Security Council
resolutions is replete and which the Palestinians seem
to ignore with easy disdain.

It is essential that we differentiate between
resolutions adopted, on the one hand, under Chapter V1
with respect to Israel and its partners in peace, and
those adopted under Chapter VII with respect to Iraq,
on the other. We must declare null and void indictments
based on false linkages. Neither the Arab party
concerned - I refer to Syria - nor the Palestinian side
can set itself up as sole and selective master decoder of
resolutions whose inconvenient provisions they trample
underfoot, only to play the role of inspector of works
undertaken and completed by Israel.

Negotiations and reciprocity in the
implementation of Security Council resolutions are the
cornerstone of the Israeli-Arab-Palestinian dialogue.
Thus, the offhand association of Israel with Iraq is
nothing more than a dangerous distraction that plays
into the hands of an unscrupulous dictatorship.

I know that reference to Israel as a democracy,
howsoever imperfect its need to survive and its
dedication to peace, occasionally stirs up emotions in
certain quarters. The representative of Syria engaged
with vigour in the ritual denigration of Israeli
democracy, no doubt because he himself is steeped in a
staunch Syrian democracy. His republic is run in
flawless republican order, including the transmission of
power from father to son, or, more precisely, from one
generation to the next.

The representative of Syria is revolted by Israel
as a democracy of occupation. I would remind that
revolted democrat that the Israeli occupation, a result
of Arab aggression, is at least, negotiable. I would
recall that it was negotiated with Egypt and Jordan, to
the satisfaction of all parties.

But can the same be said of the Syrian occupation
of Lebanon? Is it pursued on behalf of Syrian
democracy? What hope is there for Lebanon? Is there
going to be a day when the Syrian democrats,
professional enslavers, will restore the Lebanese
people their freedom? Where is, then, the lost
resolution of the Security Council that will one day
invite one of its members - I would say the most
unusual one, in his dual guise as occupier and member
of this Council - to finally negotiate its withdrawal
from Lebanon.

That is the question that Syria must respond to
before this Council.

