Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
congratulate you, Madam President, on Chile's
initiative to organize today's open debate on an item
that is of great importance both for the Security
Council and for the entire United Nations system.

Guatemala has had first-hand experience in this
area through the implementation of our peace
agreements. Although they have their own unique
characteristics, they also contain lessons that can, with
the necessary adaptations, be universally applied.
Those lessons, however obvious they may appear, offer
guidelines with regard to the subject we are
considering. I shall cite five, all of which have
domestic roots but reflect on the role of the United
Nations.

First of all, it is essential that there be a minimum
basis for agreements among the various sectors of civil
society and the Government regarding the path to be
taken. Reconciliation must originate from within, since
any attempt to impose it from outside will surely fail.
In the case of Guatemala, there fortunately was and
still is such a minimum basis for agreements. The
agreements in question were concluded by the Arzu
Administration and the Unidad Revolucionaria
Nacional Guatemalteca in 1996, assumed as State
agreements by the Portillo Administration in 2000 and,
scarcely a week ago, again assumed by the
Administration of President Oscar Berger.

Secondly, international cooperation has been
essential and the presence of the United Nations
irreplaceable. That involves not only the daily work of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala
(MINUGUA) or the support provided by the United
Nations Development Programme for the dialogue and
consensus-building round tables organized in the past
few years, but also support for strengthening the
context in which dialogue, tolerance and understanding
can flourish. Obviously, it is easier to achieve
reconciliation in conditions of economic affluence than
when there are not enough resources to go around. It is
also obvious that, for there to be reconciliation, we
need to strengthen the institutions on which democratic
societies rest. Thus, the progress made in implementing
the agreements results from the efforts of Guatemalans,
supplemented very significantly by external
cooperation.

Thirdly, the progress made has not been linear.
The implementation of the commitments generates
resistance and opposition, which sometimes even cause
setbacks. By its very nature, this progress tends to be
slow, which means that both national and international
actors must persevere. It will come as no accident that,
when MINUGUA leaves Guatemala at the end of this
year, it will have spent 10 years in the country. A long-
term commitment, then, is needed.

Fourthly, in Guatemala - as in other countries -
a commission for historical clarification was created.
The publication of the commission's report, entitled
"Guatemala" memory of silence", undoubtedly
contributed to reconciliation in that it brought to light
previously concealed facts. It also gave rise to a
compensation programme, although some consider that
programme to be too modest. The report also helped to
emphasize the general call for a strengthening in the
justice system.

Fifthly and lastly, in achieving reconciliation, one
cannot overestimate the importance of strengthening
the rule of law and the administration and
implementation of justice. In our country, as a legacy
of armed conflict, illegal organs and clandestine
mechanisms still function that violate human rights. In
a new and innovative effort to fulfil its commitment,
the Government of Guatemala, at the request of the
human rights ombudsman and with the approval of
both the outgoing and incoming Administrations,
signed at the beginning of this month an agreement
with the United Nations aimed at addressing that
situation. It involves a new type of international
mission that, acting within the framework of
Guatemalan law, is authorized to investigate the
clandestine mechanisms and to seek their
dismantlement by identifying those responsible,
ensuring their criminal prosecution. Through that
provisional and special effort, we intend to strengthen
local security and judicial capacities and to provide
strong momentum for institutional and legal reforms in
the country.

There is a final piece of information that is very
convincing for the purposes of this debate. Peace is
irreversible in Guatemala. In other words, in our case,
there is no longer any risk of returning to a conflict
situation. Therefore, despite the possible defects and
inadequacies in the implementation of the agreements,
the overall result is highly positive. Bearing witness to
that is, for example, the electoral process that led to the
orderly and democratic transfer of power on 14
January. Therefore, I believe the United Nations can be
proud of its presence and its participation in the
implementation of the peace agreements in Guatemala.

