Mr. Al-Moumani (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Japan on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July. I would also like to express appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his briefing this morning.

Our region is witnessing great intellectual and
political challenges due to an indescribably bitter
reality. Our words will never be able to match the
suffering and devastation that has been seen in our
region, be it in Syria, the Palestinian territories or
Yemen. These challenges force us to ask ourselves if
the international community is doing enough to resolve
these conflicts, pursuant to international agreements
and law. Indeed, are we doing everything possible to
achieve peace and stability?

Through its recent membership in the Security
Council, Jordan exerted great efforts and was able to
bring the question to the fore in an attempt to resolve
all conflicts in the Middle East. We have expressed our
thoughts on how to resolve conflicts in the region and
have often reiterated that the main issue continues to be
the Palestinian question, with its absence of peace and
the lack of a just and lasting solution. This conflict is
constricting all other efforts to achieve peace anywhere
else in the Middle East.

The relationship between peace in the region and
the Palestinian question is clear. What we need is a
comprehensive approach to resolving this issue, as
well as a real effort on the part of the international
community to resolve it permanently. We cannot allow
Violent and extremist groups to take advantage of this
conflict and exploit the gaps it creates with a view to
expanding their influence in the region and the world
as a whole.
Every day, the Israelis Violate international law,
destroy homes and expel populations. Their goal is to
change the reality on the ground. They categorically
reject all efforts to achieve a systemic settlement. We
are therefore obligated to ask the Council to live up
to its responsibilities and end the settlement activity
immediately. The settlements in Jerusalem and the
West Bank are in violation of international law, and
what Israel does on the ground contradicts its public
statements. On the way to relaunching negotiations
between the two sides, it places greater obstacles to any
possible success.

Nevertheless, in this context, Jordan reiterates the
importance of resuming serious negotiations based on
the two-State solution, but with a deadline, with a View
to establishing an independent, completely sovereign
Palestinian State on Palestinian soil and within the
4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
in accordance with international law and the Arab
Peace Initiative. This goal is consistent with Jordan's
interests, as my country is vitally connected to all
aspects of the Palestinian question.

His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein has
always given and will continue to give attention to a
related question of grave concern, namely, attacks
on Palestinian and Muslim holy sites. His Majesty is
using all his considerable influence to oppose Israel's
attacks on our sanctuaries. Indeed, in line with our
historical custodianship of the region, Jordan will stand
up to anyone who tries to commit acts of transgression
against holy sites. We will take any and all measures,
diplomatic and legal, to counter Israeli violations in
Jerusalem. All Israeli acts in this area are null and void
and without any legal consequence because they have
been authorized by an illegitimate occupying Power.

Regional or international initiatives designed
to solve the Palestinian question will not be realized
without genuine political will and the commitment to
push such initiatives forward. But, more importantly,
their success will depend on the seriousness ofIsrael and
the sincerity of its intention - or the lack thereof- to
achieve a lasting peace.

The practices of Israel in the occupied Palestinian
territories must stop. This is not just a Palestinian
demand, but an international demand to give the
Palestinian people the right to live in peace and
sovereignty on its soil. The situation requires greater
efforts by all parties to give momentum to the
negotiations to allow for a political resolution to be
achieved, particularly based on resolution 2254 (2015).

Jordan continues to support the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and
the International Syria Support Group. We hope that
the negotiations will succeed and that we will reach an
agreement for the transitional phase in Syria that will
allow peace and stability to return to that nation and
for the Syrian refugees to return to their homeland and
contribute to its reconstruction. Perhaps the increased
number of refugees and their continued flow from
Syria to neighbouring countries and to Europe is proof
of the scope of the humanitarian crisis in Syria, which
is affecting the entire region. Jordan continues to act
based on its moral obligation to the Syrian refugees.
That is taking its toll on our limited resources. We are
under great pressure. This requires the international
community to fulfil its obligations and to provide
greater support, in accordance with the promises made
in London last month. Syrian refugees are facing
great difficulties.

We are deeply concerned that terrorist
organizations continue to control areas of Syria, Iraq
and Libya. Such groups also continue to act based on
extremist ideologies and to perpetrate attacks in Saudi
Arabia, Iraq, Belgium, Turkey and on the borders of
Jordan and Syria. Those developments confirm that the
war against those deviant factions has become, as His
Majesty King Adbullah II has said, a third world war
using different means, which requires international
coordination among all the nations of the world. Terrorist
organizations have warped the image of Islam - again,
necessitating coordination and cooperation among all
countries in confronting terrorism. We must show
strong determination to unify our efforts and implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions to face up to
those gangs, in particular the the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham.

We trust that peace, security and stability can
be achieved in the Middle East. We in Jordan are
determined to contribute to those efforts.

