Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I wish to congratulate you,
Madam, and Chile for convening this open debate.
Malaysia is pleased to see you presiding over the
Council. We add our voice in welcoming the adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/3. We are mindful
of the instrumental role you played as the first Executive
Director of UN-Women, and your presence here today
reinforces the message on inclusiveness and on the
critical linkages among development, international
peace and security and human rights, which together
constitute the pillars of the Organisation.

I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-Moon; Ambassador Antonio Patriota of Brazil, Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission; and Ms. Leymah
Gbowee, Nobel Peace Prize Laureate for 2011, for their
presentations.

We meet today against the background of an
increasingly turbulent world. From the Middle East to
Africa, from Asia to Europe, more and more civilians
have been and continue to be caught in a seemingly
endless spiral of vicious and violent conflict. An
important dimension ofmany ofthese ongoing conflicts
is their intra-State or intranational nature and the
increasing prominence of non-State actors as drivers
of conflict. By virtue of our increasingly globalized,
interlinked and interdependent world, today we are
also collectively faced with other non-traditional
threats to international peace and security, such as viral
pandemics, cross-border terrorism and climate change,
among others.

Against such threats, the Council has demonstrated
its resilience and adaptability by recognizing and
responding to their changing nature. For instance,
resolutions 2177 (2014) on combating Ebola and 2178
(2014) on combating foreign terrorist fighters are
examples where the Council effectively galvanized and
rallied the international community to recognize and
address such scourges against humanity.

The Council has been at the forefront in promoting
the principles of inclusiveness for sustainable peace
with a view to preventing future conflicts, as reflected
in a number of its statements and decisions on a number
of situations around the world. Additionally, the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission was
a tangible manifestation of the Council's commitment
in that regard. That have been said, Malaysia believes
that there is room for a more strategic and more holistic
approach to dealing with traditional and non-traditional
threats to international peace and security. In that
context, we welcome discussions such as today's, which
allows us to take a deeper look at the underlying causes
of various conflict situations.

In Malaysia's view, understanding the nexus
between peace and security and development is key,
given that security is a prerequisite for development
and that development is possible only in a peaceful
and stable environment. Malaysia remains convinced
of the need to proactively promote stable and inclusive
societies where radicalization, violence and extremism
are totally and completely rejected. Towards that end,
States, their partners and stakeholders must spare no
effort in identifying and subsequently addressing the
factors or conditions that could frustrate the aim of
achieving cohesive and inclusive societies. Ownership
over such efforts must lie first and foremost with States
and national Governments, supported by partners and
stakeholders. The United Nations, including the Council,
is well placed to play a pivotal role in supporting such
efforts, including through special political missions
and peacekeeping missions.

Malaysia realizes that in pursuing peace and
development, the role played by women is crucial. In
that regard, the Government has carried out long-term
strategies and programmes to ensure women's equitable
share in the acquisition of resources, information,
opportunities and the benefits of development. The
strategies emphasize equality and justice in the
implementation of development policies so that women
can optimally contribute and realize their potential in
all sectors, in accordance with their capabilities and
needs. The Government has also taken the necessary
measures to create enough opportunities to enable the
young people of our country to play a meaningful role
in shaping their future.

Malaysia also recognizes that the advancement of
civil and political rights in the country should keep pace
with the significant progress made in the development
areas. In this regard, the Government has taken
significant measures aimed at further enhancing the
exercise and enjoyment of such rights in the country.
Malaysia's commitment to the promotion and protection
of human rights was demonstrated, among other things,
by the establishment of the Human Rights Commission
of Malaysia, which is intended to promote awareness
and provide education relating to human rights, and
advise and assist the Government in formulating
legislation and procedures on these matters.

We share the view that the challenges faced
by multi-ethnic, multi-faith and multicultural
societies - especially those in the developing
world - seen in terms of implementing or realizing
principles of inclusion, are enormous. We further share
the view that exclusion is particularly dangerous in
multicultural and multi-ethnic States where certain
components of society are marginalized or excluded
from the mainstream. The task is even more daunting
for societies in the post-conflict or transitional phase,
given that they would be ill equipped to embark on
nation and peacebuilding, much less to address the
root causes, such as marginalization and exclusion, that
gave rise to the conflict in the first place.

As a multi-ethnic, multi-faith and multicultural
society itself, Malaysia is keenly aware of such
challenges. Upon achieving independence in 1957,
social cleavages along ethnic lines - where the
identification of race with particular occupations
was especially pronounced - resulted in significant
inequality of income and wealth. Consequently, mistrust
and even animosity among the various communities
were widespread.

Against the backdrop ofthe ideological confrontations
that defined the Cold War era, there was also additional
pressure in the form of low-intensity guerilla warfare
and terrorism waged by communist insurgents. Such
challenges necessitated the implementation of radical
strategies in order to achieve the two key objectives
of security and poverty eradication. The notable
strategies included the establishment of New Villages,
which gathered communities living near the forest
fringes - where they were open to intimidation and
coercion by insurgents - nearer to the towns, where
the Government provided basic infrastructure and
amenities, including housing, water, electricity and,
most importantly, security.

The increased sense of security, coupled with
new-found economic opportunities for the New
Villagers, succeeded in winning the hearts and minds
of the people. The security guarantees provided by the
Government meant that the people were free to focus
their time and energy on improving their economic
situation. The implementation of this and other bold
plans and strategies has borne fruit. As one illusatrion,
at independence 70 per cent of the population lived in
poverty; according to the latest United Nations Human
Development Report for Malaysia, released in 2014,
poverty rates stand at 1.7 per cent.

In sharing that short anecdote from my country's
history, I wish to emphasize that the notions of inclusion
and inclusiveness must be given life and must result
in tangible outcomes. Malaysia has also found that in
order to cement peacebuilding and nation-building
efforts, inclusiveness must go hand in hand with other
equally important values, including tolerance and
moderation. Those values, which are deeply ingrained
in the daily lives of our people, have allowed Malaysia
to enjoy relative peace, stability and progress since
independence. Malaysia is also perhaps fortunate, as it
is part of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
region, which, since its inception in 1967, has also
sought to promote and implement such values.

Those are some of the lessons that Malaysia has
learned on inclusiveness and on the very real benefits
it has brought about in terms of peace, security and
stability. We realize that when all segments of societies
are guaranteed equal opportunity - economically,
socially and politically - and their separate identities
are respected, they will become a productive, vibrant
part ofthe State, celebrating the richness of its diversity
while building and united, strong and stable country.

I also wish to highlight that the concept ofmoderation
promoted and practised in Malaysia has managed to
produce a unique social cohesion, which enables the
multi-racial, multi-religious and multi-ethnic societies
in the country to live together in peace and harmony
through negotiation, consensus and compromise and to
embrace peace and reject any form of extremism and
violence for long-term mutual survival, sustainability
and resilience.

I wish to conclude by emphasizing that Malaysia
will continue to support the task of promoting the value
of inclusiveness and the holistic vision of international
security based on the interdependence of the three
pillars of the United Nations system: peace and security,
development and human rights.

