Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, allow me to associate myself
with the kind words expressed to Ambassador Jorge
Navarrete and to wish him every success in his new
post.

The tragic events of 11 September have greatly
changed the picture of the world. Today, as never
before, the members of the world community are
united in recognizing the need for an uncompromising
battle against international terrorism.

We note with satisfaction that the Security
Council has assumed a leadership role in creating a
global system to counter terrorism. Its resolution 1373
(2001) is undoubtedly a major historic document. This
resolution is far from being a declaratory appeal. It
imposes the obligation on each State to lead a decisive
struggle against international terrorism on the basis of
universal conventions, for as long as required and
harshly if necessary, thus observing the norms of
international law and the Charter of the United
Nations.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee established by
resolution 1373 (2001) must be an effective mechanism
of international monitoring of compliance by all
Member States with the decisions of the Security
Council and the United Nations as a whole regarding
the struggle against terrorism. We commend its
energetic activities and, to a great extent, credit for
them is due to the Chairman of the Committee,
Ambassador Sir Jeremy Greenstock.

We share the view that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee should in no way function as a repressive
body. It was never contemplated in this way. The main
task of the Committee lies in compiling and analysing,
with the assistance of appropriate experts, information
provided by States on the counter-terrorism measures
they have undertaken and to submit appropriate
recommendations. An important function of the
Committee will also be to give the necessary advisory
and technical assistance to States with a view to their
effective implementation of obligations under
resolution 1373 (2001). Russia will make every effort
possible to assist in carrying out these tasks.

We note with satisfaction that, as required under
the resolution, 123 Member States have submitted their
national reports on the steps they have taken in the area
of counter-terrorism. However, we must express
concern over the fact that nearly a third of Member
States have not yet done so. We hope that the reports of
these States will reach the Committee in the near
future.

As for Russia, we are taking all necessary
measures in response to resolution 1373 (2001).
President Putin signed a decree devoted specifically to
its implementation, in which the State structure of the
Russian Federation is instructed to carry out a set of
effective steps to freeze the accounts of persons or
organizations suspected of terrorist activities, to
strengthen border control measures, to halt entry by
terrorists, to introduce necessary changes to existing
legislation and to develop international cooperation and
exchange of information concerning counter-terrorism.

Russia is a party to 10 of the 12 universal
conventions against terrorism. The remaining two are
in the final stages of the ratification process. We intend
to continue, not in our words, but in our actions, to
make our contribution to joint efforts to neutralize the
threat of terrorism, and to do so within the United
Nations.

