Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Burundi, Mr. Michel Kafando,
and the Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Mr. Jiirg Lauber, for their
valuable briefings, in which they informed us on recent
developments in Burundi.

In my statement today, I shall focus on four issues.

First, on the political situation, the Republic
of Burundi is experiencing outstanding political
developments, including the constitutional referendum
held on 17 May. The situation in the country is relatively
calm and much improved from that of 2015. We hope
that the state of calm will prevail in Burundi, leading
to the holding of presidential elections in 2020, which
we hope will include all categories of the Burundian
people and enjoy the participation of all political
parties. We also hope that the elections will be free,
fair, transparent and credible and ensure the freedom
of expression and the participation of actors from civil
society, including young people and women along, with
regional and international organizations.

In that regard, we commend the efforts of the
African Union (AU) and the East African Community
(EAC) to reach a peaceful solution to the political
and security situations in the Republic of Burundi.
That would be achieved through a comprehensive
dialogue based on the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi, signed on 28 August 2000, and
the country's Constitution. We also highly appreciate the
efforts led by the President of Uganda, Mr. Museveni,
as facilitator and by Mr. Mkapa as mediator in the
political dialogue.

Undoubtedly, the engagement of the Burundian
Government with international and regional
organizations, such as the United Nations, the AU, the
European Union (EU) and the EAC, is significant and
fraught with important implications that could lead to
achieving the aspired stability. Such collaboration is
considered to be one of the main factors in reaching a
sustainable solution before the presidential elections in
2020. We are quite confident that the inter-Burundian
dialogue will contribute significantly to facilitating the
political process, while its positive effects will reflect
on the security, economic and living conditions in
the country.

Moreover, Government's reconciliation efforts, the
promotion of tolerance among all Burundian parties
and the call for national reconciliation will have a
positive impact that will undoubtedly contribute to
the resolution of the political crisis in Burundi. That
includes the release of certain political prisoners who
were detained during the violent events in 2015.

Secondly, the security situation in the Republic of
Burundi is improving, despite some continued violent
acts perpetrated by armed groups. We hope that the
security situation will continue to improve and that
the Government will seize on the improved security
situation to intensify national dialogue efforts and bring
all political parties together, while ensuring the holding
of the elections in 2020 in a secure and credible manner
free of violence. We hope that the outcome of the EAC
Heads of the State summit, to be held late this month,
will contribute to strengthening the security situation,
advancing the inter-Burundian dialogue and identifying
a mechanism to facilitate national reconciliation, in
collaboration with regional and international partners.

Thirdly, the humanitarian situation in the Republic
of Burundi, despite having improved since 2017,
including through the reduction of food insecurity, is
still a cause of concern. Almost 1.7 million people are
in dire need of humanitarian assistance, while human
rights violations continue to occur, accompanied by acts
of killing and violence, in violation of the principles
of human rights and international law. We call for an
end to such acts and for the perpetrators to be held to
account and brought to justice as soon as possible.

As for refugee situation following the signature of
the tripartite agreement by Tanzania, Burundi and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, we commend the gradual, voluntary return
of refugees and reiterate the need for the Government
to step up its efforts to ensure the economic and social
reintegration of those who have returned and the return
of the remaining refugees to their homes and regions.

Fourthly, we underscore that socioeconomic
development is a key factor for any Government that
wants to develop and advance its society towards
a bright and secure future. The adoption by the
Government of Burundi on 22 August of the national
development plan for the next 10 years is a step in the
right direction towards genuine cooperation among
factions of the Burundian community to the benefit of
all. We therefore hope that the development plan will
lead to significant progress in the Burundian economy
and contribute to greater stability in the security and
economic situations so that its positive effects will
improve the standard of living of the Burundian people.
