Mr. Lucas (Angola): I would like at the outset to
express my satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, presiding
over the Security Council. We would also like to
convey our congratulations to the Ambassador of Spain
and the Spanish delegation for their excellent work
during the month of September.

We would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this meeting of the Security Council,
at the request of the League of Arab States, with a view
to addressing the very grave situation prevailing in the
occupied Palestinian territories. We are extremely
concerned about the current situation in the northern
Gaza Strip - the extensive human casualties, the
deaths of civilians, including children, and the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in general.

We join the Secretary-General in calling on the
Government of Israel to halt its military incursions into
the Gaza Strip and in urging the Palestinian Authority
to take action to halt the firing of rockets against Israeli
targets by Palestinian militants.

For its part, my delegation urges the Palestinian
Authority to put an end to all acts of terror against
Israeli civilians, which lead to the deadly proactive
Israeli military operations.

Of particular concern is the excessive use of force
by the Israeli armed forces against the Palestinians. We
remind Israel that it has obligations and responsibilities
under international law relative to the protection of
civilians in time of war. We condemn all acts of
violence and terror, the excessive and indiscriminate
use of force and the physical destruction of the means
of livelihood of the Palestinians. The restrictions
imposed on the United Nations humanitarian workers,
the disruption of the work of the United Nations
agencies assisting Palestinian refugees and the
impediments to its workers' conduct of humanitarian
operations are also matters of great concern. We call on
Israel to ease the plight of the Palestinian population
and allow the humanitarian workers to resume their
work in full, in conditions of security.

It is the view of my delegation that the current
situation in Gaza is inconsistent with the proclaimed
intentions of the Israeli Government to withdraw from
Gaza. It is also inconsistent with the proclaimed
intention of the Palestinians to cooperate with Israel
for such a withdrawal. And it is inconsistent with the
encouragement and offers of cooperation on the part of
the international community to make the Israeli
withdrawal from Gaza a first and decisive step to end
the occupation of the Palestinian territories and start
the effective implementation of the Middle East peace
plan, embodied in the road map.

In this context, we recall the obligations of the
Palestinian Authority and the Government of Israel,
under the road map, endorsed by Security Council
1515 (2002).

In conclusion, by delegation would like to
express its support for the draft resolution introduced
by the Ambassador of Algeria. We consider it a
balanced text and we hope that it will meet with the
unanimous approval of Council members, in the
expectation that its adoption will contribute to ending
the bloodshed in Gaza and to moving forward with the
implementation by both parties of their obligations
under the road map.

