Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): 1 thank you,
Mr. President, for coming back to New York. We
welcome you here. I also thank the Uruguayan
presidency for having convened this open debate on the
critical issue of the protection of civilians.

We align ourselves with the statements to be
delivered by the Permanent Observer of the African
Union and by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.

We also thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson
for his briefing and recommendations, as well
as Ms. Christine Beerli, Vice-President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, and
Ms. Eveline Rooijmans, Senior Humanitarian Policy
Advisor of Oxfam for their respective briefings and
for bringing to the Council accounts of real situations
that we sometimes just discuss here. They have brought
those situations closer to us within this Chamber, which
is an important thing.

Angola shares the view that protection is the most
effective tool in addressing potential conflict situations.
States bear the responsibility for the protection of their
civilian populations. The international community
has a subsidiary but very important role to play in
addressing the very serious problem of threats against
civilians in armed conflicts. Let us also be clear that
the responsibility-to-protect agenda, on which the
protection of civilians is based, should not be used for
agendas that run contrary to the very concept of the
protection of civilians.

According to the latest report (S/2015/453) of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians, by the
end of 2014 the number of internally displaced persons
had reached a record breaking more than 38 million,
owing to conflicts and violence, while 30 million had
sought refuge abroad. Those numbers were surpassed
in 2015, with approximately 59.5 million refugees,
internally displaced persons or asylum-seekers
throughout the world. According the Office of the
United Nations High Commission for Refugees, in 2015
more than 950,000 refugees arrived in Europe through
the Mediterranean Sea alone, fleeing war and violence
in their countries. That has also been referred to several
times during our debate this morning.

The sheer brutality and disregard for human life
and dignity characterize today's conflicts. Massive
human rights violations and abuse continue to occur
in a context of widespread insecurity and neglect
for international humanitarian law and human
rights law. Civilians are killed both via targeted and
indiscriminate attacks. They are tortured, maimed,
taken hostage, forcibly recruited into armed groups or
simply vanish. People are expelled from their homes,
separated from their families and denied access to
their most basic needs. Despite the establishment of a
robust normative framework by the Security Council,
the United Nations and other international bodies, the
fact that the protection of civilians features in various
resolutions and presidential statements of the Security
Council, and despite the strengthening of protection
in peacekeeping operations, human rights mandates
have not been translated into significant improvements
where conflicts are rampant.

Angola stresses the primacy of international law
in this regard - namely, the 1949 Fourth Geneva
Conventions and, in particular, the Fourth Geneva
Convention, and its Additional Protocols - and yjr
standards set out in international legal instruments on
human rights.

Pertaining to the subject matter under consideration,
we are particularly concerned with three critical issues.

First, humanitarian access remains a key challenge
in many situations of armed conflict, along with
worrying practices of obstructing the delivery of
assistance as a tactic ofwar, which puts additional strain
on civilians. Attacks against humanitarian workers and
civilian facilities, such as schools and hospitals, and
depriving civilians of basic needs constitute violations
of international humanitarian law, which we also utterly
condemn.

Secondly, the brutalizing of civilians, the targeting
of civilian infrastructure and lack of accountability
have become an endemic feature in ongoing conflicts,
further aggravating the plight of civilian populations.
It is disturbing how such violations of international
law meet with widespread impunity, while victims are
deprived of any semblance ofjustice - a situation that
must not be allowed to prevail.

Thirdly, the widespread use of explosive devices is
having a devastating humanitarian impact on civilians
and civilian infrastructure. We support the Secretary-
General's view, expressed in his latest report, on the
development of policy standards to limit the use of
explosive devices in populated areas, as a means to
significantly strengthen the protection of civilians.

We acknowledge the crucial role of peacekeeping
missions in protecting civilians and as an important
component of the global commitment to preventing
and settling conflicts peacefully. The High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations rightly identified
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts as a core
principle of international humanitarian law and a moral
responsibility of the United Nations. Furthermore, the
Panel reiterated the need for strengthened partnerships
and cooperation with regional organizations, in
particular with the African Union, taking into account
that most peacekeeping operations are deployed in
Africa. The Council will have an opportunity to engage
with the African Union within a few days when we
travel to Africa, and especially to Burundi, in regard to
the protection of civilians.

In conclusion, Angola fully endorses the high-
level recommendations on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict and its call for sustained, predictable
and flexible funding mechanisms in support of African
Union peace operations. Finally, we recall the United
Nations fundamental purpose to apply preventive
diplomacy to reduce the risk of armed conflicts and the
core principle of international efforts to prevent, settle
peacefully and protect civilians under threat.

This open debate today, judging from the wide
support and response of the membership, is a clear
sign that we are not yet doing what is required of
the Security Council and that there is a wide gap
between policy and practice. Let us use this debate and
opportunity to rededicate ourselves to the Council and
to take advantage of the great opportunity it affords the
Council.

