I thank the President for organizing today's important meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General and the briefers for their insights. Last year, I presided over the open debate that commemorated the twentieth anniversary of the protection-of-civilians agenda and the seventieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions (see S/PV.8534). Our message at that time remains relevant today, particularly during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The Council must continue exercising its moral weight to protect civilians in armed conflict. Indeed, the pandemic has not stopped conflicts from playing out in many parts of the world. In sub-Saharan Africa, violent attacks increased by 37 per cent between mid-March and mid-April. Armed conflict has also displaced at least 661,000 people over the past two months. COVID-19 places an extra burden on the shoulders of people in conflict-affected countries and complicates our efforts to protect civilians. Against that background, I have three key messages. First, it is important to implement a humanitarian pause. The pandemic provides the momentum to put a break on the fighting. Laying down weapons would ensure unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance, create a space for credible peace processes and allow us to focus on fighting COVID-19. For those reasons, Indonesia reiterates the Secretary-General's appeal for an immediate global ceasefire in all conflict situations, including Afghanistan. Together with Norway, Germany, Qatar and Uzbekistan, Indonesia launched a joint statement on a ceasefire in Afghanistan. A global ceasefire requires political will, putting aside animosity, as well as unity in the Council. Secondly, it is critical to ensure compliance with international humanitarian law at all times. All parties to conflict must honour their obligations. Civilians are not targets. Greater protection must be given to those who are already in dire situations, women, children, refugees and displaced persons. Continued attacks on health-care facilities in conflict-affected countries further impairs their already fragile capacity to fight COVID-19. This has to stop. Palestine is a textbook example of where compliance with international humanitarian law is desperately needed now. The ongoing imminent threat of annexation and the COVID-19 pandemic have hit Palestine together. The world and the Council have a duty to restore the Palestinians' rights over their territory in accordance with the 1967 borders. We must not let further annexation happen from various standpoints. It will threaten regional stability and security. It will undermine the two-State solution. It will do away with all international consensus and parameters on the issue of Palestine. Moreover, it will shift the world's focus away from fighting the COVID-19 pandemic. Thirdly, it is also crucial to place women's empowerment at the heart of the protection of civilians. Indonesia is a strong proponent of community engagement in protecting civilians. Local communities, particularly women, must become part and parcel of the development and implementation of the protection of civilians strategy. As agents of civilian protection, women have greater access to communities. Women are essential enablers of trust- and confidence-building and help to prevent and reduce conflict and confrontation. Inclusive participation of women would also benefit any peace process as they have a unique perspective to offer. Empowering women means empowering the whole nation. That was evident when I led Indonesia's women leaders in dialogue with Afghan women in Kabul last February to encourage their greater contribution in the peace process. The Afghanistan Indonesia Women's Solidarity Network was launched during the visit. Later this year, we aim to establish a southeast Asian network of women peace negotiators and mediators. Indonesia is also committed to increasing the number of female peacekeepers, thus contributing to gender parity among Blue Helmets. There are currently 154 Indonesian women peacekeepers on the ground, all of whom will contribute to the implementation of mission mandates around community engagement and the protection of civilians. COVID-19 is unlike any global crisis in the United Nations 75-year history. However, during this dark moment of our time, we cannot neglect the imperative to protect civilians in armed conflict. After all, the United Nations was established to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war. Protecting civilians is one of the most important tasks to avoid us failing.
