Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by congratulating France on its accession
to the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of June. I would also like to thank Mr. Martin Kobler,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his very valuable briefing. I would also like to extend
my gratitude to Mr. Ramlan Bin Ibrahim for his update
on the work of the Sanctions Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).

On behalf of the Government of Libya, I would like
to commend the Security Council's intention to extend
the mandate of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL), a step that should be taken next few
days by the Security Council. It is also our hope that
UNSMIL will be able to move in full force to Tripoli as
soon as possible and that it will be able to work more
actively over the next few months to fulfil its mandate,
in particular to make progress on the implementation

of the Libyan Political Agreement and provide the
necessary assistance and support for State institutions
to be set up and to be up and running.

In the light of the total failure of Libyan
Governments over the past five years - Governments
that did not respond to the aspirations of the citizens of
Libya themselves - and against the backdrop of the
large-scale welcome for the Libyan Political Agreement
and the approval by the House of Representatives of
the Agreement on 23 January, despite some of the
challenges it faced, I would say that unity among our
partners when it comes to an international consensus
in support of the Government of National Accord is
crucial at this time.

It is a very positive sign that Security Council
resolutions have referred to the Government of
National Accord as the sole legitimate Government in
Libya. The resolutions also call upon Member States
to refrain from communicating with any other parallel
institution. However, that is not enough. More still needs
to be done because the success of the Government of
National Accdord depends upon the robust and honest
implementation of the provisions of the Libyan Political
Agreement, beginning with the implementation of the
security arrangements and the setting up of an armed
force to secure the city of Tripoli, in cooperation with
the police. Such a force must be properly equipped
and capable and should enjoy the full support of the
international community in order to be able to counter
any threat posed by one or more armed groups. Such a
force would allow the Government of National Accord
to move freely within the capital.

I reviewed the report (S/2016/452) of the Secretary-
General that is before the Security Council, and I
am able to say that it has some shortcomings at the
professional level when it comes to the way it describes
some aspects that are crucial to the Libyan political
scene. I made that point in identical letters addressed
to the President of the Security Council and to the
Secretary-General on 2 June, which will be issued as
document S/2016/508. I would like to reiterate that
the Secretariat should refrain from using unrealistic
terminology and erroneous or fictitious names, because
that only further complicates the political mix in Libya
and does not allow us to ease tensions and overcome
the impasse we are in today in order to fully implement
the Libyan Political Agreement. By way of example, it
is premature to talk today about forces controlled by
the Government of National Accord. Such a reference
can be found in the report of the Secretary-General,
which states:

"As with previous administrations, a key
challenge facing the new transitional authorities in
Libya is the urgent need to address the widespread
proliferation of weapons and the large number of
armed groups. Although nominally under State
authority, the majority of these groups continue
to operate outside the effective control of the
Libyan State and Government. It is critical that the
Libyan authorities put in place a viable plan that
paves the way for the State to gradually exercise
an unqualified monopoly over the use of force as
outlined in the relevant provisions of the Libyan
Political Agreement. This includes the development
of professional State security institutions, the
successful demobilization and integration or
reintegration of fighters, and the implementation of
effective defence and police reform programmes."
(S/2016/452, para. 82)

It is not enough for armed groups to declare their
support for the Government of National Accord for
them to be considered as having been placed under
the Government's authority. That requires a binding
agreement in which the armed groups wholeheartedly
declare their approval of the Libyan Political Agreement
and the provisions set out therein, including the security
arrangements. The armed groups also must make it
abundantly clear that they intend to hand over their
weapons and that each member intends to join State
institutions. The majority of Libyans doubt that the
armed groups will accept those terms. In the absence
of such agreement, and given the lack of a professional
security environment, as indicated by the report of the
Secretary-General, such terrorist groups will continue
to pose a threat to the Government of National Accord
and the Government might indeed become a target for
terrorist activities or extortion, as has been the case
with other Governments, if the Government stops
financially supporting the armed groups.

It is crucial that the Presidency Council of the
Government of National Accord, together with the full
support of UNSMIL, establish a database containing
information on armed groups, their leaders, their
locations and lists of their members who wish to join
the State's military and civilian protection forces to
facilitate their integration in the institutions of the
Libyan State.

UNSMIL is the sponsor of the Libyan Political
Agreement, and therefore has a key role to play as an
honest broker of the Agreement. UNSMIL must pay
attention and respond to each and every Violation of
the Agreement and not simply sweep them under the
carpet, because any violation of the Agreement by any
party might encourage other parties to undermine its
implementation. If Council members want proof of
what I mean, they can look at the former members of the
General National Congress who have set up their own
State council and have appointed some controversial
persons to it.

UNSMIL needs to change the way it has been
operating and needs to become more actively involved
in events in Libya and provide suggestions and advice,
even if it is not directly asked for its advice. However,
UNSMIL's response to our requests for support is
a herculean task, because of the absence of State
institutions or expertise in the different sectors of
the Libyan State, as we have seen over the past five
years. Many people in charge have not had access to
expert advice and did not even know what they were
actually seeking. They have not been able to envision
a functioning State structure for the team working for
them.

The implementation of the Libyan Political
Agreement, in accordance to an agreed timeline, and
support for the establishment of State institutions
need to be at the heart of UNSMIL's mandate over
the next few months. Such a mandate needs to focus
on peacekeeping and a sustainable stability plan for
Libya, the elements of which were set out in a letter
(S/2014/632) dated 27 August 2014.

The Presidency Council of the Government of
National Accord has a very difficult task before it.
The Council can be successful in its role only if its
members disregard the context of their appointment
and work in a unified way and collectively assume
responsibilty. They must put an end to institutional
divisions by replacing former leaders of institutions
with other leaders, in particular leaders of financial
and monitoring institutions, on the basis of who has the
most experience.

It is our hope that the efforts currently under way
will be fruitful, that the city of Sirte will be liberated and
that the presence ofDa'esh there will end in the next two
weeks. But to date we have seen no plan for the city of
Sirte in the aftermath of its liberation, a plan that should
include the facilitated return of displaced persons, the
return to functioning of local authorities and security
entities, and the departure of armed groups from Sirte.
This is a crucial stage, because we do not want to find
Al-Qaida in Sirte after Da'esh leaves. We do not wish to
see a recurrence of the reprehensible practices carried
out by armed groups in various Libyan cities in the
past, including the confiscation of State property and
that of citizens, and human rights violations.

The United Nations Support Mission in Libya
must guard against such violations and prevent them,
working jointly with the Presidential Council of the
national unity Government.

