Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and the friendly delegation of Vietnam on joining the Council and presiding over it this month. I wish you all the best. I also thank you for having convened this open debate on the topic "Maintenance of international peace and security: upholding the Charter of the United Nations", which coincides with the commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter. I would like also to welcome the new non-permanent members of the Council, and I wish them all the best. I thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, and Chair of The Elders Mrs. Mary Robinson for their briefings. The Republic of Yemen was among the first countries to sign the Charter of the United Nations. We, along with other peoples of the United Nations, have committed ourselves to the Charter's provisions and to the maintenance of international peace and security as a basis for prosperity and well-being. Through special political missions, peacekeeping operations and other entities, the United Nations supports consensual solutions and the settlement of conflicts through peaceful means, including by preventive measures, mediation and multilateral diplomacy, as a means to tackle threats to international peace and security. In that regard, I would like to thank the Secretary- General and his Special Envoy to Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, for their efforts to reach a comprehensive political settlement in Yemen, which has suffered for more than five years from an unfair war waged by the armed Houthi militias, supported by the Iranian regime. Those militias continue to show intransigence and refuse to fulfil their commitments under the relevant Security Council resolutions, most recently regarding the Stockholm Agreement. However, the Yemeni Government has always shown a sincere desire to achieve a comprehensive and just peace based on the three agreed terms of reference, namely, the Gulf Initiative and its implementation mechanism, the outcomes of the National Dialogue and the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution 2216 (2015). We have always given priority to the interests of Yemen and Yemenis to achieve our dream of building a new, federal Yemen that would meet our aspirations and support our brothers and friends in the region. Because of our belief in the principles and purposes of the Charter, we have always engaged positively with the efforts of the Special Envoy to end the conflict by peaceful means and to maintain regional and international peace and security. Our world has seen the emergence of non-State armed militias and groups as well as of extremist and terrorist groups, which have exacerbated crises and human suffering and threatened peoples along with regional and international peace and security. The Yemeni Government calls once again on the Security Council, which has the primary responsibility under the Charter of maintaining international peace and security, to exert further pressure on Houthi militias and to implement its relevant resolutions on Yemen. The goal is to reach a comprehensive political settlement of the conflict in Yemen that would meet the aspirations of the Yemeni people to a lasting peace built on the agreed terms of reference, achieve socioeconomic development and allow Yemen with its long history and civilization to move forward towards a better future for its people and contribute actively to building a world in which peace, stability and well-being prevail.
