First of all, I would like to thank China on its leadership of the Security Council in March and to congratulate the Dominican Republic on its assumption of the presidency for April. I would also like to thank the Dominican Republic for convening this video-teleconference on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question, and for making it possible for non-members of the Council to participate. The world is facing a historic challenge - one that is testing everything, including our humanity. At such a difficult moment, we are meeting to discuss conflicts and crises that are human-made. I wish we were meeting to celebrate the silencing of guns, which the Secretary-General called for in his appeal for a global ceasefire. Even when we are facing a common enemy that "does not care about nationality or ethnicity, faction or faith", as the Secretary-General put it, not only do conflicts persist but they provide an opening in many places around the world, especially in the Middle East, for opportunistic attempts to use this difficult moment to make political and military gains. Before I turn to the Middle East, however, I wish to express my strong solidarity with those who have been affected by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and those who have suffered the loss of loved ones. I would also like to express my greatest support for and solidarity with the poorest countries on the planet, which are suffering from two pandemics at once: poverty and economic hardship, on the one hand, and the COVID-19 pandemic, on the other. Moreover, I cannot but express my profound gratitude to front-line workers, especially health workers, who deserve to be considered major pillars of all our societies around the world. No region is immune from this pandemic, including the Middle East, which is already facing a multitude of challenges and crises. The pandemic has wrought havoc in the world economy and sent financial markets into a tailspin. The turmoil that has hit oil markets has added to the uncertainties. Like every other country around the world, Lebanon is enduring a difficult economic situation, whose impact on its people and economy it is trying to mitigate. While continuing its unflagging efforts aimed at implementing its agenda for economic reform, Lebanon has also been working to contain the spread of the virus. The Lebanese response to COVID-19 has been robust and efficient, but the virus is cruel, and no country can be safe until the whole world is safe. Yet it seems that irresponsible behaviour is persistent in the Middle East. Not even a pandemic like the one we are suffering from now can change such behaviour. Instead of heeding the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and for focusing the world's energies on fighting the virus, Israel maintains its usual policies of flouting international law and United Nations resolutions insofar as Lebanon and the Middle East are concerned. In the south of Lebanon, Israeli violations of my country's territorial sovereignty continue unabated. COVID-19 has not appeared to distract Israel from its daily utter disregard of international law, in particular resolution 1701 (2006). Its violations of resolution 1701 (2006) have long been documented in letters addressed to the Security Council. I would nevertheless remind the Council that at the height of the COVID-19 crisis, at a time when people are preoccupied with containing the virus in Lebanon, they have still had to endure hundreds of Israeli violations. In February, March and up to 13 April of this year, there were 140 sea violations, 142 land violations and 162 airspace violations. In some of these violations, Israeli war planes breached and used Lebanese airspace to attack a third country, Syria. The Security Council has not condemned these violations of Lebanese sovereignty. Furthermore, Lebanon has expected the United Nations to have something to say about Israeli disregard for the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) continues to do a commendable job in implementing its mandate in its area of operations and in assisting the Lebanese Armed Forces to preserve peace in the south of the country. I also wish to pay tribute to UNIFIL for its ongoing efforts aimed at assisting Lebanon in curbing the spread of COVID-19. In occupied Palestine, COVID-19 has not distracted Israel from pursuing its aggressive policies designed to block all attempts to make progress on the establishment of a Palestinian State by dismantling any basis for such a State's viability. The latest example of this is the approval by Israeli authorities of the confiscation of Palestinian land near the Ibrahimi Mosque in the old city of Hebron, which was a move rightfully described by Hanan Ashrawi as reflecting "an abject disregard for the status of Hebron's old city as a World Heritage site that must be protected from all acts of aggression, alteration, and destruction". The approval came a few hours after the formation of an Israeli Unity Government, whose plan is to annex and permanently occupy the West Bank. We need not remind everyone of the illegality of such actions, which violate not only relevant resolutions of the Security Council, the most recent of which is resolution 2334 (2016), but also the Fourth Geneva Convention, which, specifically in article 56, requires Israel as the occupying Power to ensure and maintain "medical and hospital establishments and services, public health and hygiene in the occupied territory, with particular reference to the adoption and application of the prophylactic and preventive measures necessary to combat the spread of contagious diseases and epidemics", including in Hebron. There is a great risk that the virus will spread into densely Palestinian areas, which will overburden the health infrastructure there. It is also high time for the Council to demand that the illegal decade-long blockade of Gaza be lifted so it can fight the COVID-19 threat without being under siege or lacking much-needed medical supplies and equipment. The international community needs to stand by the Palestinian people now more than ever so as to overcome the current ordeal by renewing material and moral support for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), especially since the investigation into its administration found no evidence to support allegations of corruption. I take this opportunity to wish the Commissioner-General of UNRWA, Mr. Philippe Lazzarini, success in his new assignment. Unfortunately, the Middle East under the threat of COVID-19 looks much the same as it looked before this grave menace to all of humankind arose. If such a pandemic cannot change the region and usher in an era of human dignity, an end to occupation and peace for its peoples, then I am not sure what would be able to bring about change.
