Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of
Venezuela did not think that the representative of the
United States was going to try, as she has, to justify the
unjustifiable, to try to show that the United States has
carried out legal proceedings that allow a convicted
and confessed criminal to remain on its territory.

Allow me to make a few brief comments. Posada
Carriles was arrested and tried in Venezuela. He
confessed to his crimes, not only to having taken part
and planned the destruction and bombing of the
Cubana de Aviacio'n aeroplane that claimed so many
lives, but also to having committed other crimes. There
are books, interviews, testimony and documents that
show Posada Carilles to be a confessed and convicted
criminal. This is not merely a man who was the subject
of judicial investigations, but a criminal who has
admitted openly and in public - and there are dozens
of documents, interviews and books that prove this -
that he himself was guilty of numerous terrorist
attacks. Thus, this is not someone who is the subject of
investigation, but rather someone who had been
arrested. He was in a Venezuelan prison. He
acknowledged his crimes, confessed them openly and
even boasted of them in the most shameless manner.

The United States representative said that a judge
in the United States declared that Posada Carriles
cannot be referred to Venezuela or Cuba because he
could be subjected to torture. On behalf of the
Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, I
would like to assure the Council that that is not the
case. Through diplomatic notes and official
conversations between Venezuelan diplomats,
representatives of the Venezuelan embassy in the
United States and representatives of the State
Department, Venezuela has given full assurances that if
the United States complies with the extradition
process, Posada Carriles will be subject to the rule of
law, with full respect for due process, for his human
rights and for all of the prerogatives that any human
being deserves.

It seems absolutely unfathomable that a country
that practices torture and even justifies it legally would
attempt to state that Posada Carilles runs the risk of
being subjected to torture, for example in Venezuela. If
any terrorist practices or tortures have been proven, it
is those that have been committed by the United States
of America, for example in Abu Ghraib and in
Guantanamo, where the Government of the United
States has refused access, on many occasions, to the
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and
both the American and the global press. We have heard
echoes of the obvious and notorious torture that has
been experienced by prisoners in those jails. But the
most serious thing is that the United States
Government is trying to justify certain forms of torture
when they are supposedly necessary to defend its
national security.

In the case of Luis Posada Carilles, we have a
well-known international terrorist, possibly the most
dangerous international terrorist alive today. But the
Government of the United States wants to let his
crimes go unpunished. This is an individual who was a
member of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). He
was on the CIA payroll. That is possibly one additional
reason that has led the United States Government to
protect Posada Carilles: the possible confessions that
that criminal could make about his CIA past, as an
agent on the payroll of the CIA, and about the actions
he committed around the world.

The accusations levelled against this well-known
terrorist come not only from the Governments of
Venezuela and Cuba. He has also committed crimes in
other countries, such as his attempt to blow up a theatre
in Panama during an event involving heads of State.

Lastly, Venezuela reiterates its request that this
body call on the Government of the United States to
honour the extradition agreement we have signed, so
that there is no impunity for that kind of crime.
