Judge Byron: I wanted first to express
appreciation to those delegations who especially
expressed support for the applications before you. I
would like to comment that approval would assist us in
attaining the objectives of the completion strategy.

I also wish to express my thanks for the general
support that all Member States have expressed. I wish
to give assurances that we will continue to do our
utmost to earn their continued support and to justify
the expressions that have already been made.
I must also take this opportunity to join with the
Member States who have congratulated Belgium on its
chairmanship of the Working Group. From the
perspective of our Tribunal, we think we have
benefited enormously from the opportunity to interact
and to share and exchange views on the issue of
residual mechanisms. I think I should probably put on
record that our Tribunal benefited enormously from the
visit of the Working Group, and we thought it had an
important impact on the improvement of the morale of
the Tribunal's staff. So I wish to express our
appreciation.

We have taken note of the remarks by Member
States concerning the issue of the referrals. I want to
assure the Council that the Tribunal is continuing the
capacity-building relationship with Rwanda, to the
extent that our trust fund allows us to. This, of course,
gives me the opportunity to once more invite Member
States to provide additional support to our capacity-
building efforts by contributing, if they wish to, to the
Voluntary Trust Fund, which supports these efforts.

The decisions already taken on referrals do not
undermine the fact that referrals continue to be part of
our completion strategy. As the Prosecutor has
mentioned, he is still engaged in investigations and
discussions, and it is open to him, when he considers
that changes have been made that justify a new
application, to renew his application before the court to
achieve this goal.

Lastly, I wish to express appreciation for the
strong statements that have been made concerning the
continuing support for the arrest of the remaining
fugitives. We also feel that that will assist in
completing the fight against impunity and in the
satisfactory completion of our mandate.

