Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
We have concluded that the situation in the Middle
East continues to be a source of serious threat to
international peace and security. As a result, it requires
the Security Council and the entire international
community to exercise increased vigilance. In his very
instructive briefing, Mr. Pascoe has reminded us of that
sad conclusion, and my delegation thanks him.

For us, the tragedy in the Middle East is
structured around a trilogy: the occupied territories, the
role and responsibilities of the actors, and expectations.
The impossibility of compromising or the refusal to do
so lies at the core of the Middle East tragedy,
particularly since the full restitution of territories
occupied by Israel since 1967 continues to be in
dispute with any real prospect of an early resolution
because the settlement policy is being pursued
unabated, in contravention of Security Council
resolution 1515 (2003).

Given that situation, the protagonists on the
southern and western fronts and at the Israeli-Syrian
border have engaged in confrontation, giving rise to the
blockade of Gaza and the ensuing humanitarian tragedy
that, unfortunately and due to lack of agreement, our
Council has been unable to condemn. Once again, my
country, Burkina Faso, expresses its regret at that
shirking of our responsibilities, which has left civilians
to struggle on alone.

We call on Israel once again to fully lift the
sanctions imposed on Gaza. We call on the Palestinian
Authority to strive to end the military activities in
Gaza. The stampede of Palestinians into Egypt
following the blockade - which is certainly no gold
rush but a rush for basic necessities - is a clear
demonstration of the fact that the blockade has earned
the description of "collective punishment".

In Lebanon, too, the unending political crisis
marked by numerous terrorist attacks leads us to fear

the worst. In such circumstances, the international
community and the United Nations, while doing their
utmost to help secure a settlement of the Middle East
question, must hold the protagonists accountable. To be
sure, hope for a lasting and viable solution cannot be
entertained without them and the States of the region.

In that respect, we welcome the peace initiatives
of the League of Arab States and the firm commitment
of the Egyptian Government in its attempts to achieve
a settlement to the conflict. All other initiatives in that
area, particularly the Annapolis and Paris conferences,
should be welcomed and fully supported. The
momentum and spirit of goodwill that arose from those
initiatives and from the bilateral Israeli-Palestinian that
followed and that should continue despite the current
challenges, are clearly a sign that all hope is not lost
and that the peace process remains relevant. The
Palestinians and Israelis need to understand that they,
above all, are still the primary players with respect to
peace. Their common history and shared destiny
condemn them to that status.

A settlement will not take place without a
modicum of compromise based on tolerance and
mutual respect. One element that has been
unanimously endorsed, including by those who
formerly were irreconcilably skeptical - the Vision of
two independent States, Israel and Palestine, living side
by side in peace and serenity - is no longer a
delusion. It would seem that the commitment of the
United Nations and the international community must
help them to reach that goal as soon as possible.

