Mr. Melescanu (Romania): I thank Indonesia for
organizing today's debate on a topic that is extremely
relevant for us.

Romania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

Our discussion is taking place at a very opportune
time and represents the tribute we can pay on the
occasion of the twentieth anniversary ofresolution 1265
(1999) -the first Security Council resolution addressing
the protection of civilians during armed conflict.
By adopting that resolution, the Security Council
recognized that civilians account for the vast majority
of casualties in armed conflicts and are increasingly
targeted by combatants and armed elements. This
year also marks the seventieth anniversary of the four
Geneva Conventions - a cornerstone of international
humanitarian law. Their adoption in the aftermath of
the Second World War firmly established that those who
are no longer taking part in hostilities - the wounded,
sick, prisoners of war and civilians, including those
living under occupation - must be protected and their
life and dignity upheld without adverse distinction. We
thank the Secretary-General for submitting today's
report (S/2019/373) with all of our achievements and the
challenges we face. Allow me to share with the Council
some aspects of my country's contribution to the efforts
of the United Nations system to protect civilians.

As a contributor to peacekeeping operations
for more than 28 years, Romania always organizes
prior to the deployment of the contingent under the
United Nations flag a rigorous three-month training
programme, in which the protection of civilians and
respect for human rights are cornerstone subjects.
Romania is currently engaged with the majority of
individual police officers and military personnel in
peacekeeping missions with a protection-of-civilians
mandate. I am referring to Haiti, Mali, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and South Sudan. We appreciate the Secretary-
General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which
was launched in September 2018. The Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations has been endorsed by more than 150 States
Members of the United Nations, including Romania,
which is a clear reflection of the importance we attach
to it.
Romania also endorsed, on 1 April, the political
declaration of the protection of medical personnel in
armed conflict, initiated by France in 2017. When we
address the various aspects of the issue of civilians in
armed conflict, we are also referring to the risks and
problems faced by children. We endorsed the Safe
Schools Declaration, the Paris Commitments and Paris
Principles on Children Associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups and the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers.

For our point of View, women also require special
protection measures. One of the most important
measures is to deploy as many women as possible in
peacekeeping missions. I am proud to tell the Council
that in our contingent of military observers and staff
officers, 17 per cent are women. We strongly support the
Secretary-General's proposal about developing national
policy frameworks for the protection of civilians.

Before concluding, I would like to reiterate that
my country is committed to contributing effectively
to the implementation of the decisions and mandates
established by the Council, to which we are a candidate
for this year's elections.

