Mr. Kawamura (Japan): We are delighted to
present the draft annual report of the Security Council
to the General Assembly. 1 would like to express my
appreciation to each and every Member State concerned
for their spirit of cooperation and flexibility during the
process of preparing the report.

My appreciation also goes to the Secretariat,
especially the Security Council Affairs Division, for
their deep institutional knowledge and precious advice
as we worked on the draft.

As the President of the Security Council for
the month of July 2016, Japan was responsible for
coordinating the preparation of the introduction of the
draft report. Implementing the note by the President of
the Security Council of 10 December 2015 (S/2015/944),
the draft report before the Council covers the period
from 1 August 2015 to 31 December 2016. The
17-m0nth coverage period is a transitional arrangement
and, as stipulated in the presidential note, the period of
coverage for all future reports shall be from 1 January
to 31 December.

The report includes key activities, meetings and
decisions taken by the Security Council to maintain
international peace and security during the reporting
period on the items of which the Council is seized.

In summarizing a wide array of Council activity
over the period of 17 months, we intended to be as
objective as possible, while making utmost efforts to
describe the context in which the Council's actions
were taken, in order to enhance the transparency and
accountability of the work of the Council.

The draft report is the product of a rigorous
coordination process. The report is a Council document
and, in accordance with the note S/2015/944, the
introduction should be approved by all members of the
Council that served on the Council during the period
covered by the report.

Japan considers that the annual report forms an
important part of the work of the Security Council,
as required by Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations, and hopes that this volume will be a useful
reference for Council members, the wider membership,
the Secretariat and all who serve the maintenance of
international peace and security.

