Mr. Frommelt (Liechtenstein): We thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Coomaraswamy, and
her Office for their dedication to advancing the work of
the United Nations on this topic. The report
(S/2007/757) makes again for disturbing reading. We
are alarmed by the escalating number of systematic and
deliberate attacks on schools with weapons having
indiscriminate effects such as cluster munitions, as
well as by evidence suggesting that camps for
internally displaced persons are one of the prime
recruiting grounds for child soldiers.

Security Council resolution 1612 (2005)
established a monitoring and reporting mechanism for
serious violations of the rights of the child at the field
level, as well as a Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict here in New York. As this decision has
proven to have a positive effect on the ground, we
believe it is important to keep the momentum to further
develop and enhance tools aimed at improving the
safety and security of children affected by armed
conflicts.

In accordance with resolution 1612 (2005), the
monitoring and reporting mechanism provides reliable
information on situations listed in annexes I and II of
the report, including the recruitment and use of child
soldiers, killing and maiming of children, rape and
other grave sexual violence against children, illicit
exploitation of natural resources, abduction of children
and the denial of humanitarian access. However, only
one out of these six grave violations - the recruitment
and use of child soldiers - currently triggers the
inclusion of countries in annex I of the report. We
believe that the role of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism could be significantly enhanced if other
violations were accorded the same effect and if all
types of violations were given equal weight.

It is, in fact, difficult to understand how
differential treatment of grave violations of children's
rights in various conflicts can be compatible with the
universality of human rights and the principles of
international humanitarian law. Political considerations
must not override the fundamental rules of protection
for the most vulnerable members of society. To further
strengthen the monitoring and reporting mechanism,
we welcome the information provided by
non-governmental organizations and call for the
inclusion of a child protection adviser in the mandate
of all future peacekeeping missions and, where
appropriate, political missions.

Any measures taken by the Working Group in
response to grave violations of the rights of the child
have to be complemented by effective enforcement. An
option in this regard is the expansion of the Working
Group's mandate to recommending targeted measures,
including arms embargos, bans on military assistance
and the imposition of travel restrictions on individuals.
Moreover, we support the recommendation in the
Secretary-General's report that the Security Council
refer violations of the rights of the child that fall within
the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court to
that Court for investigation and prosecution.

Liechtenstein has been actively involved in the
development of the United Nations mechanism to
address the plight of children affected by armed
conflict since its inception. As a member of the Group
of Friends of children affected by armed conflict, we
will continue to do so, and we hope that this open
debate will lead to the expansion of the criteria for the
inclusion of situations in annex I of the reports of the
Secretary-General, thereby improving the situation of
children in armed conflicts worldwide.

