Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to thank
Mr. Atul Khare, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his very important briefing on
the progress of nation-building efforts in Timor-Leste.
I also warmly welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Jose Luis Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste, and thank him for his valuable statement
this morning.

First of all, our sincere congratulations go to the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste on the
ceremony commemorating the tenth anniversary of the
popular consultation, held on 30 August this year. Over
the past 10 years, there have been periods that have not
been the best of times for the newly independent
country; several huge challenges culminated in the
crisis of spring 2006. However, the strong
determination and efforts of the people of Timor-Leste,
with the support of the United Nations and the
international community, have enabled the nation to
make progress towards being a peaceful and stable
country.

We are encouraged by the steady building of
democratic governance in Timor-Leste. That progress
was well demonstrated in the recently held suco -
community leaders - a elections organized throughout
the country. According to our report, Japanese electoral
observers were so impressed by voters patiently
waiting to exercise their right to cast their ballots to
choose their own local leaders. That is democracy in
8
action. We hope that the democratic culture will
continue to take root, not only at the national level, but
also at the municipal and local levels. The valuable
support provided by the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) for these successful
elections is greatly appreciated.

It is a sound democracy in which political leaders
can have an exchange of views and set forth their
arguments openly in parliament. We appreciate and
support the efforts of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative and Deputy Special Representatives,
while respecting the sovereignty of Timor-Leste, to
maintain daily contact with political leaders and
encourage them to resolve issues through the
democratic process.

The security situation is moving in the direction
of greater stability, with the assistance of UNMIT and
its tireless efforts. We are particularly pleased at
several positive developments, such as the closure of
all camps for internally displaced persons without
major incident, the judicial proceedings for the
suspects in the 2008 assaults on the President and the
Prime Minister, and the reintegration of the so-called
petitioners. We agree with the cautiously optimistic
assessment made by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2009/504).

The stable security situation has been made
possible by the presence of UNMIT since its
establishment in August 2006. UNMIT has been
conducting law enforcement on an interim basis and
helping to rebuild the National Police Force of Timor-
Leste (PNTL). We are pleased at the recent
reassumption of responsibility by the PNTL in three
districts and at the Police Academy as the fruit of those
efforts. Japan supports the approach taken: that the
reassumption of responsibility by the National Police
should be based not on an artificial timeline, but on
whether it meets the stipulated criteria. We wish to see
further progress in other districts based on that
approach. It is important to emphasize a clear
delineation between the role of the national police and
the defence force, the Falintil-Forcas de Defesa de
Timor-Leste (F-FDTL), as underscored in resolution
1867 (2009).

We certainly acknowledge the essential role that
the F-FDTL played in the process of achieving
independence. However, as part of achieving a stable
and prosperous democratic nation, Timor-Leste must
deal with the challenge of defining the new role that
the country's armed forces should play in peacetime
and of maintaining effective civilian oversight. From
our experience after World War II, we in Japan are
convinced of the importance of civilian control of the
defence forces as a fundamental pillar of the stability
and prosperity of nations. We acknowledge the positive
contribution made by the Secretary-General's Deputy
Special Representative for Security Support and Rule
of Law to the discussion in Parliament of the drafts of
three security-related laws.

It is our view that United Nations support for
Timor-Leste is beginning to bear fruit. Timor-Leste is
moving out of the emergency phase and entering a
period of transition on the way to achieving
self-sustainable stability, the rule of law, a working
justice system and socio-economic development. The
country is enjoying sound economic growth. It may
very soon be possible to review the structure of
UNMIT, so that it can correspond more closely to the
current needs of the country.

Naturally, some elements still require careful
monitoring, and we must be prudent in order to avoid
hasty action that might undermine the success we have
achieved so far. We therefore look forward to the
technical assessment mission that will formulate
recommendations to be included in the Secretary-
General's next report. It would be helpful if that report
included a review of the role of the Mission from the
mid-to-long-term peace- and nation-building perspective.

Lastly, I would like to pay tribute to the personal
contributions of Mr. Khare for what he and his able
team have achieved in UNMIT since 2006. We greatly
regret that Mr. Khare is soon to leave the Mission and
wish him well in his future endeavours. We are
convinced that UNMIT will continue to do its best to
support Timor-Leste in its nation-building efforts,
building on the path paved by Mr. Khare. As a staunch
supporter and a good neighbour, Japan will spare no
effort to aid in a successful nation-building process for
Timor-Leste.

