Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, Sir, allow me to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I am confident that your expertise and
skill will lead the Council to the success for which we
all hope. I should also like to express thanks and
appreciation to my brother Mr. Mikhail Wehbe for the
distinguished manner in which he conducted the affairs
of the Council last month. In addition, I should like to
express to you, Mr. President, and to other Council
members our appreciation for your quick response to
our request to convene this open meeting to discuss the
grave situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories - a situation that has so seriously
deteriorated because of Israel's occupation of nearly all
the cities of the West Bank, its refusal to implement
Security Council and other United Nations resolutions,
and the fact that it has never really heeded those
resolutions or taken them seriously, which has led to
continued conflict and bloodshed.

The world followed the premeditated, deliberate
Israeli shelling of a heavily populated residential
quarter of Gaza City that claimed the lives of 15
persons - nine of whom were children - and injured
more than 100 civilians, including women and
children. No logic can justify this heinous crime that
Israel has committed; it is a terrorist act that cannot be
justified under any pretext. It is a heavy blow to all the
efforts that have been undertaken to put an end to
violence and to press the parties to the conflict to
resume peace negotiations in order to restore peace and
stability in the region.

Despite the international and regional efforts
under way to end the violence and to create conditions
conducive to the resumption of the peace process,
despite the contacts between the Israeli and the
Palestinian parties to calm the situation, and despite the
many declarations by a number of leaders of
Palestinian forces expressing their readiness to end the
suicide attacks, provided that Israel commit itself not to
kill Palestinian civilians, the premeditated Israeli
shelling of residential buildings in Gaza and the murder
of their residents reflect Israel's unwillingness to calm
the situation or to seek peace and stability. Israel's
intransigence and its predetermined resolve to resort to
a policy of excessive force - regardless of its
catastrophic results and of the retribution and revenge
associated with hatred - in the hope of sanctifying its
occupation, has led to the exacerbation of the situation.
Israel's insistence on occupying the Palestinian
territories and on expanding its settlements there, its
Judaization of the occupied Palestinian cities and the
imposition of its laws and jurisdictions by force,
contrary to resolutions of international legitimacy, in
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention and failing
to respect the Palestinian people's human rights, all
confirm Israel's lack of seriousness with regard to
bringing about peace with the Arabs.

Faced with the Israeli occupation and Israel's
premeditated acts of murder - acts that Israel not only
has admitted but apparently takes pride in; faced with
the deliberate and systematic destruction and the siege
imposed on the Palestinians, with summary detentions,
the annexation of Palestinian territories, settlement
expansion and the imposition of unjust laws, as well as
attempts to erode the peace process; faced with
continued despair and devastating frustration, with the
international community's failure to compel Israel to
submit to international legitimacy, with the Security
Council's failure to force Israel to respect its
resolutions or even to work to protect the Palestinian
people so that Israel will end its assassinations,
destruction, confiscation of land and siege; and faced
with Israel's attempts to ignore all commitments and to
circumvent all agreements; faced with all that, the
Palestinians ask what their choices are. What is the
value of the life of humiliation, deprivation and
injustice that they endure? No one would accept the
murder of innocent civilians, regardless of their
nationality or religion. But violence cannot be ended
by continuing the assassinations and the destruction
and by erecting security barriers and ethnic shields.

History shows that official violence will only
beget more violence, and that peace can be attained
only in an environment conducive to the advancement
of the peace process. There is no alternative to ending
the occupation and to implementing the peace strategy
based on the Madrid Conference and confirmed by the
Saudi initiative adopted at the Beirut Summit. Israel's
withdrawal from the Palestinian territories that it has
occupied since September 2000 would end the
violence. Its withdrawal from all Arab territories
occupied since 4 June 1967, and the establishment of a
sovereign Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its
capital, would bring about peace and stability.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia condemns the
heinous act of aggression perpetrated by the Israeli
forces in Gaza. It also condemns all Israeli practices
that ignore the most fundamental human rights. It calls
upon the international community to shoulder its
responsibility with regard to this grave situation, which
threatens international peace and security, and to move
immediately and resolutely to confront Israel with its
responsibilities in conformity with relevant Security
Council resolutions and international conventions.
Israel must give up its policy of systematic Violence
and coercion, and must be compelled to work to bring
about conditions conducive to peace.

The current situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories is extremely critical in the light of its
possible repercussions not only on the efforts for peace
in the region but also on the peace and stability of the
region as a whole. We cannot remain silent; we cannot
accept such occurrences as commonplace in the
occupied Palestinian territories. We cannot simply
continue day after day to count the killed and wounded.
This tragic situation requires that the international
community - in particular the Security Council - act
with determination and sincerity to avert the
unpredictable dangers that threaten the region's future.

