Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I thank the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his substantive briefing.
We fully support the work of Mr. Mladenov as an
objective broker.

We in Moscow we are very carefully following the
development of the situation on the Israeli-Palestinian
track. We are convinced that resolving the Palestinian
question is of fundamental importance for the long-
standing normalization of the situation in the Middle
East. No other regional challenges can obscure that fact.

The ongoing stalemate in the political process is of
deep concern to us. Under those conditions, any kind of
unilateral act increases the risk of unleashing a spiral
of conflict and makes it more difficult to relaunch
direct Palestinian-Israeli negotiations. Washington's
recent decisions on Jerusalem were met with serious
criticism, which turned into mass protests. That is
understandable given that Jerusalem is the cradle of the
three monotheistic religions and is the most sensitive
issue in the peace process architecture - as well as the
fact that the question of the status of the city needs to be
considered on the basis of well-known internationally
recognized parameters, within the framework of
a bilateral dialogue between the Palestinians and
Israelis. We call upon all parties to show restraint and
to refrain from any actions that could be fraught with
dangerous consequences.

We must not forget that precisely such a method
of settlement was approved in many Security Council
resolutions adopted in recent decades. They remain
fully in force today. Against the background of the
settlement activity by Israel, the provocative rhetoric
on both sides, the outbursts of violence and the difficult
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, we continue
to hear about the erosion of a possible realization of
the two-State solution to the Palestinian problem. At
the same time, we remain committed to a resolution
that provides for an independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side
in peace and security with Israel. And West Jerusalem
will be the capital of the State of Israel.
We welcome the further consolidation of the unity
of the Palestinian people with the assistance of the
Egyptian leadership. We consider it a step in the right
direction. For our part, we will continue encouraging all
Palestinian parties to overcome their internal divisions
as quickly as possible.

A just and comprehensive settlement in the Middle
East is something that can be achieved only if there
is a firm international legal basis, which includes the
Security Council's relevant resolutions, the Madrid
principles and the Arab Peace Initiative. Russia will
continue acting both on a bilateral basis and through
the Middle Eastern Quartet of international mediators
to help to intensify international efforts in the quest to
find a way out of the current impasse in a resolution to
the Middle East question. We think that the energetic
role played by the regional players, in part by Egypt
and Jordan, is important. At the same time, we need
to ensure a fully functional United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
That is the main mechanism for alleviating the burden
of the Palestinian refugees in the Middle East and,
ultimately, it is extending assistance to those Arabs
States where the refugees find themselves.

We believe that, in the current conditions, including
those throughout the whole region, the issue of moving
as quickly as possible to revive direct Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations is becoming increasingly topical. We
therefore reiterate the relevance of our proposal to
convene a summit in Russia between the leaders
of Palestine and Israel. We are ready to be honest
mediators. Russia supports trust-based and friendly
relations with all the peoples in the Middle East without
exception 4 Israelis, Palestinians and Arabs. Our
relationships are not burdened by the negative heritage of
the past. Russia's policy has never included colonialism
or interference in the internal affairs, which, let us be
honest, became the reason of the lamentable situation
that we have in the region today. But we cannot give
up. Let us look to the future. The priority tasks remain
the same - pooling our efforts, fighting terrorism and
settling the regional crisis. Implementing the proposal
of Foreign Minister Lavrov to conduct a comprehensive
review in the Security Council on the situation in the
Middle East would help to resolve this task. We are
ready for such cooperation.

