Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to thank Mr. Pronk for the briefing he has
just given to the Council. In his briefing, as well as in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2006/728), we
noted a number of encouraging points that I would like
to mention at the outset, with respect to southern
Sudan. The stability of the security situation and the
humanitarian situation is a positive element, because
without that, no progress would be possible. Yet we
must not forget the stark situation in southern Sudan,
as alluded to by the Special Representative, and the
scope of the development challenges posed in that
region.

Implementation of the security elements of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement is encouraging. In
Juba last June, the Security Council mission noted the
operation of the Ceasefire Joint Military Committee.
The withdrawal of armed forces from certain areas
where they had previously been deployed was
generally done in accordance with the Agreement and
constituted a step in the right direction.
With respect to the east, the holding of talks
offers hope that there will be a peaceful resolution of
the problems in that area, without, we hope, going
through the trials that other outlying areas of the
country have had to endure.

Finally, we hope that the 26 August signing of a
cessation of hostilities agreement between the
Government of Uganda and the Lord's Resistance
Army will help improve the security situation for the
people of the southern Sudan.

In spite of those elements, which we welcome, it
is clear that the peace process in the southern Sudan
remains very fragile. In addition to security questions,
there has been considerable delay on a number of key
elements of the Agreement - at least those on which
there is not total deadlock. That is of even greater
concern as those different areas, in particular the
wealth-sharing and power-sharing, are issues that touch
upon the root causes of the conflict.

I would like to recall that the United Nations has
agreed to send troops to southern Sudan, in an effort
that is not only large-scale, but also long-term. The
timetable initially set out in the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement had a duration of more than six years. Thus,
we must ensure that the effort will not continue
indefinitely. Here, I would be grateful to Mr. Pronk if
he told the Council whether - apart from the
rescheduling of national elections from 2008 to
2009- that timetable could be jeopardized by the
current delays.

My delegation is sorry to note that the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) continues to
encounter a number of administrative difficulties,
sometimes in spite of the terms of the status-of-forces
agreement. It seems to us that eliminating those
difficulties would be the first - and undoubtedly the
simplest - measure that the Government of National
Unity could take to accelerate the implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

Finally, my delegation would like to reiterate its
very deep concern with respect to the situation in
Darfur. In that regard, Mr. Pronk has described some
disturbing developments and their consequences for the
civilian population.

My delegation recently had an opportunity to tell
the Security Council what its position is on the subject
and, in particular, to emphasize the need to continue to
make steadfast efforts, in particular with respect to the
Sudanese Government, so that the United Nations will
be able to take over from the African Union operation
as quickly as possible in accordance with resolution
1706 (2006).

I would like to ask Mr. Pronk a question. We have
noted the elements he set out regarding the very
difficult situation with respect to the Darfur Peace
Agreement, inter alia because a number of groups have
not agreed to sign it. I would like to ask Mr. Pronk for
some details on how, through the new discussions with
the parties that he mentioned, those who did not sign
the Darfur Peace Agreement could be persuaded to join
it.

