Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): It is a pleasure to speak
in the Security Council under your able presidency,
Sir. We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2015/684), and we greatly appreciate the briefings
provided to the Council by Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and by Mr. Yuri
Fedotov, the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime at Vienna. Likewise, it is
always instructive to hear the remarks of our brother
Ambassador Zahir Tanin of Afghanistan.

This debate is taking place at another crucial
moment for Afghanistan and the region, as the country
faces imposing economic, security and political
challenges. In recent weeks, the security situation in
Afghanistan has deteriorated significantly, with violent
attacks in Kabul and across the country. Pakistan
condemns all terrorist violence in Afghanistan. There
can be no justification for such attacks, which kill
innocent children, women and men.

In Afghanistan, as elsewhere, there are two
possible paths to ending war and violence: a military
victory over the insurgents or a negotiated peace.
There is general consensus within the international
community that peace can be best restored through a
negotiated solution with the Afghan insurgency, led by
Tehrik-e-Taliban. UNAMA's call earlier this morning
for renewing direct engagement between the parties to
the conflict is further confirmation of that approach.

Several avenues for reconciliation have been
explored over the years, in Doha and elsewhere.
Obviously, reconciliation and dialogue has to be
between the Afghans themselves: it has to be owned and
conducted by Afghans. External parties can facilitate
reconciliation, but they cannot impose a solution.

My country's priority remains to defeat the terrorists
whom we are confronting. They are responsible for
hundreds of attacks against civilian and security
targets in Pakistan. They have killed over 64,000 of
our citizens and security personnel, including innocent
children at a school in Peshawar.

Our military campaign, Zarb-e-Azb, and
Pakistan's multidimensional national action plan have
degraded those terrorist groups and have flushed out
and eliminated those trying to use our territory for
their violent agendas. Their infrastructure in North
Waziristan and adjacent areas has been destroyed.
Their few remaining hideouts in the Shawal Valley and
other isolated redoubts are under consistent and strong
attack.

It was at the request of His Excellency President
Ashraf Ghani that my country undertook to facilitate
a dialogue between Kabul and the Afghan Taliban.
Our sole aim was to establish direct contact between
them and the National Unity Government. The first
round of intra-Afghan talks was hosted in Murree on
7 July. Representatives of China and the United States
observed those talks. The objective was to ensure
transparency and impartiality. The outcome of that
round was encouraging. Both the Afghan Government
and the representatives of the Taliban agreed to
continue the dialogue. A specific date, 31 July, was set
for the second round of talks. But a few days before
that date, there occurred certain developments, which
are well known to all Council members and whose
consequences were predictable. Those developments
led to the rupture of what could have been a promising
peace process. The Afghan Taliban was unable to return
to the table. Equally inevitably, the level of violence in
Afghanistan escalated, including a series of attacks that
which claimed hundreds of innocent lives. Pakistan
unequivocally condemned all those attacks. But we
were shocked and saddened when some in Afghanistan
chose to lay the blame for the escalating violence on my
country. Our efforts to encourage the Taliban leaders
to revive the dialogue should not be misconstrued as
any form of endorsement for their revived violence
following the scuttling of the intra-Afghan talks. There
are vast uncontrolled areas in Afghanistan from where
such violence emanates against both Afghan targets
and against Pakistan.

Pakistan has refrained from responding to the
allegations made by certain Afghan quarters. On the
contrary, my Prime Minister dispatched our national
security adviser to Kabul on 4 September to reaffirm
Pakistan's desire to assist Afghanistan's reconciliation
process as well as to take part in the sixth Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference for Afghanistan.

We have declared that Afghanistan's enemies are
also enemies of Pakistan. We should both be clear
on who these enemies are. Those who are working
overtime to sabotage and poison Pakistan-Afghanistan
relations are really no friends of Afghanistan. Pakistan
is very clear in its conviction that continued conflict
in Afghanistan is not in our national interest. Peace in
Afghanistan and cooperation with Kabul will enable
us to fully defeat our common threat from violent
groups. It will pave the way for the voluntary return
of the millions of Afghan refugees we still host, which
represents the most protracted presence of refugees in
any single country in recent history. It will open the
way for the ambitious plans for regional development
and integration we have jointly worked for and on.

In conclusion, let me say that we seek peace,
friendship and cooperation between Pakistan and
Afghanistan. Mutual respect for each other's national
interests and sensitivities must be the bedrock of our
future relationship.

