Ms. Bavdai Kuret (Slovenia): I would like
to begin by thanking the Kuwaiti presidency for
organizing today's open debate. We want to commend
you personally, and your whole delegation, for your
excellent work in chairing the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Matters and
for the draft presidential notes regarding issues related
to specific working methods. I would also like to
the briefers.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group, of which Slovenia is a
member, and I would like to add some remarks in my
national capacity.

As a member ofthe ACT group, but also individually
as a State Member of the United Nations, Slovenia has
always asserted that for the Security Council to be
successful and effective, it has to be transparent and
efficient in its work. We understand that many of the
specific improvements regarding working methods
have been agreed on by Council members, and I want
to add how important those improvements are. I will
mention just a few.

Consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries are essential if the Council wants
peacekeeping operations to be effective and successful.
The Security Council should listen to Member States
that deploy their personnel and address any open issues
accordingly. In our View that will make operations
and missions better prepared, carried out, tailored and
hopefully shorter.

We also encourage continued interaction with
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), which
unquestionably adds a dimension that makes for better-
informed decisions. At the same time, interaction
with civil society, especially women's groups, as my
colleagues from Canada and Italy mentioned, is very
important. We therefore urge for including more of
such briefers. They can provide useful first-hand
information from the ground while receiving guidance
from Council members. We encourage the continuation
of this kind of dialogue.

We strongly support including newly elected
members in the Council's work in advance of their
formal membership as much as possible and exploring
additional ways to promote even greater participation.
It is in the interests of all member States of the Security
Council, as well as the broader membership, to have
new members who come fully informed, prepared and
able to start working constructively from day one.

Wrap-up sessions are very valuable to the
wider membership. Not all States are able to follow
every debate, and wrap-ups, besides giving us
useful information, also provide us with the unique
perspectives of individual Council members. We can
only encourage each presidency to plan for a wrap-up
that is as interactive as possible and to include them in
the programme of work.

As the representative of Switzerland pointed out,
there are some difficult outstanding issues on which
we would like to see more progress. For example, the
General Assembly's discussion on the annual report of
the Security Council should be more substantive and
should allow for an honest exchange of views. We add
our voices to those calling for the timely submission of
the 2018 report.

In our view, the issue of responsibilities of Security
Council members should be addressed honestly and
transparently. We do not believe that the Council, with its
obviously unequal distribution of burden-sharing, can
be called transparent. All Member States should have
the possibility to be penholders, and there can be more
than one penholder on a single issue. We are happy that
we are already seeing more progress and greater shared
responsibility in that area, representing a foundation on
which the Security Council can build further.

We call for a consultative procedure for selecting
Chairs of subsidiary bodies that is as transparent
as possible. We also want to add our voice to those
who advocate for expanding the mandate of the
Ombudsperson. We believe that fairness and due
process are important factors when implementing
sanctions regimes. Resolution 1904 (2009) was an
important step forward in that regard, and we call for
further improvement in terms of the independence and
impartiality of the Office of the Ombudsperson and for
expanding it to other sanctions regimes besides that for
Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

We want to avoid situations where the Council is
unable to make decisions, including as a result ofthe use
of the veto. I would therefore like to reiterate Slovenia's
desire to see a strong Security Council that can make
and implement responsible decisions on behalf of the
international community, and to add our call to that of
others for Council members and the wider membership
of the United Nations to subscribe to and implement the
code of conduct of the ACT group.

As today's debate clearly shows, the Council's
working methods are of importance to the membership
of the Organization. It is the primary organ responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and
security, and we all want to see it efficient, effective
and transparent.

