The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.
We, too, wish to express our thanks to Mr. Tom
Koenigs, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, and Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive

Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime. We also welcome the presence of Mr. Massimo
D'Alema, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Italy, among
us today.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2007/ 152)
describes the current state of affairs in Afghanistan in
all its complexity. On the one hand, the report outlines
the commendable progress that the Government of
Afghanistan is making in several key areas, such as
reconstruction and development and the strengthening
of democratic institutions. On the other hand, the
report describes enormous challenges, including an
increase in insurgent activities, increasing cultivation
of opium poppy, slow progress in economic and social
development and widespread corruption.

The security problem is at the forefront of the
challenges facing Afghanistan and poses a serious
threat to nation-building. South Africa supports
political dialogue and encourages political solutions
and all efforts aimed at improving the security situation
in Afghanistan. We also support the efforts by the
Afghan security forces, with the cooperation of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), aimed
at maintaining security in Afghanistan. However, we
call on those forces to exercise caution and to avoid
causing civilian casualties in carrying out their
activities.

Concerning the issue of narcotics, the Secretary-
General's report draws a bleak picture of the situation
in Afghanistan. The report makes it clear that, despite
counter-narcotics measures adopted by the
Government, opium poppy cultivation and the drug
economy continue to grow. My delegation is concerned
at the upsurge in the illegal drug production and
trafficking linked to opium poppy cultivation and the
threat that it poses to the stability of Afghanistan. We
encourage the Government of Afghanistan to improve
its institutional capacity for service delivery and
development in support of viable alternatives to poppy
cultivation.

With regard to the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board, South Africa commends the
progress made within the context of that mechanism, as
it provides a framework for facilitating cooperation
between the Government of Afghanistan and the
international community. In that regard, we support the
full implementation of the Afghanistan Compact, with
full ownership by the Government of Afghanistan, and
we encourage the Government to translate that
ownership into further practical action.

We would like to stress the importance of
regional cooperation in achieving success in
Afghanistan. We are encouraged by improving
relations between Afghanistan and its neighbouring
countries, as mentioned in the report. The Secretary-
General's report noted an increase in trade between
Afghanistan and its key economic partners. In addition,
the report argues that neighbouring countries have
contributed extensive financial and technical assistance
to Afghanistan's infrastructure.

We commend that cooperation, as it is critical to
foster the trust required to achieve peace, security and
development in the region, including continued
cooperation between Afghanistan and Pakistan on
improving security in the border areas.

Finally, we believe that the best way to break the
cycle of challenges in Afghanistan is to continue what
the Government of Afghanistan, the international
community and UNAMA are already doing in that
country. My delegation supports the activities of
UNAMA and stands ready to assist Afghanistan on its
path to a stable and prosperous future.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Afghanistan.

