Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Please allow me to begin
by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of this
month's presidency of the Council, and by thanking
you for convening this meeting. I would also like to
congratulate Ms. Leila Zerrougui on her appointment
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, and I wish her the best
in her new role.

Fifty-three per cent of Afghans are under 18 years
of age. Tragically, these young people have grown
up in an atmosphere of war and violence. Despite the
unfortunate circumstances of their upbringing, these
young people are full of hope. They represent the future
of Afghanistan and will be the ones to carry forward
our Vision of a safe and Vibrant nation with growing
economic opportunities,and equality for its citizens,
male and female alike. My Government is committed
to ensuring our country's bright future by protecting
our children and fostering their development.

Children in Afghanistan suffer from the
consequences of the terrorism and Violence of the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and terrorist groups. These groups
are responsible for brutal acts against civilians, such
as the Taliban attacks that targeted girls' schools in
2012 using poisonous gas. Last year, 1,396 Afghan
children were killed or maimed. Seventy-four per cent
of all child casualties in Afghanistan are caused by the
aforementioned armed groups. Therefore, any course of
action that seeks to ameliorate the well-being of Afghan
children must also focus on diminishing the influence
of terrorism and extremism in Afghanistan.

Children are being coerced to serve in armed
conflict in Afghanistan by the very terrorist and
extremist groups that continue to commit heinous acts
against children. We have experienced devastating
situations in which children have been forced to carry
out suicide attacks or to smuggle weapons across the
border. The use of children as a weapon of war is an
atrocious crime that must be addressed with firm
conviction.
Just as the challenges for Afghan children need
to be recognized, so too does their progress. In
Afghanistan, we have seen encouraging progress in our
crucial efforts to protect our children and ensure their
promising future. I should like to cite some examples
of meaningful measures taken by the Government
of Afghanistan to protect and address the needs of
children in armed conflict.

First, in February the Ministry of Justice began
drafting a comprehensive legal code to protect Afghan
children. It consulted closely with UNICEF throughout
the process, and we look forward to a product that will
truly benefit the well-being of Afghan children. We
have also published our 2012 report on children and
armed conflict in Afghanistan, and we look forward to
hearing reactions.

Secondly, the Ministry of Justice has established
the General Directorate of Human Rights Protection,
which will serve to oversee the upholding of human
rights in all Government activities.

Thirdly, we have expanded our birth registration
system to cover all 34 provinces. The expansion of this
system throughout Afghanistan will greatly improve
age verification procedures for recruiters so that they
can recruit in accordance with the Ministry of the
Interior's age requirement provision.

We must continue our efforts to prevent underage
recruitment in our armed forces. It is our goal to ensure
that 18 years is the minimum age for recruitment to
participate in police activity. To that end, we have
acted decisively. In 2011, Afghanistan's Ministry of
the Interior published an order mandating that "in no
circumstances shall individuals under 18 or over 35 be
recruited or deployed to military services".

Recruitment into armed forces is indicative of a far
greater problem facing children - lack of opportunity.
It is crucial that we reintegrate young people into
society and provide them with career opportunities. To
that end, we have created training centres for children
leaving military service to train for professional and
technical careers.

I am encouraged by the progress made by the
international community in protecting children in
Afghanistan and in other countries. In 2011, the Special
Representative reported that 10,000 children worldwide
were freed from their associations with armed groups
because of action plans established by the United
Nations and the parties involved in conflict.

All children deserve the right to live in a safe, secure
country that is rich with education and opportunity.
Since 2001, the Government of Afghanistan has been
implementing policies aimed at these objectives,
but there is still much work to be done. The Afghan
Government is fully committed to fostering a domestic
environment that will enable all Afghan children to
reach their full potential. That is that only way that
Afghanistan will be able to fully transition into a
peaceful, safe country for all.

