Mr. Munyambo: One year ago, when the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) last briefed
the Security Council on its policing contribution (see S/PV.7558), South Sudan found itself at a crossroads.
The 2015 Agreement on the Resolution ofthe Conflict in
South Sudan had been signed only a few months earlier.
Regrettably, despite the initial progress on ending the
fighting and starting the complex task of implementing
the Agreement, the July outbreak of fighting in Juba
between the Sudan People's Liberation Army and the
Sudan People's Liberation Army in Opposition dealt a
major setback to that progress. During the year, UNMISS
has faced some very significant challenges in its work
of protecting civilians and engaging communities in
South Sudan. Today I would like to focus on the unique
experiences of the United Nations police (UNPOL) in
South Sudan by outlining the challenges we continue to
face and the priorities we have identified for creating
the conditions necessary for peace in a very complex
peacekeeping context.

The protection of civilians is at the core of the
UNMISS mandate. Since the beginning ofthis conflict,
in 2013, close to 2.6 million people have been forced
to flee their homes, including more than 1.6 million
internally displaced persons (IDPs). Some 200,000
of these IDPs have sought refuge in United Nations
protection-of-civilian sites. New clashes of a varied
nature in multiple locations since July have left even
greater numbers of people displaced. Sadly, more than
16,000 children have reportedly been recruited by
armed actors. UNMISS has received several reports of
serious human rights violations and abuses, including
reports of the rape and gang rape of women and girls,
particularly in Juba and Wau, perpetrated by armed
men in uniform.

In this context, UNPOL is in the forefront of the
Mission's efforts to protect civilians in the UNMISS
protection-of-civilians sites in Juba, Bentiu, Malakal,
Bor and Wau, and those that are vulnerable outside our
sites. UNPOL operations include maintaining order
and a protective environment in those sites through
a permanent presence, regular cordon and search
operations for contraband, including weapons, access
control, and crowd control. These operations have
necessitated the establishment of holding facilities in
Malakal, Bentiu and Juba, which, in the absence of an
executive mandate and Government cooperation, has
presented unique challenges for UNMISS, with some
people subjected to long-term detention for as long as
up to two years.

A key enabling factor underpinning all UNPOL
activities in South Sudan is community engagement.
For example, in Juba, UNPOL conducts joint patrols
with the UNMISS force and other Mission components
outside the protection-of-civilians sites in order to
extend protection through a forward-leaning posture
and presence. This enables greater interaction with the
communities and has had positive effects in building
trust among the population and gathering information
that enhances policing. A recent innovative measure
is the establishment of a ZOO-metre weapon-free zone
around the protection-of-civilians sites in Juba, where
the Mission conducts confidence-building patrols and
regular search operations to get rid of weapons and
prevent armed elements from entering into the sites.

Despite our best efforts to proactively engage the
communities both within and outside the protection-of-
civilians sites, the security context in South Sudan is
placing significant demands on UNPOL. We are working
systematically to increase police numbers so as to
expeditiously reach the mandated ceiling. Importantly,
we are also working closely with the Secretariat and
Member States to attract police officers with the
requisite skill sets. In the current context, we need highly
skilled officers in the areas of information-gathering
and analysis, crime prevention and specialized issues
such as combating sexual-violence-related crimes.

Another priority for UNMISS is to improve
UNPOL's ability to address the potential future
crises that could result from South Sudan's political
situation. During 2016, UNMISS experienced several
major crises, beginning with the attack on the Malakal
protection-of-civilians site in February, followed by the
violence in Wau in June, and the heavy fighting in Juba
in July. These crises placed unprecedented demands on
UNPOL. In Wau, 32 individual police officers, together
with their military and civilian colleagues, successfully
managed to receive and protect more than 20,000 IDPs
who within a few days had assembled outside the
UNMISS base. Recognizing the scale of the escalating
situation, the Mission reinforced our police presence in
Wau with 60 formed police units from Bentiu. The fact
that less than 100 United Nations police personnel have
been able to maintain order in the Wau protection-of-
civilians site, which now houses close to 25,000 IDPs,
speaks to the professionalism, dedication and hard work
of our police officers.

The crises in Malakal and Juba, where the
protection-of-civilians sites and UNMISS premises
were either directly attacked or caught in heavy
crossfire, tested UNPOL. One lesson I have derived
from these experiences is the importance of ensuring
that all police officers have not only the relevant skill
sets but also the right mindset to respond quickly
and appropriately to a crisis situation. This requires
strong leadership, regular scenario-based training with
other Mission counterparts, and accountability. Since
July, UNMISS has taken several steps to improve the
ability of the force and UNPOL to respond robustly
when fighting erupts. We have adopted a new standard
operating procedure mandating formed police units to
respond both inside and outside protection-of-civilians
sites. We are regularly conducting joint scenario-based
training with the Force and the Department of Safety
and Security.

Despite our attention to improving performance,
much more can be done, in close partnership with the
Secretariat and Member States. Allow me to outline
three priorities for UNPOL that would help it better to
respond to the significant challenges I have presented
here today.

First, in order to improve UNPOL's operational
capacity, we are trying to attract more officers who are
trained to respond to protection needs, in addition to
formed police units with contingent-owned equipment,
including vehicles suitable for the terrain and security
threats, and sniffer dogs to assist with weapon searches.
This will significantly enhance UNMISS management
of protection-of-civilians sites, including crowd
management, access control, patrols and 24-hour police
post activities.

The second priority is aimed at enhancing
community outreach inside and outside protection-of-
civilians sites. With improved operational capacity, more
officers can be dedicated to enhancing communities'
ability to identify and respond to threats. Ifthe security
situation improves and more IDPs express an interest
in returning to their homes, UNPOL will resume its
pre-crisis plans to conduct confidence- and trust-
building patrols in identified areas for returnees.

Both of these areas will also be enhanced by the
third priority, which is to sensitize the local police force
to identify and respond to human rights violations.
UNPOL recognizes that the national authorities have
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians,
to investigate violations and to ensure that perpetrators
are held to account. Their role could be enhanced by
a strengthened national police presence in key areas
affected by the conflict, as stipulated by the peace
agreement, as well as working in a collaborative and
coordinated manner with UNMISS.

In conclusion, as we meet here today, South Sudan
finds itself yet again at a crossroads Where the peace
process is very fragile. It is our sincere hope that the
collective efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and the rest of the international community will assist
South Sudan in returning to an inclusive peace process,
which is a prerequisite for creating a peaceful, safe and
secure environment in the country.

