Mr. Mercado (Philippines): We join other
members in congratulating you, Madam, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May. We also congratulate
Ambassador Wang Guangya and the rest of the Chinese
delegation on their successful presidency during the
month of April. In addition, we would like to thank the
delegation of Brazil for preparing the report of the
Security Council mission to Haiti (S/2005/302) and to
pay tribute to the outstanding leadership of
Ambassador Sardenberg. The well organized four-day
mission that he led gave all of us a chance to view a
country in serious trouble.

Let me also take this opportunity, on behalf of
President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo and the people of
the Philippines, to thank the Secretary-General, the
Security Council, the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the Transitional
Government of Haiti for their statements of sympathy
and condemnation in connection with the death of a
Filipino peacekeeper at the hands of gunmen in the
slums of Cite Soleil. Ironically, the Security Council
was in Haiti during that time. It was the first combat
death of a Filipino peacekeeper in a United Nations
peace operation. That death, however, will not deter
the Philippines from continuing its participation in
MINUSTAH.

The Security Council mission to Haiti was an
eye-opener for all of us. What we saw first-hand in
Haiti was a sad reminder of the reality that all is not
well in that country. More than a year after the
international community jumped in with its lifeline,
Haiti continues to struggle in a sea of violence and
despair.

Although the mission did not bring with it a cure-
all formula for Haiti's myriad problems, we came with
a message of hope for the country and its people. Our
visit there was the strongest message that the Council
could convey to the Haitian people regarding the long-
term commitment of the international community to
give ordinary Haitians the chance to live normal lives
free from the violence, poverty and oppression with
which they have been conjoined since birth.

Security, or the lack of it, remains our most
serious concern. Although Haiti is more peaceful
compared with the same period last year as a result of
MINUSTAH reaching its authorized force level, the
situation remains volatile. Almost regularly, United
Nations peacekeepers receive small-arms fire from the
admixture of armed political partisans, criminals, street
youths and former members of the military, who also
subject ordinary Haitians to their own campaigns of
terror.

The Philippines has been an advocate of more
robust rules of engagement for United Nations
peacekeepers since the international community again
came to Haiti's rescue last year. An increased force
level with a more robust posture and clearly
demarcated responsibilities would allow MINUSTAH
to move quickly and effectively to neutralize elements
that continue to pose a danger to the security and
stability of Haiti. Disarming those armed elements will
have to be pursued in conjunction with an effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme if we are to look forward not only to the
holding of fair and peaceful elections before the end of
the year, but also to the delivery of much-promised
economic and development assistance to Haitians.

Human rights violations also remain a serious
concern, and concrete steps must be undertaken by the
Interim Government to put an end to illegal arrests and
detentions and to extrajudicial executions in order to
improve the country's human rights record. The
Haitian National Police, which has been accused of
human rights abuses, will also have to be retrained and
reformed to bring it up to professional standards.

Lastly, my delegation believes that more effort is
needed to pursue national reconciliation. As I speak,
former Prime Minister Yvon Neptune hovers near death
as a result of a hunger strike to protest his continued
detention over what he says are trumped-up charges.
We call on the Interim Government to consider, as a
gesture of reconciliation, withdrawing the charges filed
against him.

The task ahead for us in Haiti is not easy, but we
have no choice. We went in, and we must finish the job
this time.

