Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
In the context of the Security Council mission that will
visit Central Africa from 9 to 16 June, I should like to
refer to the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in Burundi.

Several years ago, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo experienced a situation of conflicts that we
are told, caused some 3 million deaths. The Security
Council immediately took up those conflicts, which
involved practically all of the countries of Central and
Southern Africa in one way or another. In close liaison
with the Secretary-General, the Council worked with
the parties signatory to the Lusaka Agreement, the
founding Agreement of the peace process concluded in
1999 and aimed at establishing the peace process and
moving it forward. The Council's efforts were
complemented by those of other international
institutions such as the Bretton Woods institutions,
which have become major actors in restoring peace in
the Great Lakes region.

But we must recognize that the international
community's efforts to restore peace to the Congo have
sometimes been frustrated. To the extent that
provisions were put in place to end the conflicts, the
conflicts seemed to adapt themselves and to resume in
a different form, a bit like a bacterium developing
resistance to medicines that are used against it. Thus,
we saw the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo transform. From a regional conflict motivated
by security concerns, it changed into an even more
complex, multifaceted crisis with other dimensions: a
domestic Congolese dimension; regional economic
stakes; and local conflicts in a situation of total
anarchy and human tragedy.

The complexity and the sometimes difficult-to-
understand nature of those conflicts are obviously not a
reason to give up, first of all because the human cost
would be alarming, but also because the peace process
that we are supporting is beginning to bear fruit. There
has been considerable movement towards the
withdrawal of foreign forces. A political transition
agreement has been signed among the Congolese. We
have begun to disarm foreign armed groups. That is
certainly not enough, because the withdrawal is not
complete, because the transition must truly be launched
and because the repeated rebel offensives in the east
are sabotaging the attempts to disarm the armed
groups. It is also not enough because progress at the
political level is still far from becoming real progress
in the life of the Congolese; massacres continue and
instability remains. However, we must build on that
progress so that the advances in the peace process are
consolidated and peace returns.

So what can we do today? The first thing we can
do is to make clear to all the parties to the conflict in
the region and in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo that it is their peace process. No one can make
peace for them. We can help them, but the restoration
of peace is their primary responsibility. Moreover, it is
in their interest. Perhaps some of the parties continue
to think they can gain some immediate advantage by
playing the military card either directly or by proxy,
but, beyond the very short term, everyone has an
interest in a negotiated political settlement in which the
legitimate concerns of all are taken into account. The
parties to the conflict have adhered to that logic by
signing the Lusaka, Kampala and Pretoria Agreements
and others, but now those agreements must be fully
respected and implemented.

It is not enough to explain to and remind the
parties of their commitments or, where necessary, to
apply political pressure on them to respect those
commitments. The Security Council must sometimes
undertake more concrete measures to help the parties
implement their commitments. That is the raison d'etre
for the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC),
deployed to facilitate the disengagement of the
combatants two years ago, the disarmament and
repatriation of armed groups last year and the
implementation of the Luanda and Pretoria Agreements
after that. Concrete measures should also be
undertaken to neutralize the forces driving the conflict.
That is the substance of the work accomplished by
Ambassador Kassem's Panel of Experts on halting the
plundering of the Congo's natural resources. Other
concrete measures aim to respond to urgent needs when
such measures are necessary: when we need to stop
massacres or when a situation becomes intolerable.

That then, is the basis for the Security Council's
role: a political message, on the one hand; action on the
ground, on the other. We cannot have one without the
other. Today, the Council is active in precisely those
two areas. We have just adopted resolution 1484
(2003), which authorizes the deployment of a
multinational force to Bunia. That force, established at
the Secretary-General's request, will have a mandate to
stabilize the situation in Bunia and help ensure the
security of the civilian population. Headed by France,
it will be deployed until 1 September, the time needed
to enable the Secretary-General to deploy a
strengthened MONUC contingent in that city.

Still, this emergency action cannot suffice. The
Council cannot limit itself to authorizing a coalition of
countries to send a multinational force to Bunia. The
Council must also strengthen the political framework
of the peace process - in short, it must give new
momentum to the process, which clearly has moved
forward, as I said earlier, but which needs to be put
back on track. This is precisely the goal of the mission
that the Council will be sending to Central Africa in a
little over a week, and which I will have the honour of
chairing.

The mission will have many messages to convey,
in particular to remind the Congolese parties of the
imperative need immediately to end military
operations. This is indispensable, as a major military
operation is being launched in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is also necessary
in order definitively to set in motion the process of the
disarmament and repatriation of foreign armed groups.

Another message will be to tell all those who
support armed groups, whoever they may be - rebels,
militias or foreign armed groups - that they must
immediately put an end to this type of support and stop
being engaged in conflict by proxy, and that they must
also prevent such support from being given.

The mission should also explain to the Congolese
parties, which, at long last, have reached agreement -
due to the personal involvement of President Mbeki
with respect to the modalities of the transition - that
they must now, without losing any more time, begin
that transition. The mission should also remind all the
parties that the wealth of the Congo must be used for
the benefit of the Congolese people.

In addition to these messages, we also need to
consider what potential confidence-building measures
we could propose. A good-neighbourly pact has been
suggested, which we should consider. There is also the
prospect of an international conference for the Great
Lakes region, in whose preparations Ibrahima Fall is
also involved. On the basis of what our interlocutors
will say to us, we will then identify the means available
to us to continue to assist the peace process, in
particular through MONUC. It is thus in the light of the
lessons learned from that mission that we will read the
report that the Secretary-General has just provided to
us, and which contains proposals on adapting this
peace operation's mandate to the latest challenges to
the peace process.

I should like also to touch upon the situation in
Burundi, where the mission will also go. Indeed, the
Council is less involved there than in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, simply because there is no
United Nations peacekeeping operation in that country.
Nevertheless, we are deeply concerned also by the
situation in Burundi, where, for two years now, the
Arusha agreement process has been under way. The
political transition envisaged in that agreement has
taken place, with the accession on 1 May of the former
Vice-President. This is testimony that the process is
working and that, more than ever, it must be supported.
It must be supported because there are real difficulties
facing the process, primarily the absence of a ceasefire.
This is a paradoxical situation: a peace process is being
established that encompasses more than 20 parties,
while the last rebels are continuing to fight. The
transition also needs to be supported because the
economic situation in the country is extremely difficult.
We all are aware that a key condition for the success of
a peace process is the provision of economic
assistance, which is indispensable to bringing about
peace.

In the near term, we must therefore strive to help
the Burundians to consolidate the Arusha process,
which is already irreversible. To do so, we will need to
provide answers to several questions: how to provide
our support to the establishment of the African
mission; how to induce the last rebels to join the
negotiations process; and how we can help the
Burundians to fight impunity. The mission, which will
spend an entire day in Bujumbura in order to meet all
the political players in Burundi and which will also
attempt to establish contacts with the last of the rebels,
will, I hope, help us to find answers to these difficult
questions.

