Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Let me thank the Bolivian
presidency of the Security Council for convening
this debate and for its successful chairmanship of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004).

My country aligns itself with the statements
made by the observer of the European Union and by
the representative of Spain on behalf of the Group
of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004). In my national
capacity, I would like to add the following remarks.

The risks of nuclear terrorism, the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and the related
materials and technologies have become a serious
threat and one of the major challenges to our common
security. The chances of these weapons falling into the
hands of unauthorized actors is particularly worrisome
and alarming in view of the rapid advancements in
science and technology.

Increasing threats emanating from terrorist groups
make the exploitation of security vulnerabilities with
criminal intent highly possible. Some actors have already
demonstrated readiness to acquire and use weapons of
mass destruction, as demonstrated in the reports by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism.

The threats posed by the proliferation of chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) weapons
and materials, as well as weapons of mass destruction
and related technologies, remains a subject of serious
concern for my country, not least due to the fact that
we neighbour the regions with a risk of proliferation.
In recent years, several attempts to smuggle nuclear
and radioactive materials through Georgia's occupied
regions were recorded. They were duly prevented by
law enforcement agencies. However, in the absence
of international presence inside those regions, it has
become virtually impossible to conduct any type of
verification activities on the ground, which increases
the risk of proliferation of WMD-related materials.

Political commitment is crucial in developing the
policies, strategies and systems to strengthen security
at all levels. In that regard, full compliance with the
obligations under the international arrangements,
such as the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention, the
Biological Weapons Convention, and resolutions 1540
(2004) and 2325 (2016) and others, must stand as a
priority for the international community.

Georgia believes that resolution 1540 (2004)
remains the main pillar and overarching legal
instrument in the multilateral non-proliferation
architecture. We co-sponsored the new resolution 2325
(2016), unanimously adopted on 15 December, which
clearly reaffirms that the proliferation of these weapons
constitutes a serious threat to international peace and
security and sets the basis for the pathway to achieve
the full implementation of the obligations of resolution
1540 (2004).

Georgia has been taking various measures to that
end. The Government established the National CBRN
Council, which, in consultation with the European
Union, the United States and the United Nations
Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute
(UNICRI), elaborated a national CBRN threat-reduction
strategy and a CBRN national action plan for 2015-
2019. Georgia is actively cooperating with the European
Union and UNICRI within the framework of the CBRN
Centres of Excellence to promote an integrated CBRN
approach across South-Eastern Europe, the Caucasus,
Moldova and Ukraine. A CBRN regional secretariat has
been opened and is now functioning in Georgia with
the aim of contributing to the success of this project.

With support from our partners and in close
cooperation with international experts, Georgia has
developed a new legislative base, in force since 2014,
for regulating its strategic export controls in full
compliance with European standards. The relevant
department in the Ministry of the Environment and
Natural Resources Protection has been transformed
into a public legal entity so as to increase its effective
independence of the regulatory body, and a new
department of radioactive-waste management has
been created, putting radioactive-waste storage and
disposal facilities under full State control nationwide,
and supported through the development of a relevant
legal framework.

To promote CBRN-related topics at the United
Nations, the Governments of Georgia, the Kingdom
of Morocco and the Republic of the Philippines have
established the United Nations Group of Friends of
CBRN Risk Mitigation and Security Governance.
The Group of Friends is a consultation and dialogue
forum with the goal of integrating a CBRN component
into the international security architecture, raising
States' awareness of the importance of mitigating
CBRN risks and fostering regional cooperation on
CBRN challenges. It also promotes activities aimed at
building capacity and developing capabilities between
and among partner States, as well as implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). It is our belief that by
promoting such joint efforts we can advance a robust
preventive system against the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction.

