Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for Rwanda's strong leadership of the Security
Council this month and for your country's significant
contribution to peacekeeping, a task to which Rwanda's
own history brings both deep empathy and an operational
determination. I also wish to thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing, and Ambassador Tete Antonio
and Mr. Maciej Popowski for their remarks. I also
want to recognize the indispensable role of the African
Union (AU) and the European Union (EU) as partners
in our collective efforts to maintain peace and security.
We were of course pleased to sponsor today's resolution
2167 (2014).

The need for effective cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations is self-
evident. No single organization alone can conduct
all the multifaceted tasks required to support and
consolidate peace around the globe.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations lies at the heart of peacekeeping.
Drawing on their unique strengths and distinct
comparative advantages, borne of their deep knowledge
of local context, cultural understanding and moral
authority, regional organizations are deploying, often
as first responders, into volatile environments to help
protect civilians and save lives. We have seen that
pointedly in places such as Somalia and in the Central
African Republic.

At a time when the world is torn by more
simultaneous peace and security crises than it has
for decades, when civilians in larger numbers are in
greater threat from conflict than at any time since the
Second World War, and as the demand for peacekeeping
therefore intensifies, we must accelerate our efforts to
foster predictability and trust in our partnerships. By
strengthening mechanisms for forthright dialogue at
both the strategic and operational levels, we can better
achieve unified views on key issues of mutual interest
and, importantly, translate them into tangible results on
the ground. That engagement should be anchored in the
knowledge that we cannot rely on ad hoc improvisation.
We must develop a broader strategy for anticipating and
responding to future challenges together. And we must
embed robust peacekeeping operations with protecting
civilians at their core.

As more regional organizations become involved
in peacekeeping, we must continue to strive for
greater coherence and inter-operability, as you said,
Sir, and greater structure. We need to enhance early
engagement between the United Nations and regional
organizations during the planning and transition phases
of a peacekeeping mission.

In our own region, Australia has seen the rewards
of inclusive cooperation and well-planned transition
between regional peace missions, host nations and
United Nations offices. The strong participation of
regional partner organizations in Solomon Islands, for
instance, and the transition to peace in Timor-Leste
after the drawdown of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation and the International Stabilization Force,
show that such arrangements can be highly instrumental.

Above all, we need to improve our collective
capacity for rapid deployment in response to emerging
crises and, critically, those that endanger civilians. No
organization has yet developed an enduring solution to
this persistent and increasing challenge. We welcome
the AU's progress in this area and the commitment
made by African leaders to operationalize the African
Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises. We call
on all Member States to support the development of
policies, guidelines, doctrines and training for the
African Standby Force as part of the African Peace and
Security Architecture.

The President's concept note (S/2014/478, annex)
for today's debate rightfully highlights the situation in
Africa. It is where 8 out of every 10 United Nations
peacekeepers are deployed and where so much of the
Council's attention is focused. We also acknowledge
the important role that the EU plays, having launched
some 30 peace missions and operations to contribute to
stabilization and security since 2003, including many
in Africa. Australia and the EU will soon conclude an
agreement providing the legal basis for Australia to
participate in the EU's Common European Security and
Defence Policy missions.

As today's resolution 2167 (2014) reminds us,
regional organizations are responsible for securing
their own human, financial and logistical resources, but
international partners must improve the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing for regional
organizations participating in peacekeeping under a
United Nations mandate. In doing so, our focus should
be on improving the capability ofregional peacekeepers
and on building a culture of efficiency, accountability
and transparency.

We must embrace cost-effective force-multiplying
technologies to strengthen the impact of peacekeeping.
By improving the technical standards of individual
units, we can improve inter-operability and boost
operational effectiveness at a relatively lower cost.

We must also invest more in our capacity to
undertake effective conflict prevention, mediation and
peacebuilding. Australia emphasizes the instrumental
role, indeed at times even decisive role, of policing
in multidimensional peacekeeping operations. We
reiterate that the role of women in peace and security
must be fully mainstreamed in all mandates. Without
the engagement of, and awareness of the effects of
conflict on, women and girls, there simply can be no
lasting solution to conflict.

In conclusion, we have witnessed a sharp increase
in demand for peacekeeping in recent years as
complex, often simultaneous, crises across the globe
have multiplied. We can expect that to increase; the
trajectory looks even worse. We must harness our
combined strengths to maximize our capacity to meet
those challenges. It is a simple truism that regional
organizations need a strong United Nations, and the
United Nations needs strong regional organizations.

