Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank you for convening today's meeting,
Mr. President. The Council has been very busy this
month, and China greatly appreciates the fact that
Venezuela has presided over our work efficiently and
smoothly. I would like to focus on three issues relating
to the Council's work this month.

First, on the Middle East, the Israeli-Palestinian
peace talks are currently at an impasse, the security
situation there is worsening and the humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory is serious.
China is deeply concerned about that. Preserving the
legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people
is the collective responsibility of the international
community, which should take stronger measures to
reactivate the Israeli-Palestinian peace talks, push
Palestine and Israel to resume them as soon as possible
and meanwhile strengthen cooperation with Palestine
and economic assistance to it with a view to alleviating
the humanitarian situation. The Council should respond
positively to Palestine and the Arab States' legitimate
aspirations and carefully study the issue of providing
international protection to Palestine, in order to play
a greater role in promoting the peace talks. China
welcomes all initiatives conducive to ameliorating the
situation and resuming peace negotiations.

Secondly, with regard to Syria, there has been good
progress recently in bringing in humanitarian assistance
and promoting a cessation of hostilities. Important
decisions were made at the ministerial meeting in Munich
of the International Syria Support Group regarding
expanding humanitarian aid and halting hostilities.
The Russian Federation and the United States reached
an agreement on ceasing hostilities, which China
welcomes. We call on the international community and
the countries of the region to continue to support the
mediation efforts of Special Envoy De Mistura and to
act together to push all the parties in Syria to accept
and implement the agreement as soon as possible, with
the aim of ceasing hostilities and resuming the Geneva
peace talks in order to create conditions conducive to
a rapid and appropriate settlement of the Syrian issue.

Thirdly, on South Sudan, good progress has
recently been made in implementing the agreement on
resolving the conflict in South Sudan. The Government
of South Sudan has declared that it is going to establish
a Government of national unity in the first week of
March. China highly appreciates the mediation efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD).

South Sudan has just started its peaceful
reconstruction, and there is a long and difficultjourney
ahead. It therefore needs strong support from the
international community. China hopes that the Council
and the international community at large will continue
to provide support to IGAD. Meanwhile, we actively
encourage all the parties in South Sudan to meet each
other half way and push for an early formation of a
transitional Government so as to restore peace, stability
and development in the country at an early date. China
will continue to play a constructive role in the political
settlement of the question of South Sudan.

Last but not least, I wish the delegation of Angola,
the incoming President of the Security Council, all the
best in the month of March.

