Mr. Onanga-Anyanga (spoke in French): Allow
me first and foremost to congratulate you, Sir, on your
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and for the excellent way in which Russia
has organized the FIFA World Cup. This being the era
of the selfie, I should have liked to take one with you
behind the ball on your desk.

I welcome the Security Council's unity with respect
to the prevailing situation in the Central African
Republic and the importance that the international
community continues to attach to that country, its
Government and its people. The participation in this
briefing of my sister, the Permanent Representative of
the Central African Republic; the Special Representative
of the African Union to the Central African Republic,
my brother Moussa Nebie; and of my friend Brigadier
General Herminio Teodoro Maio, Force Commander
of the European Union Military Training Mission in
the Central African Republic, sends a strong message
of the international community's commitment to
supporting the Central African Republic. It is indeed
essential that, in addition to the voices of the Central
African authorities themselves, the Council hear those
of all who are working together for the restoration of
lasting peace in the Central African Republic.

The most recent developments in the Central
African Republic since I last addressed the Security
Council in February this year (see S/PV.8187) and
again on 23 May, during a meeting on various items,
demonstrate the extent to which the Central African
Republic still needs the full commitment ofthe Security
Council. Since late February, the Central African
Republic has faced several outbreaks of violence, both
in Bangui and in the interior. However, while the capital
was the scene of violent clashes in April and early May,
there have recently been encouraging signs of calm.

The threat of attacks on Bangui by some radical
elements of the Front populaire pour la renaissance
de la Centrafrique (FPRC) have rekindled fears
among the population of the capital. Although the
robust stance of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) has prevented such threats
from materializing, this disturbing rhetoric has
unfortunately been exploited by shady political actors
who have sought to exploit instability and to fuel ethnic
and religious tensions.

Armed groups and factions continue to exert
a negative influence on large parts of the country,
particularly in the east, centre and north-west of the
country. Violent clashes among armed groups, such
as those that regrettably took place between the FPRC
and the Mouvement patriotique pour la Centrafrique
yesterday in Ndele, also continue to endanger the lives
of civilians.

In that highly volatile context, MINUSCA
continues to implement its mandate to protect civilians.
In fact, our daily work literally consists, in the words
of Dag Hammarskjold, in building bridges against the
breaking waves of violence and disintegration. This is
obviously no easy task. The Mission is overwhelmed
and its military, police and civilian personnel are the
targets of armed groups and criminal gangs, both in
the capital and in the countryside. The threats against
peacekeeping personnel continue to grow, as Council
members have read in the report before them today
(S/2018/611).

I therefore appeal for the Council's ongoing
support to ensure that MINUSCA has the capacity to
respond to the considerable challenges it faces daily.
The quality of its investment will be the best guarantee
for strengthening constitutional legitimacy and the
performance of MINUSCA in the effort to restore
the authority of the State. It will also be the best way
to prevent future disasters. To that end, every effort
has been made to reach the maximum level of force
authorized by the Council in resolution 2387 (2017).
These additional troops will strengthen our capacity to
protect civilians, in the spirit of the recommendations
of the report of the independent investigation by
Brigadier General (retired) Fernand Marcel Amoussou.
Their performance and good behaviour will remain
paramount for the Mission.

The current volatile security situation and
recurrent clashes among armed groups continue to
negatively affect the political process. Nevertheless, the
international partners remain committed to stabilizing
the country, particularly through the efforts of the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic. My brother and friend,
Special Representative Moussa Ne'bie, will provide
comprehensive insights on that issue shortly. I, for one,
wish to reaffirm the full support of the United Nations
and MINUSCA for that vital initiative for the return
of peace and reconciliation in the Central African
Republic

I would like to commend the strategic role of the
Peacebuilding Fund in supporting the implementation
of the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan and
the African Initiative. In addition, the first meeting of
the International Support Group on the Central African
Republic was held in Bangui on 11 April. The meeting
sent a strong signal to the people of the Central African
Republic by demonstrating that the international
community has not forgotten their fate and remains
committed to supporting the country's stabilization
and development efforts. The meeting of 11 April also
highlighted the importance of increased cooperation
among the countries of the subregion to ensure the
long-term stability of the Central African Republic.

I am also encouraged by the support of President
Touadera and of the authorities on the panel of facilitators,
including in meetings with armed groups, and by the
increased national ownership ofthe process. Ifit is to be
successful, the process must be inclusive and in keeping
with the spirit of the Constitution. It is therefore crucial
that other segments of the Central African society be
involved in the peace process and participate fully
in the ongoing stabilization efforts. What is at stake
is the search for the necessary consensus around the
social contract between the sons and daughters of the
Central African Republic so that the co-existence to
which they are deeply attached can become a reality in
a plural, united and reconciled nation. It will be equally
important to support the commitment of the African
Initiative panel to neighbouring countries to promote
coherent and sustainable subregional and regional
commitment to the stabilization and development of the
Central African Republic.

In that context, MINUSCA continues to work closely
working with the Government to launch local peace and
reconciliation initiatives in many prefectures, aimed at
reducing security threats and facilitating humanitarian
access. Religious, community, women and youth
representatives have played a ket role in the success of
these processes. These local peace plans also served
as the foundation for local disarmament programmes.
In Bangassou and Bria - cities that endured heavy
violence in 2017 - the local peace process has
encouraged the handover of over 1,000 weapons by
armed groups and the participation of these groups in
socioeconomic reintegration programmes. These local
peace initiatives and the results they have achieved
help create conditions conducive to the comprehensive
peace process led by the African Initiative.

(spoke in English)

The restoration of State authority throughout the
entire territory of the Central African Republic remains
key to stabilizing the situation and setting the country
on a path to long-term stability. The report before the
Council today spells out the substantial progress made
by the national authorities, including the deployment of
prefects and sub-prefects, as well as other sectors ofcivil
administration, with the support of the peacekeeping
mission, the United Nations system and the country's
other bilateral and institutional strategic partners. It is

important and essential that the State administration be
increasingly visible and effective in the interior of the
country. MINUSCA will continue to stand in support
of these Government efforts.

I am particularly encouraged by the progressive
deployment of magistrates in new areas of the country
and the opening of tribunals outside of Bangui.
Everywhere I have traveled in the Central African
Republic, I have heard a constant demand for justice to
help communities address criminality and to counter
the country's long, sad history of impunity. The
National Assembly recently adopted a law establishing
the rules of procedure and evidence for the Special
Criminal Court, as well as an amended law on the
Court's establishment, organization and functioning.
The judicial police officers attached to the Court have
been hired and started their work. Those steps should
allow the Court to commence investigations in the
near future.

Despite the slow but steady progress to rebuild
national courts, Central Africans have new hope that
the perpetrators of the gravest crimes will finally
face justice. Meanwhile, steps initiated by the Head
of State to advance transitional justice are also
encouraging. Justice and reconciliation must indeed
progress simultaneously.

The gradual deployments of the Forces armees
centrafricaines (FACA) and the gendarmerie and police
outside Bangui have also contributed to increasing the
State's capacity across the country. FACA units trained
by the European Union Training Mission are slowly
taking up positions in the interior of the country. In joint
operations with MINUSCA in Paoua, Obo and Sibut,
FACA has helped secure new areas, reduce violence by
armed groups and address criminal activity. We will
continue to work with the Government to ensure that
newly reformed units of the Central African Armed
Forces are professional and continue to reflect the
ethnic diversity of the country, as well as to ensure that
their deployments are coordinated with MINUSCA and
other partners, within the framework of planned reform
of the security sector. It is in that context that the
Secretary-General wrote to the Security Council, on
15 May, to ensure that MINUSCA's joint deployment
with FACA forms the core of both a successful security
response and an effective exit strategy.

I must once more bring to the Security Council's
attention the persistently dire humanitarian situation
in the Central African Republic. One in four Central
Africans has had to abandon his or her home. Nearly
700,000 people remain internally displaced, while
another 568,000 are refugees in neighbouring countries.
In the meantime, attacks against humanitarian workers
make the Central African Republic the deadliest
humanitarian context in the world. During the latest
outbreak of violence in Bambari, armed groups looted
the offices of several humanitarian agencies, forcing
them to suspend operations. The continuing attacks
on humanitarians severely undermine their ability to
provide vital assistance, with awful consequences for
the Central African population and the functioning of
essential social services in health and education.

The Central African people urgently need
the assistance of international partners to fill the
humanitarian funding gap. Only 4 per cent of the 2018
humanitarian response plan has been funded, leaving
many priority regions without assistance. That needs
to be addressed, and we are grateful for the continued
support of the Security Council.

The risk ofescalating violence in the Central African
Republic and the unnecessary suffering inflicted on
the population demand our continued full attention
and support. The country cannot afford more clashes
among armed groups seeking opportunity to pillage
and exploit natural resources. It is not too late to stop
that predatory behavior from eroding progress towards
building an effective, accountable and inclusive Central
African State. It is not too late to prevent religion and
ethnicity from becoming the driving factor of conflict.
At present, that is still the result of manipulation for
political gains, which finds echo among vulnerable
groups. It is by no means the general feeling among
Central Africans.

As long as the hands of the State - the bedrock
of legitimate force - are not stronger than the
illegitimate groups and criminal organizations, our
efforts to establish lasting peace and stability in the
Central African Republic will continue to be seriously
challenged. Central Africans remain desperate to see a
functioning State and an end to the criminal activities
of armed groups. While there are many positive steps,
the progress has still been too slow, for understandable
reasons, and remains under threat from those who seek
private gains through violence.

Together with the African Initiative and other
partners, MINUSCA will continue to support the
Central African Government to fulfil the legitimate
aspirations of the majority of Central Africans, from
all parts of the country and all communities, who hold
the hope for the country's future. Our resolve remains
strong, heeding the Secretary-General's call to all ofus
to remain engaged with a considerable dose of patience
and dedication and in a spirit of sacrifice. With the
support ofa united Security Council and region, we will
ensure that the vision and hopes of Central Africans for
lasting peace, stability and shared prosperity become
a reality.

