Mr. Widodo (Indonesia): May I begin, Madam,
by congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November. My delegation is convinced that, under
your able stewardship, the Council's deliberations will
result in a productive outcome.

While Indonesia remains unequivocally
committed to working with the international
community to eliminate international terrorism, it is
mindful that the situation in Afghanistan involves other
important aspects, the most urgent being on the
humanitarian front. It is in that respect that my
delegation wishes to express its appreciation for the
welcome convening of this open Security Council
debate to discuss the situation in Afghanistan,
particularly the looming humanitarian crisis of
catastrophic proportions that has faced the people of
Afghanistan during this conflict. For, even before the
events of 11 September, it was already apparent that
the Afghan refugee population constituted the world's
largest, with an estimated 4 million refugees living in
neighbouring countries and more than 1 million
displaced persons within Afghanistan's borders. Their
situation has, in our view, been further compounded, as
was rightly pointed out in the interim report of the
Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human
Rights on the situation of human rights in Afghanistan:

"Few people have suffered as the Afghans
Yet in early 2001, it seemed that they were
becoming a forgotten and abandoned people as
humanitarian crises in other parts of the world
diverted international attention and humanitarian
assistance". (A/56/409/Add.1, para. 4)
Indonesia shares the deepening concern of the
international community over the calamitous
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan. It is in that
context that the Government and the people of the
Republic of Indonesia, within their limited means and
capabilities, have extended humanitarian assistance
amounting to $500,000 to assist the Afghan refugees. It
was recently handed over by the Coordinating Minister
for People's Welfare, who personally travelled to
Pakistan to deliver the aid in close coordination with
the Pakistani Red Crescent Society and the
International Committee of the Red Cross.

The present situation is even more alarming
considering that the humanitarian crisis could worsen if
security in Afghanistan deteriorates any further. That
would impair the efforts of the humanitarian agencies
to reach the people most desperately in need of even
the basic necessities of life. We therefore urge all
concerned parties to exercise self-restraint and to end
the climate of strife and violence. It is imperative and
urgent at this hour to extend support for the endeavours
of the various United Nations agencies to deliver
humanitarian aid and other needed supplies to the
beleaguered population. At this crucial time, the
leaders of the various factions should set aside their
differences in the broader interests of their people and
should demonstrate political will, sagacity and a
genuine desire for peace.

Now more than ever, the United Nations has a
pivotal role to play in Afghanistan by promoting the
establishment of a broad-based multi-ethnic
Government representative of all the Afghan people. In
that regard, my delegation extends its full support to
the Secretary-General and to his Special Representative
on Afghanistan in their endeavours to assist the Afghan
people to establish a broad-based Government. The
time has also come for the international community to
marshal its efforts towards the reconstruction and
rehabilitation of Afghanistan. Bearing in mind that the
economic conditions in the country are inextricably
linked to peace and stability, it would require the
extensive input and commitment of the global
community. Meanwhile, the evolving developments on
the ground call for expedited interim arrangements to
be put in place, and it is hoped that the United Nations
will move to the forefront of these efforts.

Finally, Indonesia hopes that after long years of
conflict in Afghanistan, our concerted efforts will
contribute in a decisive manner to ensuring a peace
which is truly embedded in Afghan soil, as well as in
spirit. It should be a peace that fully respects the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Afghanistan and one that only its people can work
towards by engaging in constructive dialogue based on
compromise and cooperation. For its part, the Security
Council should remain seized of the situation in
Afghanistan until the untold sufferings of the Afghan
people are alleviated and a stable peace is permanently
anchored.

