Mr. Adorn (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Over
the past two years, I have had the honour to chair the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013), concerning the Central African Republic, and
the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations. I
would like to take this opportunity to take stock of my
tenure as Chair ofthe 2127 Committee and the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations.

With regard to the work of the Committee, I
would like to share my views on the implementation of
sanctions imposed by the United Nations and to share
some of my experiences and reflections that I hope will
contribute to further advancing our shared aspirations
towards peace and security.

Since the beginning of my mandate, I have sought
to firmly root my role as Chair of the 2127 Committee
in a context of active diplomacy with a number of States
Members of the United Nations, both in New York
and during my visits to the Central African Republic
in 2018 and 2019. In that regard, the main observation
that has emerged is that there is a lack of understanding
of the nature, objectives and context of the overall
United Nations sanctions. In fact, during exchanges
with various interlocutors, specifically representatives
of Member States on which such sanctions have been
imposed, I soon observed that there was an overriding
need to begin by reassuring them before dispelling
misunderstandings, such as the idea that sanctions have
a negative impact on the population. In reality, targeted
sanctions, such as arms embargoes, assets freezes
and travel bans, are geared not towards punishing
the countries and their people but rather towards
contributing to bringing peace and development to
countries and regions afflicted by crisis.

As a citizen of a country that was subjected to
United Nations sanctions, it was perhaps easier for me
to communicate that message to the Bangui authorities.
Many Council members know that C6te d'Ivoire, Liberia
and Sierra Leone were subjected to targeted sanctions
imposed by the Security Council. I am convinced
that the imposition of such measures by the Security
Council played a positive role in maintaining the
peace processes in those three West African countries
and helped to prevent a recurrence of conflict. Those
countries ultimately found their own path to peace and
security, which the Council acknowledged by lifting
the sanctions imposed on each of them.

Today, as my delegation leaves the Security Council
and having visiting the Central African Republic
twice, I am convinced now more than ever of the
importance that the Council and its subsidiary bodies
attach to using targeted sanctions to isolate individuals
and entities that jeopardize peace processes, target
women and children, commit sexual violence, obstruct
humanitarian operations and attack schools, places of
worship and even peacekeepers.
We must continue to ensure that these individuals
and entities be isolated and prevented from acting, to the
extent possible. We must put an end to their impunity
and, above all, show civilians, who are the targets of
their acts, that the international community is vigilant.

At the same time, armed actors must be aware
that they will be held accountable. The more they are
concerned about whether their name will appear in a
report of a United Nations group of experts, or what
will happen once it is included, the less time they will
spend attacking civilians. They should ask themselves
whether the fact that their name appears in a report will
result in the imposition of sanctions against them by
the Security Council or by one of its committees. They
should also be concerned about the freezing of their
bank accounts and the possibility of being sent back
to their country when they want to travel. Lastly, they
should consider whether the fact that the international
community is paying them such attention will not lead
to them appearing in The Hague.

Allow me to share some considerations regarding
the main issues I have been working on during my term
as Chair ofthe 2127 Committee and the Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations.

With regard to sanctions, they have focused on,
among other things, strengthening regional cooperation,
collaboration with the national authorities in Bangui,
the Committee's mobilization against impunity and the
protection of civilians in the Central African Republic,
in particular women and children.

As Chair of the 2127 Committee, one of my
priorities has been to deepen and strengthen dialogue
between the Committee and States of the region. I
am convinced that the problems currently faced by
the Central African Republic can be better addressed
by strengthening cooperation in the region. Building
the political will and the capacities of those States
can help towards eradicating illicit activities in the
Central African Republic, such as trafficking in arms,
ammunition and natural resources and the movement of
armed combatants in States of the region.

To that end and in cooperation with the Panel of
Experts, we continued the dialogue with those States
by, for example, inviting them to meetings of the
sanctions committee so that their views were heard.
On 26 January and 7 September 2018, the Chair of the
Committee therefore invited States of the region to
inform the Panel of Experts of their comments on its
2017 final report and its 2018 mid-term review. In 2019,
I also held similar meetings with States of the region on
29 January and 6 September.

During those meetings, which were open to all
Member States, States provided comments on the
conclusions and recommendations of the Panel of
Experts and also took note of the progress made and
the challenges faced in implementing United Nations
sanctions, as well as cooperation with the Panel of
Experts. I am pleased to note that States of the region
attached great importance to those meetings, and I hope
that more meetings of the same kind will be organized
in the future.

The members ofthe Panel of Experts also reminded
me several times that the meetings were very useful for
strengthening their cooperation with States of the region
and for clarifying misunderstandings about information
contained in the Panel's reports. It is also important to
note that the Permanent Mission of the Central African
Republic was always represented at the meetings and
that it provided valuable information on various aspects
of its cooperation with States of the region by noting
the progress made and the problems encountered.

During my term of office, I also made sure that I
visited the Central African Republic twice, as I havejust
said, from 2 to 5 October 2018 and from 1 to 4 October
2019. Those visits were both organized at an opportune
time and enabled me and the members of the Committee
from New York who accompanied me to have an idea of
the problems facing the country and to discuss with the
national authorities means and solutions with a view
to strengthening cooperation, particularly on areas as
complex as the arms embargo, in order to restore peace
in the country.

Following the visits, I informed the members of
the Committee by means of a report and convened
meetings between the Committee and States of the
region in order to make them aware of the results and
conclusions of my visits.

In addition, on 12 September, I encouraged the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Central Africa and Head of the United Nations
Office for Central Africa, the Panel of Experts on
the Central African Republic and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic to give briefings
on arms trafficking in the Central African Republic
and in the region and on strategies for strengthening
regional cooperation.

During the meetings mentioned above, particularly
during my visits to the Central African Republic, I was
able to take stock of the degree to which the country is
weakened by the impunity enjoyed by armed groups,
which freely violate the peace agreement and commit
various atrocities against civilians, particularly women
and children.

In that context and in order to continue to shed
light on the repercussions of impunity, I called on the
Committee to remain seized of the issue. On 29 July,
for example, I held joint briefings with the Working
Group on Children in Armed Conflict, during which
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict briefed the members of the
Committee and the Working Group. In their briefings,
the two Special Representatives emphasized that armed
groups continued to commit violence against women
and children in the Central African Republic.

I note with regret that currently, despite the
progress made in reducing violence during the period
following the signing of the peace agreement in
February, the violence has not ceased and impunity still
prevails. It is therefore the responsibility of the Security
Council to continue its work in support of the peace
agreement and to punish those who continue to wilfully
violate the provisions of an agreement to which they
freely committed.

In that regard, I recall that article 35 of the agreement
states the possibility of sanctions against persons who
do not comply with it. The Committee must therefore
assume its responsibilities and consider sanctions
against new individuals and entities. Otherwise,
potential violators will see that no new entries have
been added to the list since May 2017, a sign of the
international community's decreasing interest in the
Central African Republic.

From January 2018 to December 2019, Cote
d'Ivoire chaired the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations which, it should be recalled, seeks
to promote triangular cooperation between the
Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries.

The efforts of the Working Group during 2018
focused on the following themes: the protection of
civilians under peacekeeping operations in difficult
conditions; the strategic generation of forces in
peacekeeping operations; women and peace and
security in peacekeeping operations; the safety, security
and performance of Blue Helmets in an asymmetric
environment with an integrated approach; and lessons
learned from the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire in order to understand the prerequisites for
successful peacekeeping.

The efforts of the Working Group during 2019
focused on relations between peacekeeping missions
and host States; reviewing the implementation of the
Secretary-General's peacekeeping reform initiative,
known as Action for Peacekeeping; the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur; and
peacekeeping cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations, in particular
with regard to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the Group
of Five for the Sahel Joint Force.

Concerning the activity report for the year 2019,
Cote d'Ivoire has offered an exhaustive account of the
meetings held, while endeavouring to faithfully relay
the comments made by experts from Member States.
Unfortunately, the report has still not yet been adopted
due to divergent views among certain members of the
Council, linked in particular to problems concerning
the issue of intelligence in peacekeeping operations.
My country will seize the opportunity presented by
the 2019 report to urge the parties concerned to make
concessions so that the report, which will be of even
higher quality, can be published as a Council document.
Cote d'Ivoire reserves the right to publish the document
in its national capacity, if necessary.

Overall, it is worth noting the particular interest of
Member States in the Working Group and commending
the quality of the exchanges therein. Allow me, at
this juncture, to express our deep gratitude to the
Secretariat, the Security Council Affairs Division and
the interpreters, who have worked tirelessly to organize
our various meetings.

As we conclude our term on the Security
Council, Cote d'Ivoire wishes to stress that we will
remain steadfast in our support for United Nations
peacekeeping. From our own experience, we are aware
of the decisive role it plays in conflict prevention
and peacebuilding.

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to once again extend my sincere thanks to all those who,
through their efficient work, helped us to fulfil our
mandate, especially our colleagues in the Secretariat.

