The President: I would like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Azerbaijan, Colombia, Ethiopia,
Greece, Honduras, India and Indonesia, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, Without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Aliyev
(Azerbaijan), Mr. Giraldo (Colombia), Mr.
Hussein (Ethiopia), Mr. Vassilakis (Greece), Mr.
Acosta Bonilla (Honduras), Mr. Nambiar (India)
and Mr. Wardono (Indonesia) took the seats
reservedfor them at the side of the Council
Chamber

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Sir Brian Urquhart, former
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Sir Brian Urquhart to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Ambassador Jamsheed Marker, former Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General for East
Timor.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Ambassador Jamsheed Marker to take a
seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency Mr.
Nabil Elaraby, judge of the International Court of
Justice.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Nabil Elaraby to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, and I invite him to take the floor.


