Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): Our thanks to
Mr. Sharma, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, and his team for all their work.
Timor-Leste's international environment is
important to its future, and the United Kingdom
encourages Indonesia and Timor-Leste to continue
working together towards agreement on border
delineation by the 30 June 2003 deadline. That target
has been described by Ambassador Sharma as
"challenging".

The economic and social prospects of the country
are also clearly crucial. Timor-Leste's economic future
looks brighter with the ratification of the Timor Sea
Treaty and its potential revenue streams. But no less
important is the development of the quality of
government in Timor-Leste itself.

We salute the progress made so far by the
Government of Timor-Leste, but I should like to focus
my remarks on the justice and police and security
sectors. We welcome the publication of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) report on
the justice sector. We see a pressing need to identify
priorities for future UNDP assistance to the judicial
system and to decide on next steps in preparation of the
three- to five-year technical assistance programme. So
we look forward to early finalization of the justice
sector support programme, and we would welcome
Special Representative Sharma's giving us an
indication of its expected completion date.

With regard to the police, we welcome Timorese
ownership of the process of developing the country's
police force and the role of Prime Minister Alkatiri and
of other senior ministers at the police workshop this
month. We hope that a resolution of all outstanding
issues can be achieved at the next workshop, in June.

We encourage full implementation of the
recommendations in the joint assessment mission
report, and we urge careful consideration of the
sustainability of the Timorese rapid deployment group
and of other specialist police groups, given the finite
budget available.

We support the Secretary-General's
recommendation of increased cooperation between the
Timorese police and defence forces, and we encourage
the adoption of clear definitions of responsibility for
both organizations. We believe that the formation of
unofficial village-based security groups could seriously
undermine, rather than help, the security situation. We
urge that they be disbanded.

The United Kingdom believes that there is now a
need to focus UNMISET policing efforts on capacity-
building in the Timorese police - a point made by
earlier speakers - and we believe that donors must
remain receptive to long-term support of the policing
sector. My Government is ready to do its part in that
respect.

The United Kingdom supports the proposed
revised military strategy and the extension of
UNMISET's mandate for 12 months. It will be
important for UNMISET to keep up the momentum so
that the Mission may indeed conclude successfully in
2004.

Finally, the United Kingdom recognizes that,
even after UNMISET has concluded its mandate, the
international donor community will have to provide
much support to Timor-Leste. The United Kingdom
will play its part in that and urges other donors to do
likewise. There must be no hiatus in the progress being
made with the international community's support in
Timor-Leste when UNMISET closes. So we very much
agree with Special Representative Sharma that the
Council must begin to think through with UNMISET
the next stage in Timor-Leste's development so that the
transition is smooth. We look forward to Ambassador
Sharma's promised report and proposals to the Security
Council on those issues.

