Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): On behalf of
the delegation of Viet Nam, I warmly congratulate you,
Sir, and your delegation on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. In discharging
your important task, you and your delegation can rely
on the fullest cooperation of my delegation. I would
also like to convey to Ambassador Thomas Mayr-
Harting and the delegation of Austria our sincere
appreciation of their effective leadership of the work of
the Council in November.

I thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their briefings and
their comprehensive reports on the work of the two
Tribunals.

My delegation notes with appreciation the
commitment of the Tribunals to accomplishing their
completion strategies as soon as possible. While
making efforts to complete a large amount of trial
work, both Tribunals have also undertaken measures,
as recommended by the Secretary-General, in
preparations for the transition to the residual
mechanism.
In adopting resolution 1534 (2004), the Security
Council expressed its determination to review the
implementation of the Tribunals' completion strategies
and to ensure that the timeframes set out in the
completion strategies and endorsed by resolution 1503
(2003) would be met. At present, both Tribunals
estimate their completion date of all appeals to be
between the end of 2012 and mid-2013. That will
require that the Security Council consider proper
adjustments to facilitate the Tribunals' efforts to
complete their mandates without further slippage. We
urge the Tribunals to take all necessary measures to
meet the requirements of the completion strategies, and
we call on all Member States to extend full cooperation
with a view to helping the Tribunals with an early
completion of their work.

We support all efforts aimed at strengthening
competent national judicial systems to facilitate the
transfer of cases involving intermediate- and lower-
rank indictees, including fugitives, from the Tribunals
to national jurisdictions.

Before concluding, I wish to express our high
appreciation of the work of the Council's Informal
Working Group on international tribunals concerning a
possible residual mechanism to replace the ICTY and
the ICTR in their post-completion period. The Working
Group has been able to reach numerous common
understandings providing the basic elements of an
initial draft resolution on such a residual mechanism.
Viet Nam encourages the Working Group to continue
its deliberations, in close collaboration with the
Tribunals, to finalize the draft resolution.

