The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of China.

At the outset, I wish to thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2002/ 1223) and Ambassador
Sharma for his detailed briefing. I would also like to
extend a welcome to Ambassador Guterres as the first
Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste to the United
Nations. His presence has made today's meeting more
meaningful.

Since the independence of Timor-Leste,
encouraging changes have been taking place, one after
another. Under the leadership of the new Government,
and with the enormous support of the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET), the
people of Timor-Leste are carrying out nation-building
on all fronts in a gradual and orderly manner. It is also
pointed out in the report that leaders of Timor-Leste are
vigorously pursuing broadly based democratic
participation on the domestic front. On the diplomatic
front, they are actively building and developing
friendly relations and cooperation with the
international community, particularly with the
countries of the region. China is pleased to note that
both Timor-Leste and Indonesia are committed to
good-neighbourliness. That is bound to contribute
positively to the long-term stability of Timor-Leste and
of the region as a whole.

Under the leadership of Mr. Sharma, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, UNMISET is
comprehensively carrying out the mandate given to it
by resolution 1410 (2002). In so doing, it has
established good working relations with the
Government of Timor-Leste and the various sectors of
the country. We note that the Mission has done much to
help Timor-Leste to improve its administrative capacity
and to put in place a judicial system. It has also made
progress in the areas of police training, the transfer of
policing responsibilities and cooperation with the
national defence force of Timor-Leste. In addition, the
Mission's military component has maintained an
effective presence in the border areas and has
established a mechanism for consultation and
cooperation with the Government of Indonesia; this has
played a key role in improving the security
environment in Timor-Leste.

China appreciates the Mission's achievements
and will continue to support its work. We look forward
to an even greater role for the Mission under the
outstanding leadership of Ambassador Sharma.

Of course, there are still many difficulties to be
overcome in the work of the new Government and of
the Mission. As the report of the Secretary-General

repeatedly points out, the support of the international
community is of crucial importance to the various
aspects of capacity-building in Timor-Leste and to the
transition from United Nations functions to traditional
development assistance. It is therefore necessary that
the international community increase its input in
Timor-Leste and fully implement its commitments. In
addition, an adequate solution to the issue of refugees
will have an impact on the long-term stability and
security of Timor-Leste. We hope that the Governments
of Timor-Leste and Indonesia will continue to work to
make progress in that regard.

China long supported Timor-Leste in its quest for
independence. We will continue to support the people
of Timor-Lest in their efforts at building a nation.
Within our capabilities, we will also continue to
provide support.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

It is my pleasure to welcome the Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste, Mr. Jose Luis Guterres,
who is taking the floor for the first time in this
Chamber as the representative of a Member of the
United Nations. I now give him the floor.

