Mr. Misran (Malaysia): 1, like other speakers
before me, thank you most sincerely, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting, and particularly for responding
at very short notice to a request by a State Member of
the United Nations for a meeting of the Council on the
grave situation in Palestine. This augurs well for the
credibility of the Council in the eyes of the larger
membership of the United Nations.

We look forward to the statement which the
representative of South Africa will make later on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The grave situation in occupied East Jerusalem
and the rest of the occupied Palestinian territory must
be addressed immediately by the international
community, especially this Council. The spiral of
violence that was triggered a few days ago must be
stopped once and for all. The unleashing of the
disproportionate response by the Israeli security forces
on Gaza City and on the Palestinian people clearly
signals the intent of the Israeli Government to wage a
kind of war against Palestinian civilians.

Malaysia will continue to work with the other
members of this Council to take immediate, concrete
measures, including the immediate establishment of a
United Nations observer force to ensure the safety and
lives of innocent Palestinian civilians. We believe that
a United Nations presence on the ground would be the
best, speediest and most effective mechanism to help
de-escalate the violence in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Clearly, the present efforts to stop the
violence, including those on the bilateral track, have
not produced effective results so far.

This Council must carry out its solemn duty and
act to protect civilians. We have repeatedly stated this
fact in our previous resolutions and statements on the
question of Palestine and the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, and we must play our part to the fullest.

Last Friday we mandated the Secretary-General
to explore the proposal to deploy a United Nations
observer force to the region. But the Council cannot
rest on its laurels; it must also give its full support to
the establishment of the observer force. We must
encourage and convince the parties concerned - those
Council members that have great influence and
leverage with the parties to the conflict could play a
particular role in this regard - to accept such a United
Nations presence on the ground.

I could not agree more with Ambassador
Holbrooke that we need the consent of the host country
when we deploy United Nations peace operations. He
cited Indonesia in the case of East Timor and the visit
of a mission to West Timor. But I wish only to tell
Ambassador Holbrooke that the difference is that in the
case of Palestine Israel is clearly the occupying
Power - the only occupying Power in this modern era.
Palestine is an occupied territory; that is a fact.

Of course, for practical reasons, we would need
the cooperation of the Israeli Government to ensure the
effective performance of a United Nations observer
force on the ground. To this end, we call on Israel to
give its full cooperation to the establishment of a
United Nations observer force, if Israel is really serious
in its intention to stop the violence and to restore calm
and peace. After all, it would also be for the good of
the people of Israel.

A just and lasting peace can be achieved only
with the complete withdrawal of Israel's armed forces
and illegal settlers from all Arab and Palestinian lands
occupied since 1967, including the city of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif and the occupied Syrian Golan. The people
of Palestine have the inalienable right to establish an
independent and sovereign State of their own, with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its undisputed capital. To this
end, Malaysia calls on Israel to comply with Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1322
(2000), and all other relevant resolutions.

For more than 50 years the question of the plight
of the Palestinian people has been on the international
agenda. The failure of the international community to
redress the injustices committed against the Palestinian
people will only prolong the instability and violence in
the region. The Council must act now to stop the
violence and to allow the peoples in region to live in an
atmosphere of peace, harmony and progress.

Let us not forget that this Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. We must live up to our obligations.
The Council's credibility is at stake. To date about 250
people have been killed, including women and
children, mostly Palestinians, as a result of the
disproportionate and excessive use of force by Israeli
security forces. Malaysia deeply mourns these tragic
deaths and offers its deepest condolences to the
bereaved families.

How many more deaths and injuries of innocent
civilians, women and children, and how much more
violence do we need to witness before the Council can
act? Let us not repeat the mistakes that were made in
the past in the case of the tragedies in Rwanda and
Srebrenica because of the paralysis of this Council.

