Mr. Sharma (Nepal): Please accept our
congratulations, Sir, on the outstanding manner in
which you are presiding over the Security Council this
month, and our thanks for convening this timely open
debate on Afghanistan.

After 23 years of war and devastation, the
violence-battered Afghan people are trying to get back
on their feet with international assistance. We
appreciate that assistance and urge the international
community to sustain its support for Afghanistan to
help it make a clear break from past chaos and attain
security, stability and progress.

The Bonn Agreement, together with the
subsequent Emergency Loya Jirga, has restored relative
calm in Afghanistan, but the country is by no means
out of the woods. Afghanistan and its Transitional
Authority are still wrestling with the remnants of the
Taliban and Al Qaeda, who are out to create trouble,
the warlords, who are working to advance their own
vested agenda, and the deep-seated mutual distrust
among tribal groups ready to ignite renewed conflict.
At the same time, it has in hand the formidable tasks of
building its institutions and ensuring security and better
standards of living for its people.

When people have hope they are their own best
defence. And people in despair can be their own worst
enemies. Having lived through the trauma of war and
mayhem for so long, Afghanistan has witnessed a loss
of central authority and order, and has seen the erosion
of its social fabric, letting parochial interests hold sway
and control people's lives. To change this, Afghans
must be enabled to believe that this is no longer the
case and that better days are ahead for them - by
giving them hope and inspiration. This calls for
security coverage for all citizens and the availability of
critical humanitarian assistance to the refugees, the
displaced and the dispossessed, along with prospects
for growth and progress.

The International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) is providing much-needed security to Kabul.
My delegation appreciates what the troop contributors
are doing. But we want to warn that a small oasis of
security in a vast desert of insecurity is untenable; it is
a sure recipe for impending implosion, which can be
triggered by a pervasive feeling of exclusion and
neglect among people, undermining efforts made with
good intentions.
In order not to let this lacuna queer the pitch of a
new and frail Government, security coverage should be
gradually expanded throughout the land in a manner
that the people see as both serious and steady.
Demobilizing, disarming and rehabilitating the
combatants should be integral to the scheme. Although
security must be the responsibility of the Afghan
Government itself once domestic military and police
forces are trained and deployed, we suggest that the
Security Council mount a robust United Nations
peacekeeping mission to work alongside ISAF until the
local forces are ready to take their positions throughout
the country.

Security from fear is as essential as security from
want. Nepal applauds the international community for
coming to rescue Afghanistan from its dire financial
state. However, we are also alarmed and anguished that
humanitarian relief, recovery and reconstruction have
been affected by insufficient funding to increase the
capacity to process the return of refugees, as well as by
the Government's inability to finance such activities
beyond Kabul. This uncertainty will not be helpful in
quickly healing Afghanistan's wounds, in stabilizing
peace and in nudging sustainable development forward.
Nepal therefore calls on the global community not to
let Afghanistan down at this critical juncture and to
assist it to overcome the ongoing crisis of resources.

We commend the United Nations for assisting
Afghanistan to leave its bloody past behind and the
Karzai Administration to establish new institutions
critical to running the State. While absolutely
necessary structures and processes must be set up early
on, we must also bear in mind that the social fabric
cannot be transplanted and social systems cannot be
imposed from outside. The Afghan people themselves
will have to evolve institutions and processes best
suited for their society that can propel them on the
arduous and long trip to modernization.

What outsiders can do, at best, is inspire and help
them to find a progressive, functional and acceptable
social equilibrium as they move along and encourage
them to meet internationally approved fundamental
norms of behaviour. The United Nations would be wise
not to impose structures and processes that Afghanistan
still finds too alien, too unacceptable or too
unsustainable.

Finally, we express our profound solidarity with
Afghanistan and its people, and we applaud their effort
to reclaim peace and rebuild the nation. We also
congratulate President Karzai and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Brahimi,
for their dedicated work to make Afghanistan a country
that is secure, stable, free from terror and engaged in
promoting durable peace and development. Nepal is
always ready and happy to contribute to that endeavour
as best it can.

