I would like to begin by thanking Estonia for convening this important meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General for his report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366). Since the adoption of the landmark resolution 1265 (1999), the Security Council has reiterated its firm commitment to this important issue by adopting a series of resolutions, including resolution 2286 (2016), on health care in armed conflict, to which Japan contributed as a co-penholder in 2016. It is regrettable that, according to the Secretary-General's report, we see increased attacks against medical and humanitarian personnel and their facilities. Last December, Dr. Tetsu Nakamura, a representative of a Japanese humanitarian non-governmental organization who devoted himself for decades to health care and agricultural development in Afghanistan, was killed in a terrorist attack in Jalalabad. Japan strongly condemns such heinous attacks against aid workers. Currently, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is causing a serious human security crisis, spreading across borders and striking the weakest segments of society the hardest. Again, it is the people affected by armed conflict and other situations of violence, women, children, people with disabilities, refugees and internally displaced persons who are the most vulnerable. Japan strongly urges all parties to armed conflict to respond to the Secretary-General's call for a ceasefire. Key provisions of international humanitarian law must be respected to limit the effects of armed conflict on the people and communities fighting against the virus in already fragile situations. In March, Japan provided emergency assistance of $140 million through United Nations agencies and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies for the COVID-19 response. In April, Japan decided additional assistance of more than $1.4 billion to support health systems and medical capacity in developing countries. Last year marked the seventieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions. Japan is deeply concerned about the frequent occurrence of alleged violations of international humanitarian law, notwithstanding the repeated resolve of the Council with regard to the protection of civilians. At the thirty-third International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent last December, the Japanese Government, together with the Japanese Red Cross Society, made a pledge to promote public awareness through dissemination of the importance of international humanitarian law in order to prevent sexual violence and attacks against humanitarian workers and their facilities in armed conflicts. Japan urges all parties to armed conflict to comply with their obligations under international humanitarian law in all circumstances. Respect for international humanitarian law must be no exception in the context of the emergence of cyberwarfare and new weapons equipped with emerging technologies, including artificial intelligence, which may be drastically changing aspects of conflict. At the thirty-third International Conference, Japan also pledged to promote study and dialogue at multiple levels on issues concerning cyberwarfare and the use of new weapons. Japan intends to contribute to the discussion towards establishing new rules in this area. In this regard, Japan plans to host an international conference on lethal autonomous weapons systems later this year. Furthermore, Japan recognizes the critical role of the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission in upholding international humanitarian law and continues to contribute both financially and by nominating the most qualified members to the Commission. Japan is actively engaged in operational activities to help civilians affected by armed conflict. With a view to ensuring human security, one of the pillars of Japan's development cooperation policy, Japan has always prioritized the protection and empowerment of those affected by armed conflict, in particular refugees and internally displaced persons. At the seventh Tokyo International Conference on African Development, held in Yokohama last August, Japan, together with African countries and international donors, committed to supporting efforts for strengthening the self-reliance and resilience of displaced populations and host communities. Japan's contribution in connection with COVID-19, which I mentioned earlier, will also be allocated to support those suffering from armed conflict and other situations of violence in the Middle East and Africa. The protection of victims of sexual violence in armed conflict is another priority area for Japan from the viewpoint of human security. This year, which marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, Japan reaffirms its unwavering commitment by contributing €2 million to the Global Fund for Survivors of conflict-related sexual violence. Japan continues to support the work of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, under the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary- General, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic, Somalia and Iraq. Japan also contributes, through UN-Women, to the protection and empowerment of victims of violent extremism in the Sahel and the Lake Chad region. Japan will continue to commit itself to the protection of civilians in armed conflict. On the normative side, Japan will continue to work to further disseminate awareness of international humanitarian law, while, on the operational side, we will support the efforts on the ground to ensure and strengthen human security, by protecting and empowering the victims of armed conflicts and by building institutions that will protect the most vulnerable people, including through humanitarian assistance and peacebuilding support. Japan looks forward to working closely with the United Nations in this endeavour.
