Mr. Llorenty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like at the
outset to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
and the Russian presidency for having convened today's
very important debate.

We are gathered this morning at a time of roiling
tensions across the globe, especially in the Middle East
and North Africa. Many conflicts exist that represent
a threat not just to the region but also to international
peace and security. We are speaking here of the
situations in Syria, Libya, Yemen, Iraq and Palestine,
as well as of cross-cutting issues such as the threat of
terrorism, the alarming number of displaced persons
and refugees and the trafficking and smuggling of
persons, among others.

In the case of Syria, the conflict has been going on
for eight years, and we are not seeing any letup in the
constant siege and violence against the Syrian people,
mainly children, who, in addition to living with the
psychological consequences of that situation, are in
urgent need of humanitarian assistance. The crisis has
generated more than 500,000 deaths since its inception.

In the case of Libya, we are facing a conflict
where violations of international law, human rights
law and international humanitarian law continue to be
committed. It should be noted that this reality continues
to have repercussions on the situation of instability in
the Sahel region, which is the cause of many challenges
in that part of Africa.

The Palestinian question is without a doubt, as some
of our colleagues have mentioned, at the heart of the
conflicts in the Middle East, and not only because of its
long history, which dates back more than 70 years, but
rather because as long as that issue is not resolved, there
can be no truly sustainable peace in the region. The
core issue that runs through the Palestinian question is
the occupation by Israel of territories that do not belong
to it, including the Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem. That
poses a threat to the lives of Palestinian and Israeli
civilians and threatens the security of the entire region.
We are convinced that the only long-term way to put
an end to the situation of occupation in which Palestine
lives is the two-State solution in which a free, sovereign
and independent Palestinian State is finally established
with the pre-l967 international borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.

I turn now to the consequences of conflicts, chief
among them are the humanitarian crises, as is the
case in Yemen, where more than 8 million people are
at risk of famine and 60 per cent of the population is
experiencing food insecurity and where a cholera
outbreak has affected more than 1 million people.
These conflicts have also created millions of displaced
persons and refugees who, while fleeing Violence
in search of safety, often become victims of human
trafficking. That is the case in Libya, where there has
been evidence of cases of slavery.

Another consequence of this situation is the
proliferation of terrorist groups, who, by taking
advantage of Government vacuums, the weakness
and lack of capacity of law enforcement and security
forces, and the lack ofborder control have found spaces
to impose their violent ideology, commit crimes and
perpetrate serious violations of human rights, which
could constitute crimes against humanity.

We also believe that it is important to talk about
the root causes of these conflicts. If we analyse all
those conflicts, we can find a common denominator.
The policies of regime change, interventionism and
interference in the internal affairs of States have been
some of the main causes, as we already mentioned
with regard to the spread of terrorism, of governance
vacuums and have weakened the forces of law and order
and security and resulted in a lack of border control,
which has enabled chaos to emerge.

We reiterate that the use of unilateral actions is
contrary to international law and the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
constitutes a flagrant violation of multilateralism and
a serious threat to the international order. Unilateral
actions are illegal measures that extend the domestic
jurisdiction and legislation of one State over another, in
Violation of the principles of equality, sovereignty and
the territorial integrity of States. In other words, there
cannot be a double standard, and one cannot claim to
uphold international law by violating it.

In essence, one of the reasons for the use of
unilateral actions and regime change policies in the
region is the search for control and ownership of natural
resources and geopolitical control. Sovereign control
and management of natural resources is paramount to
the cessation of hostilities and economic development.
When a country maintains effective control over its
resources and there is political will, it is possible to
achieve structural change leading to stabilization and
the strengthening of the rule of law.

Finally, Bolivia, as advocate of respect for
international law and the culture and the right to peace,
supports the use of peaceful means for the settlement of
disputes, including good offices, preventive diplomacy,
multilateralism, non-interference and respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
States. Those are universal principles recognized by
the international community and constitute effective
tools to prevent the scourge, not only of war and its
consequences, but also ofthe various conflicts resulting
from the root causes I described here.

