Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your friendly
country's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month. We wish you every success.

We also thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process for his invaluable efforts
and for his briefing this morning.

The international community is following the
accelerating events and developments unfolding in the
Middle East. However, the Arab-Israeli conflict, after
more than seven decades, remains at the core ofthe crises
in the region. More time continues to elapse and we still
have not found a just and comprehensive solution to the
Palestinian question. That could lead to a deterioration
of the situation and have serious repercussions on
regional and world stability and security.

The international community recognizes that
ending the Arab-Israeli conflict is a precondition for
restoring peace and stability in the Middle East. That is
why the United Nations bears responsibility for ending
the suffering of the Palestinian people. It must allow
them to regain their rights and fulfil their legitimate
aspirations. Today, after a number of solutions have
been examined but have not led to the outcome
desired by the Council and the world, it is asserted
that settling the Palestinian question will be possible
only on the basis of the terms of reference agreed by
the international community, in particular ending the
Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories,
including the occupied Syrian Golan and the occupied
Lebanese territories; accepting a two-State solution;
establishing a viable independent Palestinian State
within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living side by side with Israel in peace and
security, in line with relevant Council resolutions and
the Arab Peace Initiative; the return of refugees; ending
settlement activities; dismantling Israeli settlements in
the occupied territory; and lifting the blockade on Gaza
Strip and other Palestinian areas.

The State of Qatar recognizes its responsibilities for
achieving stability and peace in the Middle East. That
is why it has not stood idly by. Despite the obstacles to
the peace process, we have made tireless and concrete
efforts to improve the humanitarian situation and that, in

turn, will help reduce tensions and achieve peace. This
year, the State of Qatar has contributed $480 million
to promote the Palestinian Authority's budget. We
have provided humanitarian assistance to the Gaza
Strip, as well as fuel to enhance the electricity supply.
We have also supported United Nations recruitment
programmes for securing jobs in the Gaza Strip. The
State of Qatar continues to coordinate with our partners
in the international community to make every effort to
find a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the
Palestinian question, leading to stability and peace in
the whole region.

The brotherly Syrian people continue to seek
security, peace and a life of dignity through a political
solution that meets their legitimate aspirations, based
on the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and
resolution 2254 (2015), in a way that preserves the unity,
territorial integrity, independence and sovereignty of
Syria. We look forward to launching the Constitutional
Committee and have hopes in that regard. The State
of Qatar will continue to support all efforts to remove
all obstacles to achieving peace and implementing a
political solution, based on the legal terms of reference
of the United Nations.

In Libya, the military operations launched by
militias against Tripoli, targeting the legitimate,
internationally recognized Government, threaten the
unity and stability of Libya. We call on all actors to
shoulder their responsibilities and to respect the will
of the fraternal Libyan people in achieving a peaceful
solution. We warn that any interference in the situation
in Libya would further complicate the crisis, prevent
international consensus and contravene Security
Council resolutions. We fully support the efforts of
Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya.

With regard to Yemen, we again stress that ending
the conflict will require all authorities to engage in
dialogue to achieve a political solution and national
reconciliation, based on resolution 2216 (2015), so as
to preserve the unity of Yemen and achieve its security
and stability. We express our support to the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen. We stress
the dire need to meet the basic needs of all the Yemeni
people, facilitating the delivering of humanitarian aid
and protecting human rights.

The serious situation and the plethora of crises
in the Middle East underscore the need to respect
international law, international humanitarian law and
international human rights laws, on which there can
be no compromise or delay. That is why the Security
Council must take the appropriate measures to stop
violations and defuse tensions, which could have further
catastrophic consequences for international peace and
security and place an additional burden on the United
Nations, while distracting it from discharging its main
duties. That is why refraining from instigating crises and
levelling accusations to achieve illegitimate objectives
will help enhance the ability of the United Nations and
the Security Council to confront all challenges.

In that regard, the illegal unilateral actions and
unjust blockade imposed on the State of Qatar for more
than two years now by the siege States, as well as the
cybercrimes committed against the Qatari news agency
to justify the blackmail and extortion campaign against
the State of Qatar, contravene United Nations efforts in
the area of preventive diplomacy and peaceful resolution
of crises. In addition, those illegal measures flagrantly
violate the Charter of the United Nations, international
law and human rights. The bad intentions behind the
imposition of the blockade and the attempts to offend
Qatar have been made clear by the fact that to this day
the siege States have failed to provide any evidence
for their allegations, while still refusing to come to the
negotiation table. The State of Qatar is committed to
stability and security in this region, one that is so vital
to the world. We are also committed to implementing
our well-known policy of respecting international law
and resolving disputes and conflicts through peaceful
means, in line with the Charter. We have stressed our
willingness to settle the crisis through unconditional
dialogue based on mutual respect. In that regard, we
want to once again express our appreciation for the
sincere efforts made by Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad
Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Amir of our sister State of Kuwait.

In conclusion, the challenges that we face in our
region, which are based on policies that disrespect
international will and international law, require that we
act quickly and effectively to end their implementation
and ensure the accountability of those responsible for
them, in line with the purposes and principles of the
Charter and while continuing to maintain international
peace and security.

