Ms. Mogherini (Italy): I thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this meeting and the
United States Government for the initiative. I would
also like to thank Nickolay Mladenov for the work that
he is leading in Iraq for the United Nations. I would
especially like to thank Minsiter Al-Jaafari for the
work that the Government in Baghdad is doing and also
for reminding us earlier in the meeting that the war
declared by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) is against all Iraqi people. I think that that is why
the Iraqi decision to form a national unity Government
and to work in an inclusive way to respond to the
threat in order to restore the country's unity needs and
deserves our full support in coordination with the Iraqi
authorities and the Government in Baghdad.

Let me also say that we particularly appreciate
today's initiative and the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/20. That helps and contributes
to the provision of a global United Nations framework
that is necessary for such a partnership to be
internationally recognized as one that is not primarily
military but mainly seeks to respond comprehensively
to a threat that faces us all.

Italy has been present from the very first days of
the outbreak of the crisis. We participated in the middle
of August in Baghdad and in Erbil with the visit of
Prime Minister Renzi. We have promoted a European
Union common framework for a response to the crisis,
requesting the convening of a meeting of the Council
of the European Union, which was held on 15 August.

On 20 August, we decided through a parliamentary
vote on our own contribution, first of all, to
humanitarian aid. We sent six flights of such aid. We
have contributed through multilateral channels, the
World Health Organization, the World Food Programme
and UNICEF. We also decided on military support.
Two other flights are arriving tomorrow, bringing arms
and ammunition. In total for this month, we will send
18 flights of arms and ammunition to Erbil through
Baghdad. But we are ready and willing to do more,
in particular in terms of training, advice, logistics
support and air refuelling if necessary. We have done
that working closely with the Iraqi Government and the
regional authorities of Kurdistan, because we know very
well that our most precious and valuable contribution is
and will be the political support that we can give to the
Iraqi Government in its work for inclusiveness and to
the unity of the country.

We also believe that all our efforts should be and
should stay focused on full, positive and coordinated
involvement of all actors in the region. I welcome the
presence here today of the ministers of many countries,
including His Excellency Mr. Zarif, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Iran. We
believe and have believed from the very beginning that
Iran can and - we are confident - will play a positive
role against ISIL.

We need an integrated approach, first of all to
defined a common strategy to face the crisis in Syria.
Here, I would recall the words that Frank-Walter
Steinmeier used: that we should take advantage of the
work that the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Staffan de Mistura, has started to do these days. I think
we need to coordinate and have a common approach.
We need a common strategy to prevent and stop foreign
fighters, and that is going to be at the centre of our
work next week. We need a common effort to stop the
financial flows supporting ISIL activities, and here I
value in particular the initiative from Bahrain. We
need to work with and in support of countries that are
hosting immense flows of refugees, primarily Lebanon
and Jordan, and ensure that the social pressure does not
become an internal factor that will destabilize those
countries and thus the region.

We need to unite forces. A global threat requires a
global response. We need to make it very clear: this is not
a coalition of the West against Islam. On the contrary,
it is a global partnership in support of Iraq and all Iraqi
people, whether Muslim, Sunni, Shia, Christian, Yazidi
or others, against a terrorist organization.

