Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Bosnia
and Herzegovina would like to thank the Russian
Federation for convening this debate on United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Alain Le Roy, and Force Commanders Lieutenant
General Sikander Afzal, Lieutenant General Babacar
Gaye, Major General Moses Bisong Obi, Major
General Robert Mood and Major General Luiz
Guilherme Paul Cruz for their valuable and
comprehensive briefings. We commend their tireless
efforts and outstanding work in maintaining
international peace and security.
As a police- and troop-contributing country - a
country moreover with significant experience of United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts -
Bosnia and Herzegovina is particularly aware of the
importance of the topic we are considering at this

meeting.

Achieving sustainable peace from an initial peace
agreement requires clear and adequate mandates
adapted to country-specific situations, strategic
planning and coherent implementation, as well as the
consent and commitment of the host country. Bosnia
and Herzegovina is convinced that, in order to
successfully implement Security Council mandates, the
issue of major gaps in capabilities, resources and
training has to be addressed through enhanced
coordination among the Security Council, the
Secretariat and police- and troop-contributing
countries. We particularly underscore the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in bringing together all the
relevant actors and call for further strengthening and
consolidation of its contribution to peacekeeping
efforts. We also believe that the Security Council could
rely more on its advice.

The United Nations has notably improved the
effectiveness of its peacekeeping. However, the
challenges posed by the global deployment of United
Nations missions will require additional and further
improvements in mandate design, strategic planning,
cognitive capacity and coherence. We urge the
Secretariat to continue to increase its planning capacity
expertise, as more data would be helpful in drafting
mandates.

Bosnia and Herzegovina stresses the importance
of including strategic integrated planning and
benchmarks, developed in close consultation with host
countries and the relevant regional organizations and
stakeholders, wherever possible and appropriate. Clear
and carefully calibrated benchmarks can help improve
the Security Council's strategic oversight of a
mission's progress and facilitate appropriate and timely
preparations for further action.

With regard to the increasing need for expertise
in areas such as the rule of law, security sector reform
and the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process, we believe it is important to improve
recruitment and training and to upgrade human-
resource rules, especially when a mission's mandate
includes a number of peacebuilding aspects. The

United Nations roster system covering experts in the
various areas of mission activities should be improved,
including with respect to interoperability with similar
databases of experts from regional and subregional
organizations. The experience and knowledge of
civilian, police and military experts from past and
current peacekeeping and peacebuilding host countries
should also be utilized.

The development of a strategic framework on the
protection of civilians, containing elements and
parameters for mission-specific strategies, will assist
the mission leadership in elaborating a comprehensive
protection strategy aligned with a mission's concept of
operations. The process of putting such concepts into
practice has to be clearly defined and discussed with
the troop- and police-contributing countries. In that
regard, training modules for pre-deployment and in-
mission training for peacekeeping personnel are
important.

Peacekeeping operations must complement
activities that address the immediate needs of the local
population. Implementing quick-impact projects
contributes to building confidence in the peacekeepers
and gaining support for a peacekeeping mission and its
mandate, as well as creating an environment conducive
to the peace process.

Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that transfer of
ownership and strengthening of national capacities are
of key importance, as a peacekeeping operation cannot
be a substitute for the political process. We therefore
emphasize the importance of activities aimed at that
goal, such as the training of national police and
military personnel in international humanitarian law,
international refugee law and the protection of
civilians, as well as the establishment of joint
operational teams.

Finally, we would like to stress once more the
importance of sincere and devoted effort on the part of
the international community in assisting local and
regional stakeholders to reach a genuine and
constructive political dialogue aimed at solving key
political issues. Such an approach would significantly
contribute to the creation of an environment conducive
to sustainable peace, stability and development.

