Mr. Gnehm (United States of America): The
peoples of the Middle East deserve peace. They have
longed for it, they have died for it and, in the past few
years we have seen them live for it. The current
generation of political leaders in the region has made the
courageous choice to abandon the rhetoric and policies of
conflict and to embrace peace as a strategic choice - to
embrace peace as an ideal and as a way of life.

It is most unfortunate but a truth that this peace
process remains fragile, beset by enemies and filled with
dilemmas that test the wisdom and the courage of the
region's leaders. It is incumbent upon all of us, whether
debating in this room or actively participating in the
peace process, to do nothing that might damage that
process. All parties must remember that words and
actions can have consequences well beyond those
intended.

In regard to the Israeli notice to expropriate land in
the Jerusalem area, my Government has publicly stated
that this is not particularly helpful to the peace process.
Indeed, it is difficult to see how such actions promote the
peace process.

Having said that, we do not believe that this is the
appropriate forum for dealing with this issue, which is for
the parties to this dispute to address. Indeed, Israel and
the Palestinians have demonstrated their abilities to
contend with and resolve difficult issues in the search for
peace. I would note that the Council and the General
Assembly have registered their satisfaction several times
with the notable achievements made by the parties to the
Middle East conflict since the Madrid process commenced
in 1991.

We should consider just what the parties to the
dispute have accomplished so far: the Declaration of
Principles between the Government of Israel and the
Palestine Liberation Organization of 13 September 1993;

 

the Agreement on the Gaza Strip and Jericho Area of
4 May 1994; the 29 August 1994 Agreement on Preparatory
Transfer of Powers and Responsibilities; the 14 September
1993 Agreement between Israel and Jordan on the Common
Agenda; the Washington Declaration signed by Israel and
Jordan on 25 July 1994; and the Jordan-Israel Treaty of
Peace of 26 October 1994. Each of these extraordinary
steps on the path towards a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace required dedication, imagination and courage on the
part of the parties.

The position of my Government is well known: Israel
and the Palestinians are committed to achieving peace and
reconciliation through an agreed political process. They
have agreed in their wisdom to cover certain areas during
permanent status negotiations at a later point. We
wholeheartedly support this approach. It has enabled
Palestinians and Israelis to negotiate their differences and
to make progress undreamed of only four years ago.

Israel and the Palestinians are currently engaged in
important negotiations to implement the next stage of the
Declaration of Principles. Debate in this Council on issues
which are for the parties to address will only distract
attention from their efforts and have a negative impact on
the process. None of us, I am sure, wants to see that
happen. It is therefore incumbent upon us that we not
undercut the peace process with a divisive debate or hasty
action. Instead, we must act in a manner that encourages
the parties in their search for reconciliation and by doing
this nurtures the peace process.

The matter before us today pertains to a specific issue,
not to every issue in Jerusalem. Although the Palestinian
Observer noted correctly the position of my Government
with regard to legislation before Congress, I regret that he
brought into this debate an issue internal to United States
decision-making and that he did so in a threatening and
distorted manner.

