Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to say that my country
is an important party to the Arab-Israeli conflict, as
well as to reiterate two vital points. First, the Syrian
Golan Heights have remained under Israeli occupation
since 1967. Secondly, when my country was a
non-permanent member of the Security Council from
2001 to 2003, we proposed that the Council convene an
open public meeting every three months to consider the
situation in the Middle East.

My delegation would like to thank the Columbian
presidency of the Council for convening this open
debate to discuss the escalation of Israeli aggression
against the occupied Arab territories. We would also
like in particular to thank the Permanent
Representative of China for his excellent work as
President of the Council last month.
In the many decades of the Israeli occupation that
began in June 1967, the Security Council, the General

Assembly and other United Nations bodies have
adopted hundreds of resolutions calling upon Israel to
end its occupation of Arab territories and its massacres
of unarmed and unprotected Palestinian people. Sadly,
in spite of all those resolutions, the facts show that
Israel continues to engage in organized and systematic
practices and is not subject to international
accountability for its violations of the basic principles
of international law and international humanitarian law.
This demonstrates that Israel is defying international
law.

Among its main hostile acts that have been
internationally condemned is its feverish settlement
campaign in occupied Arab lands, including its seizure
of land, the destruction of houses and expulsion of its
inhabitants and the settling of herds of foreign
colonialist settlers in those houses - to say nothing of
its construction of the racist separation barrier and the
Judaization of occupied Jerusalem. All of his is
happening right under the noses of the very people who
call for the protection of human rights while closing
their eyes to flagrant Israeli violations of human rights
in the occupied Arab territories.

Moreover, all of this is taking place while the
Security Council remains ineffectual in exercising its
duty and obligations to enforce international peace and
security in accordance with the purposes and principles
and of the United Nations Charter. The most recent
example of this was the Council's non-adoption of a
draft resolution (S/2011/24) calling on Israel to end its
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories (see S/PV.6484), in spite of the fact that the
draft resolution and the principle of the illegality of
Israel's settlement activity both enjoyed international
consensus.

Two years have gone by since the Israeli
aggression against Gaza began. During that action,
Israel committed war crimes and serious violations of
humanitarian law considered to be crimes against
humanity. But the Israeli perpetrators of those crimes
have not been held accountable or subjected to any
punishment. Israel continues to reject the rebuilding of
schools and other facilities by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East and is preventing all such activities and
projects in Gaza. That has only encouraged Israel to
pursue its inhuman embargo against the people living
in Gaza. In addition, Israel is once again threatening
further aggression against the second humanitarian
flotilla, which is planning to provide humanitarian aid.
Israel is committing further aggression against Gaza
and is undertaking further massacres of Palestinians,
creating dozens of innocent casualties and many
hundreds of wounded civilians.

In this context, we are shocked by the lack of any
response from the international community to the
appeals by the Palestinian people. For many decades,
the international community has ignored the Israeli
crimes against the Palestinian people and its continued
occupation of Arab land. In the past few days, the
League of Arab States has called upon the Security
Council to adopt a resolution to impose an air embargo
against Israeli airplanes attacking Gaza, so as to protect
unarmed civilians and to put an end to the unjust
embargo. We therefore call on the Security Council to
follow up immediately on that demand by the League
of Arab States to protect Palestinian civilians. We
reaffirm that the protection of Palestinian, Syrian and
Lebanese civilians living under Israeli occupation and
subject to Israeli attacks on a daily basis is an integral
part of the issue of protecting all civilians without
distinction.

The Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan is also
a very serious issue. Israel refuses to return and
reintegrate the Syrian Golan into Syria and flouts
international resolutions, in particular resolution 497
(1981), which declares the occupation of the Syrian
Golan by Israel to be completely illegal, null and void.
Israel is continuing its policy of terror and repression
against Syrian civilians in the Golan, as well as to
imprison Syrian citizens. It is also seizing land and
continuing settlement activities, including its most
recent settlement campaign in the Syrian Golan. A
council of settlers in the Golan has undertaken a new
provocative measure in the form of a publicity
campaign for the building of new settlements in the
occupied Syrian Golan. The campaign, called
"Welcome to Golan", is responsible for transferring
3,000 Israeli settler families to the Golan.

The Israeli Knesset recently adopted a law
requiring a general referendum before any Israeli
retreat from the occupied Syrian Golan or occupied
East Jerusalem. This is in total disregard for
international law and the resolutions of the Security
Council, in particular resolutions 497 (1981) and 487
(1981). We reiterate that this measure is totally rejected
and unacceptable and does not change the fact that the
Golan is occupied Syrian land and that the restoration
of the entire Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967 must
be the basis of any peacebuilding arrangements. We
hold the Israeli Government responsible for all these
hostile and provocative policies.

In their statements today, some permanent
members of the Council have referred to the situation
in my country. They have spoken in biased terms and
have made very dangerous exaggerated statements. I
would like to draw the attention of the Security
Council to the following.

On Saturday, 16 April, Syria's President chaired
the first meeting of the new Government. He called on
the Government to be active and to take immediate
action in order to launch a number of draft proposals to
ensure reforms and promote national democracy and
citizen participation, for the purpose of consolidating
national unity, stability and security for the country and
its citizens. Four days after that meeting, the
Government submitted three draft laws, which were
signed by the President and entered into force today,
lifting the emergency law, dismantling the Supreme
State Security Court and granting the right to peaceful
demonstrations. The Government is now working
expeditiously on a number of new draft laws on
political parties, the media and local administrations.

President Al-Assad is seen by all as a reforming
leader, because he is aware of the fact that these reforms
are a national necessity - exclusively national.
Needless to say, any reform in any State Member of the
United Nations is, according to the Charter, a domestic
issue. All must respect the principle of non-interference
in the internal affairs of States, including some
permanent member States. Such reforms must not be
obstructed by obstacles that could only serve foreign
interests and agendas. Whoever encourages reform from
the outside cannot deliberately ignore the fact that
reforms and measures have been undertaken on the
ground. Those individuals must not endeavour to
undermine the very well-known Syrian model of reform,
which is based on tolerance and co-existence among the
various sectors of the country's population.

A number of calls have been made in the Security
Council, including for the overthrow of legitimate
Governments. Those who make such calls are
responsible for negative incitement and for
irresponsible acts that harm the interests of peoples and
Governments. That represents a clear violation of the
United Nations Charter and an irrational attempt to use
international law to take advantage of this meeting on
the situation in the Middle East, which is limited to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in particular the question of
Palestine. Thus, it is a misuse of that agenda item to
ignore the underlying aspects of the problem. It also
encourages the continuing Israeli aggression and
occupation and the Israeli Government's engagement
in further violence and settlement expansion.
Furthermore, it encourages intransigence and defiance
of the wishes of the international community and the
Palestinian people for peace.

We would have liked to hear the representatives
of the United States and the United Kingdom express,
if only just once, their sympathy for and empathy with
the suffering of the Syrians living in the Syrian Golan,
occupied since 1967. We would have liked to hear
those two delegations call on Israel to put an end to the
state of emergency that has been in effect in that
country since 1948 to this day. The state of emergency
has been used to seize Palestinian territory, to destroy
houses and expel their inhabitants, and to allow gangs
of Israeli settlers to occupy the land. Furthermore,
Israel has exploited an emergency regulation enacted
under the British Mandate in 1939 and applied to all of
Palestine.

