Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I should like to express
our gratitude to Assistant Secretary-General Hedi
Annabi for introducing the Secretary-General's report
(S/2003/421) and for his comprehensive briefing on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). Pakistan attaches great importance
to the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and supports the
full implementation of all the provisions of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999).

The people of Kosovo have suffered considerably,
both historically and during the hostilities that took
place five years ago. Mr. Annabi's briefing identified a
series of problems and issues that continue to
complicate the task of establishing and sustaining
peace and stability in Kosovo. That experience, and the
difficulties encountered by the international
community, are one indication of the complexity of
sustaining post-conflict peace and rebuilding a country
after war. The lessons that we are learning in Kosovo
are relevant for the United Nations in other situations
where it is involved or is likely to be involved in the
future.

Pakistan was not a member of the Security
Council when resolution 1244 (1999) was adopted. I
must state that we consider the "standards before
status" approach - which has been applied in this
case - to be unique, and we believe that it is
applicable only in the case of Kosovo. As a general
rule, the status issue should be the Security Council's
primary concern. Earlier this month, in his 9 April
report on another issue before the Council, relating to
Georgia, the Secretary-General made the following
observation:

"... the status question cuts across every aspect of
a final peaceful settlement. Without its
satisfactory resolution, a sustainable settlement is
likely to remain elusive." (S/2003/412, para. 27)

The Secretary-General's observation on Georgia
is, in our view, applicable to a whole host of issues on
the Security Council's agenda. We believe that the
resolution of the status question should be the primary
focus of the Council's work in all but the most
exceptional of cases.

I now turn to the report itself. We regard the
transfer of further responsibilities from the United
Nations to local authorities as an important step in the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). We urge the
leaders in Kosovo to take full advantage of the
opportunity that has been provided to them to
administer their affairs through the Provisional
Institutions. We support the Secretary-General's call on
local leaders to work together to consolidate those
Institutions by focusing on substance and practical
results rather than on holding institutional
developments hostage to political or ethnic differences.

Pakistan also supports - in Kosovo as
elsewhere - the unconditional right of refugees and
displaced persons to return to their homes. In that
regard, we condemn acts of intimidation, threats and
violence from any quarter. Like the Secretary-General,
we call on the leaders and the people of Kosovo to put
an end to such acts and to work actively on inter-ethnic
dialogue and reconciliation. We also support the
initiative taken by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Michael Steiner, to establish a
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina on practical
matters of mutual concern.

We appreciate the progress made by the United
Nations to improve conditions in Kosovo despite
tremendous obstacles. We commend the United Nations
efforts to promote a peace based on multi-ethnic
accommodation and the rule of law. We hope that those
efforts will continue and that important progress will
be made in the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999). Such progress will, we hope, consolidate peace
and stability in Kosovo and across the entire area of the
former Yugoslavia and its neighbourhood.

