Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Algeria
has vigorously condemned the assassination of
Mr. Rafik Hariri ever since the commission of that
abominable crime and has insisted that light be shed on
the matter and that the perpetrators, whoever they are
and wherever they might be, be brought to justice.

Those concerns prompted us to play an active
role in the negotiations that led to the Security
Council's unanimous adoption of resolution 1595
(2005), which established the international
Commission responsible for helping the Lebanese to
establish the facts. We helped to ensure that the
Commission had the full support of the Security
Council and that it would be able to carry out its
mission with full independence. Similarly, during
negotiations on resolution 1636 (2005), we strove to
provide the Commission with the means and resources
to enable it fulfil its mandate and to ensure the full
cooperation of all the parties concerned.

The Council has just considered the second
progress report. The report's conclusions are not final,
and need to be corroborated. We are convinced that, in
order to safeguard the credibility of the report and the
work of the Commission, consideration of the report
must be free from any influence that could harm one
party or another. In this regard, we welcome the
agreement reached concerning the location and
conditions for hearing the Syrian witnesses, as well as
the cooperation shown by Syria - and borne out in
actions - and we urge it to continue in the same
direction and, in particular, to comply with resolution
1636 (2005). The letters recently addressed by Syria to
the Security Council confirm that willingness to
cooperate.

We also note with satisfaction the readiness of the
Council to give positive consideration to the request
for the expansion of the mandate of the Commission
investigating the assassination of Mr. Hariri to consider
the other attacks that have taken place since 1 October
2004. We have fully supported that request, first of all
because it came directly from the Lebanese
Government, but also because there could be links
between the various attacks that have taken place in
Lebanon. Although not completely satisfactory, the
wording agreed upon by the Security Council relating
to that request and to the establishment of a tribunal of
an international character constitutes a clear
commitment on the part of the international community
to Lebanon, and we can therefore welcome it.

Finally, we have sought and obtained assurances
that the Security Council will refrain from any
premature or inappropriate action, given the stage that
the investigation has reached and the common
objectives that we are pursuing. That is why, while
pointing out that the language in the resolution just
adopted concerning the degree of cooperation by Syria
with the Investigation Commission does not do justice
to the goodwill that has been shown by that country,
we nevertheless chose to preserve the unity of the
Council and voted in favour of the text that was
submitted.

