Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me first thank
Ms. Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her briefing today. I thank her and her
entire team for their dedicated and tireless efforts over
all these years.

Like South Africa, we are also gravely concerned by
the escalation of violence and the excessive use of force
against civilian protesters, as well as the detention of
hundreds of civilians. In its press statement (SC/13836),
the Security Council called for accountability for those
events, and we echo this call. Germany urges the
authorities in the Sudan to work towards a peaceful
and transparent transfer of power to an inclusive
and civilian-led transitional Government and free
elections in order to fulfil the democratic aspirations
of the Sudanese people. Otherwise, we fear that lasting
stability cannot be achieved.

Germany strongly supports the International
Criminal Court (ICC) with regard to the investigations
concerning all serious crimes committed since 2005.
We concur with the Prosecutor that accountability
for crimes under the Rome Statute and full respect
for the rule of law are indispensable prerequisites of
sustainable peace, stability and development in the
Sudan. We encourage the authorities in the Sudan to
move forward by dealing with the past through ensuring
accountability. We fully concur with the assessment
of the Prosecutor that now is the time to act and that
continued impunity is not an option. We call on the
Sudanese authorities to fully cooperate with the ICC
and the Office of the Prosecutor. Ending impunity for
the most serious crimes is critical to preventing further
grave crimes and to bringing peace and security to the
country. The democratic aspirations of the Sudanese
people likewise include Sudan-led transitional justice.

Initiating criminal proceedings against ex-
President Al-Bashir, Mr. Harun and Mr. Hussein,
who have recently been imprisoned in the Sudan, with
regard to their responsibility for the situation in Darfur
would be an important step in the right direction. In line
with the principle of complementarity, it is the primary
responsibility of States to investigate and prosecute
crimes under the Rome Statute. We encourage the
competent authorities to fulfil that responsibility now
and ensure accountability for all crimes, especially
the most serious crimes under international law. It
is necessary for all States to fully implement the
Security Council's resolutions and to comply with their
obligation to cooperate with the Court. That includes
arresting and surrendering suspects for whom arrest
warrants have been issued. States are also obligated
to implement sanctions against individuals on the
sanctions list of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan.

On a more general note, I would like to take this
opportunity to reiterate Germany's continued support
for the ICC, its independence and effective functioning,
and the integrity and values of the Rome Statute.
The ICC is a crucial element of a strong rules-based
international order. We call on all United Nations
Member States, particularly those on the Security
Council, to keep up their support for the Court in order
to end impunity and ensure accountability. We also call
on those that have not yet joined the Rome Statute to
consider doing so now.

