Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
Security Council meeting of the President of the
Coordination Centre of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo and Metohija, Her Excellency Ms. Sanda
Raskovic-Ivic, and of the Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
Mr. Saren lessen-Petersen, and his delegation.

We take note of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2006/361) and of his Special
Representative's briefing on the situation in Kosovo,
Republic of Serbia. We also take note of the work of
Mr. Jessen-Petersen as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
during the past two years. However, we are obliged to
note that the most recent report shows signs of
rewriting Kosovo's reality. We must also note that,
despite certain favourable trends and the promises
made by the leaders of the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government in Kosovo, the implementation of
standards in Kosovo still cannot be called satisfactory.
Some of the positive peripheral developments in
Kosovo - for example, the functioning of local
governance - do not compensate for the continuing
failure to implement standards in the region as a whole.

We associate ourselves with the Secretary-
General's appeal to the leaders of the province to
urgently address those problems while giving primary
attention to priority areas, especially those of vital
importance to national minorities. The Contact Group,
along with UNMIK, transmitted to the leadership of
the Provisional Institutions a list of crucial steps in that
regard. Progress in those areas will be an important
indicator of the readiness of Kosovo's leadership to
establish the foundations for a multi-ethnic democratic
society in which the members of all communities can
live in decent and safe conditions. We hasten to add
that the tasks set out in that list constitute only a small
part of what must ultimately be done. We count on
close monitoring by the Contact Group as regards the
implementation of standards by leaders of the
province.

At the moment it is premature to say that the
requisite guarantees of the rights, safety and freedom
of movement of members of minority groups,
especially Serbs, exist. The problems associated with
decentralization and protecting the religious and
cultural heritage of minorities are also far from being
solved. The situation urgently requires greater efforts
on this track by UNMIK, the representative of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and other European organizations. We would also
welcome more energetic efforts in this area by the
Council of Europe.

In the area of maintaining law and order, and
specifically with regard to the progress made in
investigating the anti-Serb pogroms of March 2004, we
note that to date not a single network behind the
pogroms has been eliminated. Of the houses destroyed
two years ago, only slightly more than half have been
rebuilt.

We are particularly concerned that, according to
available information, between 24 October 2005 and
31 May 2006 there were a total of 187 attacks on
members of the non-Albanian population of Kosovo.
Fifteen of those cases involved firearms, and 11
included explosive devices. There were also 16 cases
of arson, while 27 passers-by in cars had stones thrown
at them. As a result of that, one person died and 21
were injured, 25 buildings were burned or damaged,
four religious buildings were destroyed or seriously
damaged, and 18 graves were desecrated. The list of
the damage goes on. The troubles in that area are also
evidenced in a series of incidents in northern
Mitrovica, were victims are unfailingly Kosovo Serbs.
Flagrant crimes against the Serb national minority are
not fully investigated, and criminals go unpunished. To
doubt that the vast majority of these crimes are
ethnically motivated is to fly in the face of common
sense.

The facts point to the urgency of the need for
more effective international pressure on extremists in
Kosovo. The international community must not give in
to outrageous blackmail from extremists, whereby the
wave of violence will continue if the province does not
receive independence by the end of the year. Claiming
political maturity, the authorities in Pristina, as well as
UNMIK, must effectively put an end to such threats
and, even more so, to such acts.

The sorriest state of affairs concerns freedom of
movement. A prime example of that is the fact that the
overwhelming majority of the inhabitants of the Serb
enclave of Gracanica, near Pristina, have never been to
the provincial centre. In other words, those people are
living in total isolation due to fear and the lack of
sufficient security on the roads.

We welcome the meeting between Mr. Sejdiu,
President of Kosovo, and Bishop Teodosije, head of the
monastery at Visoki Decani. That should provide
impetus to making progress in this area.

Nevertheless, the situation concerning the return
of refugees and the rights of communities continues to
be unsatisfactory, as the figures contained in the report
confirm. That does not take into account those who
registered their return, sold their property and once
again left Kosovo. In order to rectify the situation we
need not only political statements but also concrete
efforts, including financial measures to improve living
conditions on the ground and eliminate obstacles to the
process of return.

We note in particular the role played by the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the Council of Europe in restoring
Serbian Orthodox Church buildings in Kosovo. We
count on continued attentive monitoring by those two
international organizations. We share the Secretary-
General's concern about the continuing acts of
vandalism against religious shrines. Any incident of
that nature requires firm condemnation, above all by
the political leaders of the province.

The non-participation of Kosovo Serbs in the
activities of the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government proves that Kosovo is still far from
resolving the main task of creating a multi-ethnic and
democratic society. The level of trust of minorities in
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in
Kosovo is still low. Moreover, non-Albanian
communities have misgivings about the lack of
democracy and systems to include minorities, as well
as about the existing mechanism to monitor local
implementation of decisions in the interest of all, rather
than of a single community. A significant number of
non-Albanians still have the impression that their
participation in the Provisional Institutions is more
decorative than anything else. They feel that there is no
real involvement in the decision-making process. The
majority community must create a climate that
encourages minorities, and Kosovo Serbs in particular,
to cooperate with provincial authorities and take part in
all spheres of life in Kosovo. In that regard, we believe
that the attempts to shift to Belgrade the blame for the
non-participation of Kosovo Serbs in the activities of
the Provisional Institutions are wrong. Nor should
Belgrade be blamed for the unsatisfactory situation vis-
a-vis the standards.

We urgently call on provincial leaders to intensify
their efforts to ensure real and stable progress in the
implementation of standards, especially as regards
those that are of priority to national minorities.

Given the defining significance of the standards
for Kosovo's future, we categorically oppose attempts
to defer their implementation to the post-status period.
We view as unacceptable statements regarding
predetermination of the question of the region's
independence before the end of the year. We also
oppose the notion, heard here and there, of "status, if it
works, before standards". Arguments that the
independence of the province would somehow make it
possible for Pristina to implement standards more
effectively are absolutely unfounded.

Achieving specific and effective progress on
standards is one of the determining factors influencing
the pace and success of the negotiating process that
will determine the future status of Kosovo. We are
convinced that only a qualitative correction of the
situation regarding standards will serve to lay the
foundation for productive progress in their
implementation through the mediation of Martti
Ahtisaari, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, to
find a negotiated compromise between Belgrade and
Pristina. We note that the task of the international
mediators should be precisely that of mediation and
should not be an imposition of their own ideas,
particularly if they coincide with those of only one
side.

It is already clear that, even in the optimal
outcome, lasting and genuine results in standardization
can be assured only in the long term. Quite some time
will also be required for the parties to reach an
outcome in status negotiations. In that regard, we see
no need for the status issue to be artificially hastened.

We feel in that respect that it would be
counterproductive to establish any kind of arbitrarily
stringent timeframe. We base that assessment on the
multiple potential versions of the status option. Parties
to the direct negotiations must themselves identify,
without outside pressure, a negotiated decision on the
future status of Kosovo that satisfies both Belgrade and
Pristina.

In that connection, it is of primary importance
that, in the context of the forthcoming negotiating
rounds, the Belgrade status platform be constructively
considered alongside other proposals. The success of
the collective efforts of the international community on
Kosovo will depend on the consistent observance of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and of the
guiding principles laid out by the Contact Group, as
well as on ongoing and comprehensive monitoring by
the Security Council of standards implementation in
the province and the evolution of the negotiating
process as the parties seek a mutually acceptable status
solution.

A decision on the future status of the province
must, in all circumstances, be comprehensive. The
formula for resolving the problems of Kosovo - which
are far from unique, by the way 7 will objectively have
an impact on the development of situations in other
conflicts. The Security Council must therefore support
only negotiations, and not one-sided, unilateral or
imposed solutions, for only negotiations will not set a
negative precedent in the context of international crisis
resolution.

