Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): The people of Angola
deserve a lasting peace. No one, least of all the civilian
population, which has suffered so much already, can afford
a continued deadlock in the peace process. The Angolan
people deserve better than the current military tension and
the armed attacks which have affected civilians, Angolan
authorities and United Nations and humanitarian personnel.
The Angolans deserve better than seeing vital humanitarian
assistance delayed and stopped because of the serious
security situation. And they deserve better than the risk of
losing what has already been accomplished in the peace
process.

The Government of Sweden is deeply disturbed by the
lack of progress in the peace process in Angola over the
past months. As stated in the draft resolution before us, this
is primarily the result of the failure of UNITA to fulfil its
obligations under the "Acordos de Paz" and the Lusaka
Protocol. There can be no alternative to the full
implementation of those commitments, including in
particular the full demilitarization of those forces which
UNITA has retained despite its declarations and contrary
to its obligations under the Lusaka Protocol, as well as
through cooperation in the extension of state
administration.

We hope that both the Government and UNITA will
use the coming weeks to set the peace process back on
track and will give priority to the need for national
reconciliation and confidence-building, based on respect
for the human rights of all Angolans. We urge both
parties, but in particular UNITA, to cooperate with the
United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA)
and to guarantee the safety and security of United Nations
and humanitarian personnel.

We welcome the recent visit by the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Brahimi, to Angola
and the region and the most welcome appointment of Mr.
Issa Diallo as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. We hope that these steps will give the
peace process the momentum it so clearly needs. We
agree with the Secretary-General that to continue to work
towards peace and reconciliation is the best way to
honour the memory of Maitre Beye and his associates,
who died so tragically in June.

The Government of Sweden believes that there will
continue to be an important role for the United Nations in
promoting and building peace in Angola. The various
elements of MONUA - military, police, political and
human rights - have all made essential contributions to
the peace process. We look forward to the
recommendations of the Secretary-General on the future
role of the United Nations in Angola in these fields. In
anticipation of those recommendations, we fully support
the draft resolution before us today, which will extend the
mandate of MONUA until 15 September 1998.

