Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank the President
for organizing this wrap-up session, the sixth since the
beginning of the year, and the second in a row in the
format of a public meetingn. The convening of these
meetings, which provide an opportunity for the Security
Council to assess its work and critically examine its
progress and effectiveness, should be encouraged. I
hope that more Council members, current and future,
will continue this practice and that non-members of the
Council will continue to participate.

The delegation of Rwanda appreciates the way you,
Mr. President, presided over the Council during the
month of August, particularly your focus on effective
management of time. We extend our appreciation to
the Deputy Permanent Representative and the political
coordinator and his alternate, as well as to the whole
Security Council team of the United Kingdom.

I take this opportunity to congratulate Ambassador
Samantha Power of the United States on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of September.
We note that during its last presidency, in July 2013,
the United States organized an open debate on the
protection of journalists in armed conflicts (see S/PV.7003), and that this September, the United States
has chosen foreign terrorist fighters as the main topic
for its presidency. The barbaric killing of James Foley,
a United States journalist, by a member of the Islamic
State, including foreign terrorist fighters, is a tragic
example of the need for the Council to tackle this
scourge while enforcing the protection of civilians,
including journalists.
In connection with the protection of civilians, we
also thank the United Kingdom for organizing, on the
occasion of the World Humanitarian Day, on 19 August,
a briefing on the protection of humanitarian workers
(see S/PV.7244) in memory of Sergio Vieira de Mello,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, and his colleagues killed in the terrorist attack
against the Canal Hotel in Baghdad 11 years ago.
Rwanda supports the draft resolution that the United
Kingdom presidency has introduced in that regard.

While we appreciated the successful Security
Council trip to Belgium, the Netherlands, South
Sudan and Somalia, we noted that the maintenance
of international peace and security continued to be
gravely challenged during the month of August. From
Ukraine to the Central African Republic and through
Syria, Iraq, Libya and South Sudan, conflicts around
the world continued unaffected, many of them without
any prospect of a peaceful resolution.

More worrying is that terrorist organizations
have moved beyond committing terrorist acts, and the
Islamic State, Boko Haram and others have acquired
the military might to conquer territories with a view to
creating an Islamic caliphate. Although Rwanda usually
advocates for the peaceful resolution of conflicts, we
believe that when the world faces terrorist and genocidal
organizations, the only solution is to fight them and to
defeat them. We cannot afford to contain or appease
those violent groups. Cooperation and coordination
among regional countries and world Powers on the
Security Council are critical to achieving that goal.

However, in this dark picture of international
peace and security, we noted a glimmer of hope for the
conflict in Gaza. The open-ended ceasefire in Gaza,
brokered early this week by Egypt, could provide a
fresh start for a political solution to the long-standing
conflict in the Middle East. Nonetheless, the Security
Council should closely follow the situation and be ready
to take appropriate measures to help the parties achieve
sustainable peace and stability.

On eastern Ukraine, considered in an earlier
meeting today (see S/PV.7253), we welcomed the
regional summit held in Minsk on Monday, but we
continue to be concerned at the dangerous escalation
of the situation on the ground. We again call on the
parties concerned to exercise restraint in respect to the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine and to continue dialogue for a political and
diplomatic solution to the crisis.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was also discussed in August during a high-level
debate (see S/PV.7246) focused on the neutralization
of the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda
(FDLR). Recalling the press statement (SC/11533)
adopted on Tuesday, 26 August, Rwanda welcomes the
Security Council's clear and unreserved support for the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and
the Southern African Development Community, which
have clearly stated that a six-month period provided
to the FDLR for its disarmament must be followed
by military action should that genocidal organization
continue its delaying tactics.

We all know that the dramatic increase in and the
worsening of conflicts around the world has enlarged
the agenda for the Security Council. Unfortunately, the
situation has also made our methods of work worse.
I will not dwell too much on the need to shift our
approach from a culture of management of conflicts to
a spirit of prevention of conflicts. We have appreciated
the thematic open debate convened by the United
Kingdom in the past week (see S/PV.7247) and the
briefing provided by the Department of Political Affairs
this week. But we believe the effective prevention
of conflicts should be oriented towards regular,
country-specific scanning based on actual threats to
international peace and security.

Beyond that, Rwanda noted over the past weeks
and month not only the increase in emergency meetings
but also the emergence of a practice whereby a Council
member requests a meeting on an aspect of a particular
crisis, while another one requests a meeting to discuss
another aspect of the same crisis within the same
period. We believe that this practice undermines the
Council's ability to effectively address conflicts in a
comprehensive manner. The Council should have a
serious conversation on how to be more flexible and
more efficient and how better to manage its agenda.
We believe that the frequency of our meetings should
depend on the evolution of crises on our agenda, which
should be addressed in a holistic manner, including
sanctions. While some situations should be considered
on a biannual or quarterly basis, other situations
deserve monthly or even semi-monthly meetings, with
a clear strategy on the part of the Security Council.

To conclude, I wish to thank the Secretary-General
for his usual availability to interact with members of
the Council. I extend our appreciation to members of
his administration, including members of the Security
Council Affairs Division, for their usual assistance to
Council members.

