Mr. Bame (Ethiopia): I would like to express my
delegation's gratitude to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his comprehensive report on Somalia (S/2010/447),
and my deep appreciation to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahiga, for his efforts to
engage with the main actors in the peace process. I
would also like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kenya for his detailed briefing on
developments in Somalia and on the concrete efforts of
the subregional organizations, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the African
Union, in stabilizing that country.

Ethiopia has been doing whatever is necessary to
ensure the success of the peace process in Somalia. Our
regional organization, IGAD, supports the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) in its endeavours to ensure
peace and stability in Somalia. IGAD underlines once
again the critical need to provide the financial and
logistical support to enable the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) to reach its authorized level of
8,100 troops.

The African Union Assembly, demonstrating its
commitment to peace in Somalia, endorsed the
decisions of the IGAD heads of State and Government
in July, including the decision to deploy an additional
2,000 peacekeepers to AMISOM. immediately. My
delegation would like to stress the need for concerted
effort on the part of the international community to
assist the African Union in increasing its forces to the
level necessary to enable AMISOM. to carry out its
mandated peacekeeping activities. Nevertheless, the
ultimate solution is to transform AMISOM. into a
United Nations peacekeeping force.

Ethiopia calls for concrete action by the Security
Council aimed at stabilizing Somalia permanently by
helping the TFG and AMISOM. to bring normalcy to
that war-ravaged nation. The international community
must continue to assist the TFG, the only legitimate
body that can bring sustainable peace, which must be
encouraged to show itself able to work credibly with its
partners and to deliver results. No one can pretend that
deploying military forces in isolation can resolve
Somalia's problems. IGAD, Somalia's neighbouring
States, the African Union and the TFG have all been
working to move the political process forward.

Ethiopia believes that the transitional federal
institutions should work to strengthen internal cohesion
while avoiding the tensions to which the country has
been prone in the past, obstructing the implementation
of the Transitional Federal Charter. We believe that the
political leaders should resolve disputes among
themselves and take tangible steps towards the
fulfilment of their commitments through genuine
consultation and dialogue. We applaud the
commendable and tangible results achieved thus far,
one of which has been the broadening of the peace
process in order to bring on board others who are
prepared to work for peace and stability in Somalia.

It is important to ensure that the training of
security forces is conducted in a more organized and
coherent way, restructuring the TFG's security
institutions by making them more effective and
manageable, with proper command-and-control
structures. My delegation, while recognizing the
constructive consultations between the TFG and Ahlu
Sunnah Wal Jama'a, encourages the leadership of the
TFG to show the necessary determination to resolve to
work together. It is necessary to acknowledge that the
TFG has consistently made it clear that it is prepared to
talk to any and all groups that reject extremism and
violence. The United Nations should work to maintain
unity within the TF G.

Somalia continues to be the most dangerous
threat to regional and international security, due to the
failure of the international community to take timely
action when Al-Shabaab succeeded in galvanizing the
support of its partners. Ethiopia condemns the terrorist
attacks on civilians in Kampala and Mogadishu by
Al-Shabaab and its supporters. We would like to
emphasize that the Security Council must not abandon
Somalis to international terrorism. Al-Shabaab and its
allies, who are closely linked to Al-Qaida, must be
defeated. The United Nations and the regional
organizations and countries involved should move
forward in the struggle against the international
terrorist networks.

The Council is fully aware of Eritrea's support
for extremist groups such as Al-Shabaab and Hizbul
Islam, which continue to enjoy substantial Eritrean
military and logistical backing. There is explicit
evidence of Eritrea's continued involvement in the
transfer of weapons to Somalia. Eritrea has yet to be
deterred from violating the Council's resolutions in its
ongoing support for terrorists and efforts to destabilize
countries in the region.

Ethiopia considers that any investigation of
human rights violations in Somalia should be
undertaken within the mandate of the Human Rights
Council, and particularly by the Independent Expert on
the human rights situation in Somalia. We believe that
the efforts at the United Nations level to fight impunity
within the Djibouti peace process should be Somali-
owned.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that the
Council should work to re-hat AMISOM. to United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

