Mr. Negroponte (United States): The long-
standing commitment of the United States to peace and
stability in the Balkans is beyond question. We have
also been clear and consistent about our concerns on
the question of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
in particular the need to ensure our national jurisdiction
over our personnel and officials involved in United
Nations peacekeeping and in coalition-of-the-willing
operations.

As you are well aware, this is not the first time
we have raised this issue with the Council. I explained
these concerns when we dealt with the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) in May.
The United States voted in favour of the East Timor
resolution with the expectation that the Council would
address our concerns before the ICC came into effect
on the first of July. In East Timor only three United
States soldiers participate in the United Nations
peacekeeping mission; we intend to withdraw them
absent a solution to this question.

It is with great regret that the United States finds
itself on the eve of that date, and despite our best
efforts, without a solution.

The United States has contributed - and will
continue to contribute - to maintaining peace and
security in the Balkans and around the globe.
Contributing personnel to peacekeeping efforts
demonstrates a commitment to international peace and
security that, as you all know, can involve hardship and
danger to those involved in peacekeeping. Having
accepted these risks by exposing people to dangerous
and difficult situations in the service of promoting
peace and stability, we will not ask them to accept the
additional risk of politicized prosecutions before a
court whose jurisdiction over our people the
Government of the United States does not accept.

Some contend that our concerns are unwarranted.
With our global responsibilities, we are and will remain
a special target and cannot have our decisions second-
guessed by a court whose jurisdiction we do not
recognize.

With the court coming into being, this problem
must be resolved - but in a way that takes into
account two hard facts: the United States wants to
participate in international peacekeeping, but the
United States, a major guarantor of peace and security
around the globe and a founding member of the United
Nations, does not and will not accept the jurisdiction of
the ICC over the peacekeepers that it contributes to
operations established and authorized by the United
Nations.
The failure of the Security Council to act to
preserve an appropriate legal status for United States
and other non-ICC party peacekeepers can only end in
damage to international peacekeeping generally. We
believe that none of this is of our making. We have
offered a practical solution to this problem that would
preserve everyone's interests, protect international
peacekeeping and strengthen the hand of this Council
to maintain international peace and security.

We have scrupulously sought to find a way
forward that is consistent both with others' obligations
to the Rome treaty and with United Nations
peacekeeping practice. Furthermore, we have accepted
the principle that this solution should apply only to
States that are not party to the ICC.

Let me repeat: there is no inherent reason why
States that have signed or even ratified the Rome
Treaty cannot also support our proposed solution. Our
proposal calls for establishment of immunity for United
Nations peacekeeping. It builds on immunities that are
already recognized in the United Nations system and
reflected in status of forces and status of mission
agreements. The Rome Treaty itself recognizes the
concept of immunity. If the Security Council decides
that its ability to maintain international peace and
security will be enhanced by providing immunity to
United Nations peacekeeping, it may provide such
immunity. The framers of the ICC Treaty surely could
not limit the authority of the Security Council in that
regard. The consequence of providing United Nations
peacekeepers with such immunity would be the
creation of a legal obligation on States to observe that
immunity. Pursuant to article 98 of the ICC Treaty, the
compliance of ICC parties with such obligations is
entirely consistent with the Treaty.

It strikes us as more than perplexing that others
that are parties to the ICC can use the provision of the
Treaty to exempt their forces for an extended period
from the purview of the Court for war crimes and then
suggest that our attempt to use other provisions of the
Treaty similarly to provide protection for our forces
either Violates their Treaty obligations or does
unacceptable damage to the spirit of the Treaty.

The United States will vote against this draft
resolution with great reluctance. This decision is not
directed at the people of Bosnia. We will stand by them
and by our commitment to peace and stability in the
Balkans. The fact that we are vetoing this draft
resolution in the face of that commitment, however, is
an indication of just how serious our concerns remain
about the risks to our peacekeepers.

