The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls the letter from
the Secretary-General of 18 April 2000
(S/2000/334) and the letter from its President of
28 April 2000 (S/2000/350). The Council also
recalls the letters from the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to the United Nations to its President of 26
April 2000 (S/2000/362) and of 1 June 2000
(8/2000/515).

"The Security Council welcomes the
recommendation made by its mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, contained in
paragraph 77 of its report of 11 May 2000
(S/2000/416), to proceed with the early
establishment of an expert panel on the illegal
exploitation of natural resources and other forms
of wealth of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to establish this panel, for a
period of six months, with the following mandate:

° To follow up on reports and collect
information on all activities of illegal
exploitation of natural resources and other
forms of wealth of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, including in violation of the
sovereignty of that country;

° To research and analyse the links between
the exploitation of the natural resources and
other forms of wealth in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the continuation
of the conflict;

0 To revert to the Council with
recommendations.
the

"The Security Council stresses that in order
to implement its mandate, the expert panel, which
will be based at the United Nations Office at
Nairobi, may receive logistical support from the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC)
and make visits to various countries of the region,
making contact during its visits with diplomatic
missions in the capitals concerned, and, if
necessary, to other relevant countries.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to appoint the members of the
panel, in consultation with the Council, on the
basis of candidates' professional expertise,
impartiality and knowledge of the subregion. The
Council stresses that the Chairman of the panel
should be an eminent personality with the
necessary experience and decides that the panel
will consist of five members, including its
Chairman. The Council underlines that the panel
might call upon the technical expertise of the
Secretariat and of the Funds and Programmes and
Specialized Agencies of the United Nations, as
required. Voluntary contributions to support the
Panel would be welcomed.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to report to it on the steps
taken to establish the expert panel. The Council
requests also that the expert panel, once
established, submit to the Council, through the
Secretary-General, a preliminary report with
initial findings after three months and a final
report, with recommendations, at the end of its
mandate."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/ZOOO/ZO.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 2.05 p.m.
