Mr. Minton (United States of America): We
support the Secretary-General in his efforts, as
embodied in the observations and recommendations in
his report, to find a peaceful, sustainable solution to the
long-standing dispute in Western Sahara, and urge
other members of the Council to do the same.

We support the Secretary-General's proposed
length of mandate and sought to hew as closely as
possible to his language in explaining why this period
is appropriate and necessary. Divorcing the length of
the mandate renewal from the reasoning behind it
would have made no sense. Like the Secretary-General,
we support exerting every effort to overcome
difficulties and promote implementation of the
settlement plan. At the same time, we believe that the
Secretary-General has been clear and frank in his last
three reports over six months in telling the Council of
the difficulties of bringing the process to resolution.
Ignoring these realities will not fix them.

Therefore, we believe the Secretary-General and
his Personal Envoy should have full leeway and
authority to work with the parties as the Secretary-
General and his Envoy see necessary in order to find
ways that are acceptable to the parties - and I stress
the need for such acceptance - to peacefully resolve
their dispute over the Territory. Indeed, this breadth of
mandate for the Personal Envoy is the same as was
endorsed unanimously by the Council in 1997 and
reaffirmed in February of this year, also unanimously.

We call on both parties to cooperate fully with the
Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy in their
efforts to find a way forward. For that reason we
support this resolution and voted in favour of it.

In closing, allow me to echo the words of the
Argentine Ambassador and thank you, Mr. President,
for your leadership in steering the Council through
what has been a very difficult discussion and vote. I
think your leadership has greatly helped us see the
issue clearly and will, as the Council remains seized of
this issue, help form the basis on which we can find
unity in the future. That is certainly our hope and our
belief.

