Judge Agius (spoke in Spanish): I should like to
begin by expressing my sincere congratulations to you,
Sir, on your country's assumption of the presidency
of the Council for December. Your country is known
for its tireless support for international justice and
was, as a member of the Security Council in 1993, an
indispensable force in the creation of the Tribunal.

(spoke in English)

I take this opportunity to thank you, Sir, and your
country, along with Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand and
Venezuela - all outgoing members of this body - for
their resolute support to the Tribunal. At the same time,
I warmly welcome the incoming Security Council
members, which will see the Tribunal through to the
end of its mandate. I look forward to working with them
during 2017. I should also like to thank the Informal
Working Group chaired by Uruguay, as well as the
Office of Legal Affairs.

On behalf of all the judges and staff members of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), I wish to commend the Security Council for
its prompt reaction to the Tribunal's urgent request
concerning the composition of the Appeals Chamber.
Resolution 2306 (2016), which amended the statute
of the Tribunal, was not only adopted in a very short
period of time, but it also demonstrated the Council's
readiness and commitment to support the Tribunal.

The completion strategy report (see S/2016/976)
before the Council demonstrates that the Tribunal has
continued to work vigorously and diligently since its
last report (see S/2016/454). With only one trial, one
appeal and one contempt case remaining, the Tribunal's
mandate is nearly complete, although it is not over
and we shall face some formidable challenges in the
coming year. It will be noted that, during the current
reporting period, the Prosecutor v. Mic'o Stanisic'
and Stojan Zupljanin appeal was delivered, and I can
confirm that we are still on track to deliver judgements
in both the Prosecutor V. Ratko Mladic' trial and the
Prosecutor v. Prlic' et al. appeal by November 2017. In
addition, proceedings in the trial case of Prosecutor V.
Goran Hadeie were terminated following the death of
the accused.

The Tribunal's ongoing progress is due to the
relentless efforts of all staff and judges, to whom I
express my heartfelt thanks for their outstanding work
and dedication. In the light of the projected completion
dates of these cases, I have recently submitted a request
for a final extension ofthe terms of office ofthe Judges.
I use the term "final" precisely because I am confident
that the Tribunal will close its doors at the end of 2017.
I remain hopeful that this request will be favourably
considered by the Security Council.

Council members will also find that the
aforementioned report contains a special section on
the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS)
evaluation, and in accordance with resolution 2256
(2015) sets out the Tribunal's implementation of the
OIOS recommendations. I wish to assure all Security
Council members that the Tribunal took the evaluation
and recommendations very seriously. Everything that
could feasibly and appropriately be done was done,
bearing in mind our mutual interest that the Tribunal
should stay on course to complete all its judicial work
by 30 November 2017. The Tribunal's best efforts must
therefore be measured against the context and purpose
of that important commitment.

I draw attention to OIOS'S third recommendation,
which the Tribunal has partially implemented. A code
of professional conduct for the judges of the Tribunal
was adopted unanimously at the plenary of judges,
held on 6 July, with immediate effect. In relation to a
disciplinary mechanism, the Tribunal did not implement
that recommendation, bearing in mind the lack of time
and resources, although the judges considered it to be
desirable. ICTY judges know that they are not above the
law and that they are custodians of the justice system
and ought to be held accountable for any breach of their
ethical or professional duties. Our report also identifies
the lack of a disciplinary mechanism as a systemic
issue that affects other courts and tribunals and a wide
number of United Nations high-level and non-staff
officials. The Tribunal therefore suggests that the
General Assembly address this more comprehensively
at an organizational level.

Overall, the OIOS evaluation was a valuable
experience. However, the Tribunal regrets that it was
carried out at the very end of its lifespan and that,
as a result, it was not possible to implement certain
recommendations. Further, the OIOS evaluation focused
on efficiency, almost to the exclusion of other factors
such as effectiveness and, most fundamentally of all,
fairness and due process. This reflected an unfortunate
misunderstanding of the Tribunal's primary aim and
function - which are to deliver justice - and its
unique nature as an international judicial institution.

There is a systemic institutional problem with
international justice. It is called politics. While the
Tribunal appreciates that political sensitivities may
arise in certain circumstances as a result of cooperating
with the ICTY, these can never constitute an excuse for
failing to do so. Cooperation is a Vital responsibility
flowing from the statute of the Tribunal itself, and
reflects the collective will of the Security Council in
our common fight against impunity.

I am referring to the pending contempt case of
Prosecutor v. Jojie et al., in which the Republic of
Serbia has yet to execute the arrest warrants for three
indicted persons that were issued 22 months ago. It has
further failed to file any monthly progress reports since
May 2016. The Trial Chamber seized ofthe case advised
me in September of Serbia's continued non-cooperation
under article 29 of the Tribunal's Statute. In addition,
one week ago theTrial Chamber made public
international arrest warrants and orders to surrender
the three indictees, which it had issued confidentially
in October. I therefore request the Security Council's
support on the matter. In particular, I urge the Council
to ensure that Serbia abides by its duties under article
29 of the Tribunal's Statute and complies with the
Tribunal's orders. Furthermore, the Tribunal calls on
all Member States to execute the international arrest
warrants and orders to surrender.
In the past, the Security Council has called on
States to cooperate with the Tribunal pursuant to their
obligations under article 29. There is no reason that
this contempt case should be treated any differently,
particularly when what is at stake is the integrity of the
Tribunal's administration ofjustice. Indeed, contempt of
court sabotages the Tribunal's ability to conduct fair and
efficient legal proceedings. Furthermore, Serbia's past
cooperation does not excuse its current non-compliance
or release it from its ongoing obligations. If the Jojic'
et al. case is not heard and concluded before the end
of November 2017, it will constitute a serious blow
to all of the efforts to pursue accountability that the
Council and the Tribunal have made together over a
quarter of a century. I trust that the Security Council
will take the necessary steps to prevent such a failure of
international justice. I would like to assure the Council
that my insistence that the case be heard is not in any
way an attempt to extend the duration or life of the
Tribunal. The Tribunal stands ready to dispose of the
case expeditiously, in accordance with due process and
fair trial rights.

While I take enormous pride in closing down an
institution of the calibre of the ICTY, I can assure the
Council that it is by no means an easy task. Indeed, the
last point I would like to raise is one that the Council
is very familiar with by now, and it concerns the
Tribunal's staffing situation. Let me emphasize that my
commitment to concluding the Tribunal's work on time
is unwavering. However, I feel compelled to continue
to raise the issue because it concerns circumstances
beyond and outside my control, and because it has a
significant impact on the functioning of the Tribunal.
The reality is that staff attrition will, if left unchecked,
increase the risk that the Tribunal will not be able to
complete its remaining cases by the end of November
2017. In that connection, the Tribunal has formulated a
proposal for the consideration of the General Assembly,
which is being discussed with the Secretariat. If
adopted, the proposal will help to mitigate the risk
posed by staff attrition, and I very much hope that
Member States will lend their support in that regard.
On the Tribunal's side, we have exhausted all available
options and are now relying on the Organization to find
an adequate solution.

In conclusion, I would like to say that we should
not forget that the development of an international
justice system is a long-term project and that, in the
grand scheme of things, we are just getting started.
The Tribunal has played an enormous role in those
beginnings. Not only has it changed the way we think
about and react to impunity, it has served as a powerful
catalyst for the establishment of other international
courts and tribunals. As we approach our final year of
operations, there is much to reflect on and be proud of.
The Tribunal looks forward to completing its remaining
cases and cementing its significant legacy during 2017,
and to continuing to work with the Security Council
towards the conclusion of its mandate.

