Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. Allow
me, through you, to thank Mr. Djibrill Bassole,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso and the

Special Representative of the Facilitator of the peace
process in Cote d'Ivoire, President Blaise Compaore,
for his good offices and for his briefing to the Council
this morning. Allow me also to thank Mr. Abou
Moussa, Principal Deputy Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Cote d'Ivoire, for his
comprehensive briefing to the Council this morning.

The Agreement signed in Ouagadougou on
4 March 2007 by President Laurent Gbagbo and Prime
Minister Guillaime Soro represent a historic turning
point and a major opportunity to turn a new page in the
Ivorian crisis.

We have been closely watching the
implementation of that Agreement in the first months
following its conclusion. That period witnessed a
number of positive developments, including symbolic
initiatives such as the flame of peace ceremony in
Bouake, during which the process of disarming the
Forces nouvelles was launched in the presence of the
President, the Prime Minister and a number of African
heads of State or their representatives. In addition,
there were the practical steps to implement the
Agreement, such as the establishment of the integrated
command centre in charge of implementing the
military and security aspects, the deployment of mixed
contingents, the replacement of the zone of confidence
with the green line, and the launching of the process of
identification of the population and voter registration.

However, the failure to meet the deadlines set by
the Ouagadougou Agreement for taking those steps is a
cause for concern. The same goes for the obstacles
facing completion of the unification of the defence and
security forces, disarming and disbanding the militias,
and completing the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, as well as the
difficulty of redeploying the State administration
throughout the country.

The report of the Secretary-General currently
before the Council (S/2007/593) identifies the
obstacles in the way of full implementation of the
Agreement. The Government and the other Ivorian
parties must therefore act immediately to overcome
those hurdles, especially through the Evaluation and
Monitoring Committee and the implementation of the
Ouagadougou Agreement, with the assistance of the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI),
the French Operation Licorne troops, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
regional intermediaries. By so doing, they will avail
themselves of the historic opportunity offered by the
positive political climate currently prevailing in cote
d'Ivoire and extricate the country from its current
crisis.

The embargo on arms imports and the targeted
sanctions imposed by the Council should be fully
adhered to. It is also necessary not to hinder the
activities of UNOCI, the French troops which support
it, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the Special Representative of the Facilitator or the
Group of Experts established under resolution 1643
(2005).

While the security and political situation in the
country has started to improve gradually since the
signing of the Ouagadougou Agreement, the economic
and humanitarian situation of the Ivorian people has
not improved commensurately. Since we are aware of
the close link between peace and security on the one
hand and the stability of the socioeconomic situation
on the other, we stress the importance of focusing on
the economic recovery of the country and on
addressing the worsening humanitarian situation,
including providing assistance in the return of persons
displaced by war. It goes without saying that
international financial support has a critical role to play
in the implementation of the Ouagadougou Agreement
and in post-conflict recovery. We therefore commend
the high level of funding that has been recently
provided by the other international stakeholders in
response to the appeal launched by the Government.

Finally, the human rights situation in C6te
d'Ivoire is also one of the issues that must be addressed
in that country where civilians are still subject to
abusive behaviour by Government defence and security
forces and members of the Forces nouvelles.
Furthermore, many reports note the growing problem
of human trafficking for forced prostitution and forced
labour, particularly the trafficking of children.

