Mr. Belinga-Eboutu (Cameroon) (spoke in French): The delegation of Cameroon is grateful to
you, Mr. President, for having accepted the request of
the Arab Group urgently to convene a Security Council
meeting to discuss the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.

That question, which is at the centre of the
Israeli-Arab conflict, spanned the twentieth century,
unfortunately without a solution being found. However,
the Organization, through the Security Council, has
envisaged a lasting settlement of that conflict. That is
the purpose of resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and,
recently, 1397 (2002). Those resolutions are the
foundation for the political settlement; they are also the
expression of the principle of land for peace.

Thus the objective to be attained is well known
and the path for reaching it has been laid out. What we
need today is political will - a political will that is
strong and clear. It is because such political will has
been lacking, and is still lacking, and because the
parties have had scant interest in respecting the
Council's resolutions, that the settlement of the
Palestinian question has been slow to emerge.

The spiral of violence is expanding, and, in the
face of that growth, there is great risk that
discouragement will triumph. Over the past months and
days, the escalation of Violence has been particularly
dangerous - so many deaths, so much suffering and
destruction. It is truly a tragedy. In the light of those
conditions, we understand the great hope raised by
recent initiatives and decisions aimed at ending the
violence and relaunching the peace process: resolution
1397 (2002), envisioning two States, Israeli and
Palestinian, living side by side within secure and
recognized borders; the peace initiative of Crown
Prince Abdullah; the diplomatic actions in the field by
the "quartet"; and the recent mission of the United
States Secretary of State to the Middle East.

On 18 April the Secretary-General submitted to
the Council and defended a new proposal for action by
the international community to achieve peace in the
Middle East, peace that - one cannot fail to repeat -
must be based on settlement of the central question of
Palestine. The Secretary-General proposed the
deployment of a multinational force in the region. That
force, which would not be a United Nations force,
would be approved and authorized by the Council
within the framework of Chapter VII of the Charter. As
the Secretary-General informed the Council, it would
pursue a quadruple objective: ending the cycle of
Israeli-Palestinian violence, creating conditions for the
resumption of normal activities in the Palestinian
territories, re-establishing the institutions of the
Palestinian Authority, and facilitating the resumption
of negotiations on a political settlement of the entire
Middle East crisis. Once it was made public, the
proposal gave rise, not to opposition as such, but rather
to a series of questions and reactions aimed at
mastering its details. Over the course of negotiations in
the coming days, we hope to see such questions and
reactions smoothed out.

Cameroon believes that this multinational force
can be deployed without waiting for the parties' full
support. However, if it is to fulfil its mission, it must
enjoy and be assured of the full cooperation of all
parties. The evidence of such cooperation on the part of
Israel and of the Palestinian Authority, as well as of
other parties directly interested and concerned, would
be a sign of their will to commit to the peace process,
in which political and security considerations
predominate.

Therefore, the Secretary-General's proposal, in
our view, is an essential contribution in the search for a
way to restore confidence between Israelis and
Palestinians. Such confidence would assist in the
resumption of negotiations towards peace. Only
negotiations - no other type of action - can lead to
peace. Any other kind of solution that the parties might
wish to undertake, any other option that the parties
might resort to can only lead to a nightmare or
apocalypse - such an apocalypse as has been
proclaimed so many times in that land holy to three
faiths. But if there were such an apocalypse, it would
not make any distinction between the winners and the
losers, between these people and those people. We have
caught a glimpse of this in the escalation of Israeli
military violence and the multiplication of Palestinian
suicide attacks.

It is for all these reasons that Cameroon shares
the global vision of the Secretary-General. Confronted
with the worsening situation, the lack of trust, the
hatred that is developing, the language we hear from
both parties - which is increasingly war-like and not
peaceful - all of this means that the parties will not be
able to find their way to the negotiating table by
themselves. Hence, there is a need for action by a third

party.

Not so long ago, when Cameroon proposed that a

Security Council mission be sent to the field, we spoke
about the need to apply electroshock therapy to the
situation. The multinational force, whose mandate has
been sketched out, we feel is the solution towards
which we should strive. This is a win-win situation.
Israel would win, and the Palestine Authority and
Palestine would win, too. The international community
and the region would also win, and, above all, peace
would win - peace in people's hearts, peace in their
minds and, finally, protection for men, women and
children.

The search for peace, we feel, should be the
guiding line when we examine the Secretary-General's
proposal. It is the search for peace that can bring us
together to find rapidly the right shape and form for the
multinational force.
This is an emergency. The situation is a tragedy.
The credibility of the Security Council is at stake. Let's
make a decision. Let's make a decision to help the
Council emerge from what the other day I called the
"deafening silence" of its resolutions.

