Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Japan on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month,
and today we indeed see that Japan has made a great
deal of effort in organizing today's meeting. I also want
to thank France for the work it carried out during its
presidency of the Security Council.

On behalf of my delegation, I also want to express
our sincerest condolences to the French people
following the abominable terrorist attack that took
place yesterday, which resulted in the deaths of a large
number of civilians who were celebrating the 14 July
French national holidayin the city of Nice in the south
of France. We wish to express our sincerest sympathies
to the families of the victims, and we pray to God the
Almighty for the recovery and health of those who
were injured. The Iraqi Government wishes to express
sympathy to the Government and the people of France

in the fight against terrorism, takfirism and all forms
of extremism.

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Kubis, and his team for
all the assistance provided through the work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
both Baghad and New York. I thank him for his very
productive efforts.

The Iraqi Government is making every possible
effort to fight terrorism, notably in improving the
capacities of the security forces and regaining all the
territories that were only recently taken by Da'esh
terrorist gangs. That is happening thanks to the
command and supervision of the General Commander
of the Armed Forces, the Prime Minister of Iraq. My
Government acknowledges that the Iraqi army and
security services have truly succeeded in liberating the
city of Fallujah, whereby we have been able to regain
control of a number of villages and neighbourhoods
in the city and consequently recover the city centre,
formerly under the control of Da'esh. We continue in
our efforts to allow internally displaced persons to
return safely to their cities, in particular through our
work in removing anti-personnel mines.

Over the past several weeks, we have fought to
liberate Rutbah city, the town of Baghdadi and the road
between Haditha and Heet, breaking the siege imposed
on Haditha since 2014. We also liberated city of Trebil
on the border between Iraq and Jordan. That city will
be soon be reopened, as well as the points of entry that
will allow refugees to return home. We will be able to
recommence trade between the two brotherly countries
of Jordan and Iraq.

Through the assistance of the international
coalition, the Iraqi Government was able to liberate
approximately 60 per cent of territory formerly under
the control of Da'esh terrorist groups. We are also
carrying out preparatory efforts to liberating Mosul.
As the Council is aware, certain operations are already
under way under the supervision of the Joint Operations
Command, and several villages have already been
retaken in the first phase.

The Government has already put in place a number
of plans to ensure stability in the various areas that
have been liberated. In particular, the Government
has created stability by providing basic services for
the population in general and security services for
displaced citizens who seek to a safe return to their
places of origin. Thanks to the assistance of the
international coalition and funds from United Nations
Development Programme, we have been able to make
progress towards building a more stable Iraq.

More than 700,000 Iraqis have returned to their
homes in zones liberated from Da'esh and other terrorist
groups. Once again, thanks to significant financial
resources provided by the international coalition, we
have been able to ensure the security of those areas
before displaced persons had begun to return. We have
also been able to provide basic services to those people
so that they can return to normal life.

Iraq condemns in the strongest possible terms
efforts of some Arab and non-Arab media to manipulate
information on events through a strong sectarian bias in
their reporting. That is exactly what Da'esh has been
trying to do through its policies designed to incite
hatred. Of course, Iraqis opposed the different terrorist
organizations that infiltrated the region, and it was this
Iraqi opposition that led to the liberation of Fallujah
from the hands of Da'esh. The liberation was a victory
for all Iraqis regardless of their community of origin or
religious affiliation.

The liberation of Fallujah allows us to return to a
path ofnational cohesion. Falluj ah is, first and foremost,
an Iraqi city, and the people of Iraq love and respect
that city much more than any of the Da'esh terrorists
do, especially since the citizens of Fallujah saw hunger,
suffering and death when the city was under Da'esh's
control. It is now time to apply resolution 2178 (2014),
on foreign terrorist fighters, in order to halt the flow
into Iraq of such fighters, who come from more than
120 States Members of the United Nations. We also
need to cut off the sources of financing for these groups,
including the illicit trade in antiquities and Iraqi oil. We
must stop - at the source - logistical aid, medical
assistance and arms from reaching to terrorists.

The Iraqi Government would like to stress the
importance of the commitments that the international
community has made, in particular commitments
made in Security Council resolutions, with respect to
impunity. Some groups associated with Da'esh still
enjoy a certain degree of impunity, while flows of
financial assistance continue to reach them and other
groups associated with Da'esh. Governments of the
world need to stand shoulder-to-shoulder with Iraq in
its fight against terrorism, in particular by providing
a firm stance against all groups and entities that are
providing financial assistance to terrorists.

In that regard, the Iraqi Minister for Foreign Affairs
presented an official inquiry to the Government of Saudi
Arabia in order for light to be shed on why Saudi officials
permitted Saudi non-governmental organizations to
send funds to terrorist groups in Iraq under the pretext
that the aid was for the children of Fallujah. We would
recall that Security Council resolutions are legally
binding on all States around the world and that they
are to be respected without exception. That is essential.
There can be no exceptions. The Iraqi Government
asks all of the countries of the world and the relevant
United Nations sanctions committees to respect these
binding decisions, work to limit the terrorist capacities
of Da'esh and cut off all sources of financing that these
terrorist groups enjoy.

In addition, we would like to remind the members of
the Security Council that it is extremely important that
they call on Turkey to withdraw its forces from Iraq.
Turkish forces have violated not just an independent
State's sovereignty, but also other principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. Turkey should respect
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Iraq and refrain from interfering in Iraq's domestic
affairs. Iraq has not violated the sovereignty or territorial
integrity of Turkey. We call on the Security Council
to order Turkey to immediately withdraw its forces
from Iraq, in particular those that made incursions
into Iraqi territory without obtaining any authorization
whatsoever from the Iraqi Government.

The Government and the people of Iraq would like
to thank all the States members of the international
coalition, in particular the United States of America
and the members of the European Union, as well as all
other countries beyond the international coalition, for
the efforts they have made to date to fight terrorism.
We also thank them for the logistical support they
have extended to Iraqi security forces in the context
of full coordination among forces, which has been
crucial to protecting our sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We recognize in particular the efforts made
to restore stability in the areas retaken from Da'esh by
Iraqi forces.

It is now incumbent upon us to ease the humanitarian
crisis facing all the internally displaced people in Iraq.
We need to mitigate the immediate risks coming from
the presence of mines and explosive devices left behind

by Da'esh's criminal gangs. We must provide the basic
services that people need and create opportunities
for their employment. We are grateful to the United
Nations and its specialized agencies for the efforts
made to provide the Iraqi Government with the support
it needs in addressing the domestic situation. We call
upon all the States of the world to continue financing
these assistance programmes in Iraq.

Iraq is working tirelessly to improve its relations
with Arab countries and other countries in the region.
Proof of this is the improvement in our relationships with
Kuwait, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Iran. We also continue
to maintain relations with the Syrian Government.

The Government of Iraq is committed to making
progress on the issue of the missing Kuwaiti citizens
and archives. Our national committees are working
diligently to determine what happened to the Kuwaiti
reported missing. A technical sub-committee has met,
as has a Tripartite Committee, which recently held its
forty-second meeting, with a view to finding out what
had become of the missing Kuwaitis. On 23 May, a
meeting was held in Kuwait to discuss developments
related to potential burial sites for some of the missing.
Since then, the Iraqi authorities have continued their
exhumation work on remains at 1,300 sites around
Al-Kumaisia, but we have not yet found any evidence
of Kuwaiti bodies at the sites in question. We must
therefore re-evaluate the witness statements received
that attested to the kidnapping of Kuwaitis. We will also
have to re-assess information provided by witnesses at
certain Kuwaiti bases. Announcemts will be placed in
the Kuwaiti media to call for witnesses who may be
able to provide credible information. All of this is with
a view to carrying out furhter exhumation work in
areas identified by the witnesses. To that end, the Iraqi
Defence Ministry has developed a plan for the second
half of this year.

Iraq expresses its profound gratitude to the State of
Kuwait, to the Amir and to the country's Government and
the people for postponing the payment of compensation
amounting to $4.6 billion until the agreed-upon date of
1 January 2018.

Iraq is committed to protecting and repatriating
the residents of Camp Hurriyah. In that connection, we
express our appreciation for the efforts of Ms. Lute to
find a lasting solution to this issue.

I would like to inform the Security Council of the
desire of the Government of the Republic of Iraq to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq for one year, in line with the statement
made by Prime Minister Al Abadi and the letter
addressed by Foreign Minister Al-Jaafari to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon dated 11 May 2016, and in
accordance with the letter and spirit of the provisions
set out in resolution 1770 (2007).

Finally, we thank Special Representative Jan Kubis
and his team for their efforts in advising the Iraqi
Government. We appreicate the activities undertaken
by UNAMI for a unified and stable Iraq, free from
terrorism. We condemn the killing of a UNAMI staff
member, and we would like to inform the Council that
te competent Iraqi authorities are conducting a thorough
investigation to identify the perpetrators of that crime
in order to bring them to swift justice.
