Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to commend the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Poland on his commitment to the rights of children. I
also thank Ms. Mariatu Kamara; Mr. Majok Peter Awan;
and the Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Henrietta
Fore, for their statements.

This year we mark the thirtieth anniversary of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the sixtieth
anniversary of the Declaration on the Rights of the
Child and, in two days' time, the tenth anniversary
of resolution 1882 (2009), submitted at the initiative
of France and adopted unanimously by the Council.
This is an opportunity to take stock not only of the
progress made, with more than 130,000 children freed
in approximately 20 years, but also of the considerable
challenges ahead. In 2018, there were 25,000 verified
violations, including 12,000 killings and cases of
maiming. This is an inadmissible record, and that is
why the Council must step up its action in order to
better protect the more than 200 million children who
are confronted daily with a situation of war.

We commend the role of Belgium as Chair of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
We must use all the tools available to us to protect
children. First and foremost, we must make full use
of the mechanisms created by the Council. Resolution
1882 (2009) in particular strengthened the monitoring
and reporting mechanism, which must remain at
the heart of our strategy. I would like to commend
the Special Representative on her recent visits to the
Central African Republic and to Mali, which are vital
in order to establish a dialogue with the authorities and
with armed groups. Such visits are imperative. We are
encouraged by the signing of additional plans of action
by the Central African Patriotic Movement and the
Syrian Democratic Forces, which we hope will lead to
positive results.

Child-protection advisers also play a key role.
We owe them, for instance, the successes obtained
by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It is vital that their functions and specific roles be
maintained within peacekeeping operations. I welcome
also the adoption by the Working Group of the
conclusions on Syria and on Burma, which now must
be fully implemented.
Lastly, I would like to reiterate the importance
of the annexes to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/509), which list the parties to armed conflict
that commit violations against children. Their role as
a deterrent and a motivating force needs no further
demonstration. It must be made clear that no party
will be struck from these annexes without first
having demonstrated real progress. Resolution 1882
(2009) defines sexual violence as a criterion for the
inscription of parties on the blacklist. However, we
must acknowledge that 10 years later we have not put
an end to such violence and must therefore redouble
our efforts. The cooperation between the two Special
Representatives on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and for Children and Armed Conflict is vital. Their
interaction with the sanctions committees and the
exchange of information on individual cases must also
be further bolstered.

We must also step up our efforts to prevent violations
and reintegrate children who are victims of conflict. On
31 October 2017, the French Minister for Europe and
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, presided over
an open debate in the Security Council (see S/PV.8082)
and proposed measures based on prevention and the
reintegration of children. Bearing this in mind, we call
once again on those States that have not yet done so
to adopt the constitutional bloc to protect children in
conflict by signing and ratifying the Optional Protocol

to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and by
endorsing the Paris Commitments to protect children
from unlawful recruitment or use by armed forces
or groups; the Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups (Paris Principles); the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping
and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers; and the Safe Schools Declaration.

This legal corpus must be fully implemented,
which involves punishing and trying those responsible
for grave crimes against children through the use of
national, joint or international legal mechanisms. This
involves also ensuring access by children to education,
health care and other essential services in safe schools
and hospitals. This is a priority of President Macron,
who decided that France would contribute €200 million
to the Global Compact on education and set up
innovative financing by focusing as a priority on the
education and empowerment of girls.

France is furthermore fully committed to the
reintegration of children, not only as co-Chair of the
Group of Friends of Reintegration of Child Soldiers,
but also and especially on the ground, including in the
Central African Republic, where France is funding
several projects related to the access to education.

We will continue to play an active role in shielding
children from the suffering of war. We often say that
children represent the future and coming generations
and that they are the condition of a lasting peace, but
protecting them is also a universal moral obligation,
and we must redouble our efforts.

