I thank Under-Secretaries-General Rosemary DiCarlo and Jean-Pierre Lacroix for their comprehensive briefings. I would also like to welcome Ambassador Omer Siddig, Permanent Representative of the Republic of the Sudan. Viet Nam commends the efforts of the transitional Government of the Sudan in promoting peace, stability and development in the country, as well as in responding to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We welcome the recent progress made in the peace negotiations between the Government and the armed groups in Darfur. We also express our support for the efforts of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), as well as those of regional organizations and countries of the region, namely, the African Union and neighbouring South Sudan, in contributing to the peace process in the Sudan. We also agree with many of the points in the statement made earlier on behalf of the three African countries that are members of the Security Council. With regard to recent developments, allow me to make the following observations. First, the implementation of the transitional tasks and the peace negotiations remain the two most important tasks in order to achieve long-term peace and stability in the Sudan. It is our sincere hope that the Government of the Sudan and the relevant parties in Darfur can build consensus and jointly advance the political transition and peace process. We believe that more confidence-building measures should be supported in this regard. The support of the United Nations and the African Union, as well as the mediation role of South Sudan, can be further strengthened. The recent positive developments in the Sudan's neighbour country can be conducive to promoting the Darfur peace process. Furthermore, in the light of the challenges posed by COVID-19, it is important to support the Government in maintaining dialogue with the relevant parties in Darfur, including via remote means. Secondly, we note that the security situation in Sudan in general and Darfur in particular have become more stable, owing not only to the effective work of UNAMID but also to the active efforts of the Sudanese Government. However, intercommunal violence, attacks on camps for internally displaced persons and United Nations staff in Darfur remain issues of high concern. We urge all armed groups in Darfur to exercise maximum restraint. We call on the Sudanese authorities to find more comprehensive solutions to address the root causes of those issues. We also strongly condemn the attempted assassination of Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok on 9 March. In this critical period, it is vital to refrain from any actions that could undermine the peace, security and stability of the Sudan. Thirdly, it is important to promote the safety and livelihoods of the people, especially in the context of COVID-19. Viet Nam is concerned by the growing spread of COVID-19 in the Sudan in recent weeks. The international community should continue to support the Sudanese Government in its efforts to address the pandemic as well as the current socioeconomic challenges, including food insecurity and climate change. Sustainable development will reduce the risk of violence. Fourthly, on UNAMID, we acknowledge that Darfur is currently in a transitional phase from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, as mentioned by the United Nations and the Sudanese Government. The whole country is also in a critical period of transition. In that regard, Viet Nam supports the establishment of a new United Nations presence, after the exit of UNAMID, to assist the political, security 23/26 24/26 and development process in all of the Sudan as well as to promote the governance capacity of the Sudanese Government and the local authorities. At the same time, we believe that this process must be carefully considered and carried out in line with the situation on the ground and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. It is also important for the international community and the Council to take into account the views of the Sudanese Government, which holds the primary responsibility for maintaining security in the Sudan. Fifthly, we strongly support the active role and participation of women in all stages of the peace process, and therefore appreciate the efforts of UNAMID to support the engagement of women in many aspects, such as resolving intercommunal issues and the protection of civilians. We look forward to the continuation of such efforts in the post- UNAMID phase. To conclude, Viet Nam would like to reaffirm its support for the pursuit of sustainable peace, stability and development for the Sudanese people.
