Mr. Fawzy (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would like,
at the outset, to thank the Russian presidency of the
Security Council for the month of September for having
convened this important meeting on the topic "Peace
and security in Africa: partnership to strengthen
regional peace and security". I would also express our
appreciation for having invited Egypt to participate
in this meeting as Chairperson of the African Union,
thereby reflecting the important African vision on
issues of peace and security on the continent and the
principle of African solutions for African problems.

The African continent is facing a number of
interlinked challenges affecting peace and security,
foremost of which are the threats of terrorism and
extremism spreading across different regions in Africa,
as well as organized crime, human trafficking, arms
trafficking and the impacts of climate change, such as
desertification, water shortages and scarcity of natural
resources, at a time of peoples' growing aspirations to
peace, stability, development and well-being. On this
occasion, I would like to focus in my statement on three
main messages.

First, Egypt believes that the best means to ensure
stability and peace in the world, especially on the
African continent, is by addressing the root causes of
problems that constitute a threat to peace and security,
while working on conflict and crises prevention in
the first place. Furthermore, the role of preventive
diplomacy and mediation in settling disputes among
States is important. In that context, we stress the need
to respect the established principle of African solutions
for African problems. That principle was the basis for
the successful Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020
initiative, which complements other ongoing African
efforts to establish security and peace in Africa,
constituting also an important added value to the
pillars of the African Peace and Security Architecture
with the aim of promoting mediation and preventive
diplomacy to prevent, resolve and manage conflicts and
crises and achieving post-conflict reconstruction and
development. That would revive the relevant African
policy, including through launching the activities of the
African Union Centre for Post Conflict Reconstruction
and Development in Africa, which is based in Cairo.

Secondly, Egypt stresses the importance of all
international and regional concerted efforts to support
stability and security on the African continent. In that
regard, we underscore the importance of achieving
continued consistency and coordination between the
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council. The aim is to unify visions and
positions related to all the issues included on the agenda
of both Councils. In that connection, I would like to
commend the important role played by the group of the
three African States members of the Security Council.

Thirdly, all international and regional efforts aimed
at achieving stability and security on the continent
must be based on the principle of the sovereignty of
States and the central role of Governments in designing
peace agreements and development plans in accordance
with national priorities and national ownership.
Sustainable and long-term peace can be achieved
only by strengthening the capacity of Governments
to extend their authority throughout their territories
and promote their institutional capacities in all fields,
thereby achieving security and stability while ensuring
their gains in that regard.

In conclusion, I cannot but to emphasize the close
link between peace and security, on one hand, and
achieving sustainable development, on the other, as
well as ensuring the transition from achieving peace
and security to peacebuilding and sustainable peace.
All international and regional efforts to achieve peace,
security and stability must go hand in hand with
efforts to achieve socioeconomic development. We are
therefore currently preparing for the Aswan Forum for
Peace and Sustainable Development to be launched
at the summit level on 11 and 12 December. The
Forum will be a platform for dialogue and interaction
among leaders, decision-makers and experts in
order to lay out an integrated African vision linking
aspects of development and peace, and to practically
implement existing African initiatives and policies
as well as achieving sustainable development. That
would contribute to the stability of societies while
minimizing the risks of polarization of destructive and
extremist ideologies.

