Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
should like to express the condolences of the British
Government to the delegation of China on the loss of
life following the devastating earthquake today.

I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing this morning.

Peace in the Middle East remains a key priority
for the United Kingdom. As long as a sustainable
solution eludes us, the situation in Palestine and Israel
will remain a catalyst for resentment, violence and
extremism. So it is in the interest of this Council,
which is charged with maintaining global peace and
security, and of the rest of the international community
to encourage a rapid resumption and conclusion of
negotiations between the parties, leading to a lasting
peace.

The end state is clear - an independent and
viable Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel and its other neighbours. This
objective is shared by almost all of the international
community. There is also broad international
convergence on the parameters of a conclusive
solution: two States, borders based on those of 1967,
Jerusalem as the capital of both States, and a just
settlement for refugees.

But whatever the will of the international
community and whatever its shared goal and common
understanding of the parameters, there can be no peace
until the parties themselves take the necessary steps to
move the process forward. I would like to make four
points on what we believe needs to happen in order to
make progress.

First, peace can be achieved only through
negotiations. We urge the parties to urgently enter into
proximity talks. Both sides should be prepared to use
the talks to discuss all core issues. But indirect talks
are no substitute for direct negotiations, so the aim
must be for proximity talks to rapidly lead to face-to-
face negotiations. Setting a clear time frame is key. We
therefore welcome the 24-month time frame articulated
in the Quartet's 19 March statement.

Secondly, both sides must work harder on
creating an atmosphere conducive to peace. That
requires them to abide by their previous commitments
and to avoid provocation and incitement. Israeli
settlement activity in the occupied territories, including
in East Jerusalem, is illegal under international law and
should stop. Last month's announcement of 16,000
new housing units in the Jerusalem settlement of
Ramat Shlomo was not only illegal, but had an
immediate negative impact on the prospects for
resumed peace talks. We are also concerned by the
recent Israeli decision to change the deportation rules
for Palestinian nationals living in the West Bank. We
urge the Israeli authorities, in accordance with
international law, to respect the freedom of Palestinians
to live in the West Bank and to move freely within the
Palestinian territories.
The Palestinian side must also refrain from
incitement. The recent deaths of two Israel Defense
Forces soldiers in Gaza - and Israel's response, which
resulted in the deaths of at least four Palestinians -
were a tragic reminder of the risk of a return to a cycle
of Violence. It is the responsibility of Hamas, if it
genuinely wants a peaceful and better future for the
citizens of Gaza, to ensure an end to all violent attacks
emanating from Gaza and to release unconditionally
Gilad Shalit, who has been held without Red Cross
access for nearly four years. The Palestinian Authority
should also avoid any actions that make restarting the
negotiations more difficult. In particular, we find any
form of commemoration or celebration of individuals
who have been responsible for the death of civilians
deeply distasteful.

Thirdly, sustainable peace requires a viable
Palestinian State represented by a united leadership.
We continue to support the Palestinian Authority's two-
year State-building plan that will lay the foundation of
a future State. This ambitious and impressive effort
needs to be reinforced by a unified leadership.

Fourthly, Israel must ensure that its actions do not
damage the prospects for a viable Palestinian State
under unified leadership. Israel's de facto blockade of
Gaza only serves to radicalize and isolate its
population, a key stakeholder in any future peace.
Furthermore, it is a failed policy. The tunnels are
becoming more sophisticated, to the point where there
are frequent reports of four-by-four vehicles being
smuggled through them. Consequently, it is almost
certainly more difficult to monitor and control the flow
of illicit weapons into Gaza, and Hamas is profiting,
both financially and politically, from the tunnel
economy.

We welcome the limited Israeli cooperation with
the United Nations Gaza reconstruction initiative and
the easing of restrictions on the flow of some goods
into Gaza, as outlined by Mr. Pascoe. But it is not
sufficient. We urge Israel to open the crossings so
Gazans can access the means to meet their needs
legitimately.

Finally, the region and the wider international
community must play a key role. We fully support the
efforts of the United States Administration to bring the
parties to the negotiating table. Active Arab
engagement and encouragement will also be crucial to
creating an atmosphere conducive to peace and
securing the desired end state. The region, this Council,
the Quartet and the broader international community
must send a clear and unambiguous message about our
shared vision, the parameters of a solution and our
willingness to stand ready to provide practical support,
as required, once negotiations get under way. The
world is ready and waiting, but it is up to the parties
themselves to take the first steps.

