Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I want to note that I have the
impression, as other colleagues certainly also do, that
those who called for this meeting today are attempting
to nullify the cooperation between the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic and the United Nations. As
the Council knows, that cooperation has had a number
of positive results over the many years of the so-called
Syrian crisis. I have heard some colleagues, specifically
those who called for today's meeting, saying that the
Syrian Government does not want to cooperate with the
United Nations. The Council is aware that those words
have nothing to do with the reality.

First of all, we are a founding Member of the
United Nations and have been elected as a member of
the Security Council three times. We are therefore quite
familiar with the importance both of this international
Organization and the Council.

Secondly, we have been committed to the Geneva
talks since the beginning. We held dozens of meetings
with the late Kofi Annan and with Lakhdar Brahimi
and Staffan de Mistura. We have devoted thousands of
hours to working with them to help Syria end the crisis,
and we are therefore committed to the United Nations.
The Council knows that we have sat down with it 56
times to discuss reports issued by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), which
is a humanitarian body of the United Nations. I repeat, I
have discussed OCHA reports with the Council 56 times,
which represents additional proof of our cooperation
with the United Nations. We cooperate with all the
United Nations entities located in Damascus, as well
as 28 international non-governmental organizations. Of
course, we participated in the Astana process, which,
as the Council is aware, has yielded many positive
results. We are cooperating with the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, as the Council is
also aware, and we have participated with the Council
in dozens of meetings on that topic. There is therefore
no reason to doubt my Government's cooperation with
the United Nations, and I hope that this topic will be
pulled out of circulation in such important meetings.

This meeting, which is being held to hear a briefing
by the Special Envoy, is taking place two days after
the anniversary of the founding of our Organization.
We are proud that my country has been a founding
Member and signatory to the Charter, as I mentioned
earlier. The Charter has enshrined the principles of
respecting the sovereignty and independence of States
Members of the United Nations; rejecting the crimes of
aggression against them; rejecting interference in their
internal affairs; and rejecting actions that undermine
their territorial integrity.

It is shameful that 74 years after the creation of our
Organization and the adoption of those lofty principles,
these values are being swept aside and ignored by States,
including some permanent members of the Council.
Certain Western countries violated the Charter very
quickly, even before the ink it was written in had dried.
Those States in particular conspired against my
country and waged an unprecedented seven-year
terrorist war against it. They have created military
bases to sponsor and protect the terrorists whom
they brought from the four corners of the globe; they
called them the moderate armed opposition. The
plans and projects of the enemies of Syria are harmful
and poisonous as snake venom, but in the face of the
resilience and determination of our people, they will
become as fragile as a spider's web.

I deplore the fact that the statement made today by
the Special Envoy did not refer in any way to terrorism or
to the shelling carried out by the so-called international
coalition, which is led by the United States of America.
Syrian towns and villages have suffered 69 military
raids carried out by coalition planes that have created
thousands of martyrs and wounded thousands more, in
addition to destroying my country's infrastructure. The
Special Envoy did not mention that, although I always
started my meetings with him in Geneva by recalling
the need for him to make a statement condemning these
military operations against Syrian civilians, in Deir ez-
Zor and elsewhere.

Once again, on 19 October, the illegitimate so-
called international coalition led by the United States
of America committed a heinous crime that caused
dozens of civilian deaths. Coalition planes deliberately
targeted the villages of Sousa and Bubadran in the
south-eastern part of Deir ez-Zor province, martyring
62 civilians, mostly women and children, and leaving
many people injured, some of them critically.

I have sent the Council 96 official messages
informing it of the appalling crimes committed by
the illegitimate coalition against Syrian civilians. I
demonstrated that the coalition had targeted everything
except armed terrorist groups. As a poet once said, if
my interlocutors had been alive, my voice would have
reached them.

Certain members of the Council have been passive
with regard to those crimes. The Special Envoy has
joined them in also ignoring those crimes and not
mentioning them in the reports of the Secretariat, which
are claimed to be credible although they are far from
being so. We therefore call for accountability and for
those States that consider themselves to be defenders of
the right to life to move away today, not tomorrow, from
this pernicious coalition.

What is astonishing is that those States that falsely
wept over Idlib and made threats, claiming that they
wanted to protect civilians in that city, turned a blind
eye when armed terrorist groups in Idlib randomly
targeted civilians in Aleppo city with dozens of
missiles on 24 October, resulting in scores of martyrs
and wounded people.

We have heard no statement on the attack on
Aleppo from the Special Envoy, the Secretary-General
or anyone else on the Council. Idlib is, of course, a dear
part of my country, and we are determined to recover
it. We now allow political and diplomatic efforts to be
made, but our right under the Charter and international
law allows us to fully recover Idlib when we deem
it necessary.

The Syrian Government will not allow Idlib to
become another Tora Bora. We will not allow that.
There can be no other Tora Bora terrorist groups in
Idlib. That has already been fully decided upon.

Based on our respect for the role of the United
Nations in facilitating intra-Syrian dialogue, the
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
for Syria and the Diaspora met the Special Envoy in
Damascus on 24 October. During that meeting, a
discussion was held on the efforts made to move ahead
with the political process to resolve the crisis in Syria,
as well as ideas regarding the political process and the
constitutional committee. Those issues were discussed
by our Minister and Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres in New York on the margins of the work of the
General Assembly at its seventy-third session.

My country believes in the role of the United
Nations and its Charter, as did the founding fathers. Its
role is based on the strength of law and not the arrogance
of force, a role that respects States' sovereignty and
non-interference in their internal affairs.

A State that is a permanent member of the Council
has established a camp for terrorists in Al-Tanf in
which it deploys its military troops. As the Council
is aware, Al-Tanf is a part of the Syrian territories,
so that would be a violation of the Charter. However,
the Syrian Government has committed positively and
openly to the Geneva negotiations and transparently
dealt with the Special Envoy since he took up his
mandate as intra-Syrian facilitator four years ago. My
country continues to wish for the success of his mission
because it is in the interest of the Syrian people, as
attested to by the Syrian Government when it dealt
with his two predecessors, the late Kofi Annan and
Lakhdar Brahimi.

My country has engaged with the Astana process in
a fully positive way and dealt positively with the results
of the national Syrian dialogue in Sochi. We continue to
maintain the results achieved regarding the creation of
a committee to discuss the current Constitution.

The Special Envoy can facilitate the work of
the committee. My country's Government was the
first to submit a list of participants to the Special
Envoy on behalf of the Syrian State, and we believe
that the guarantor States can play an important role,
in full cooperation and coordination with the Syrian
Government, in the creation of the committee and its
mandate and working mechanism, with the facilitation
of the United Nations. The Council should note that we
are not excluding the United Nations. However, its role
is to facilitate an intra-Syrian dialogue, and it does not
have guardianship over the dialogue. The task of the
Special Envoy is to facilitate intra-Syrian dialogue.

No one wants to end the crisis that has been ravaging
my country for more than seven years more than the
Syrian Government. We have been bearing the brunt of
a terrorist war whose goal was to fragment the Syrian
State, kill our people and destroy our infrastructure.
The plan was to turn Syria into a failed State, but we
have made that plan fail. We have also been open to
counter-terrorism initiatives and to resolving the crisis
and settling the cases of the people who have become
involved in the war. The aim is to achieve national
reconciliation with a view to ending the bloodbath and
preserving the unity of Syria and its people.

We believe that establishing a committee to discuss
a constitution that reflects Syrian society and realizes
its ambitions is a way to end the crisis. In our view,
therefore, the meeting between our Foreign Minister
and the Secretary-General on the margins of the general
debate of the General Assembly, as well as the recent
consultations with the Special Envoy in Damascus,
represents the start of efforts reflecting our positive
cooperation with the Special Envoy. We also believe
that coordination with the two Astana guarantors, Iran
and Russia, in reaching thoughtful solutions that will
ensure the establishment of a constitutional committee
and help to realize the aspirations of the Syrian people,
will play an important role in achieving our objective.
It was the Syrian National Dialogue Congress in Sochi
that proposed establishing a constitutional committee,
not the Special Envoy, the Geneva talks or the Astana
process. Syrians themselves took the decision in Sochi
to establish a committee in order to discuss their
Constitution. We also believe that setting artificial
deadlines and proposing ideas that are not conducive to
the outcome we desire will not have positive results in
helping us achieve our aspirations.

Lastly, I want to emphasize that the Syrian
Government will make every effort to meet the
aspirations of the Syrian people and of our true
friends, as well as all who aspire to build a world free
of terrorism, strengthen the values of the Charter of
the United Nations and achieve stability and security
in the region and across the world. We are ready to
continue cooperating with the United Nations to reach
the outcome we desire.

