The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

We want to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
briefing on the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, and we welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs ofPalestine, Mr. Riad Al-Malki, and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Jordan, Mr. Ayman Safadi.

The Middle East is at the heart of world politics.
The region is plagued by multiple crises, old and new.
Russia is closely following the latest developments, as
we have long-standing relations with the States of the
region, based on mutual respect, mutually beneficial
cooperation and common interests.

It is no accident that I mention common interests.
We believe that the peoples of the Middle East and
North Africa, including all ethnic and religious groups,
are inextricably linked. They had struck a balance
that was upset in the recent past and continues to be
disrupted by geopolitical engineering imposed from
outside, interference in internal affairs, the use of force
and the collapse of entire States.

We note with concern the ongoing tense situation
in the Palestinian-Israeli peace process. It is further
complicated by Israel's continued settlement activity
and demolition of Palestinian buildings, as well as the
situation in and around the Gaza Strip. Such activity is
not only illegal under international law, but is also one of
the most serious obstacles to the establishment ofajust,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

In that connection, we share concerns about recent
statements by the Israeli leadership regarding its
intention to extend Israeli sovereignty to the Jordan
Valley. Following through on those intentions will
inevitably escalate tensions in the region and undermine
hopes for the long-awaited peace between Israel and
its Arab neighbours. That also applies to the decision
of the United States Administration on Jerusalem and
the illegitimate recognition of Israel's sovereignty over
the occupied Syrian Golan Heights, which is a flagrant
violation of international law, particularly resolution
497 (1981).

At the same time, we are seeing persistent
attempts to impose alternative arrangements for
a peace process - arrangements that undermine
long-established and internationally recognized
parameters for resolving the Palestinian problem.
We believe that the intention to drag out the efforts
to find a lasting comprehensive solution to this issue
is counterproductive. Unilateral actions bring us
no closer to resolving the long-standing and newer
problems of the region. It is clear to us, as it is to
most of our colleagues, that the only way forward is
to combine international and regional efforts, with the
key involvement of the United Nations and the Security
Council. That tenet should be the starting point for all
relevant efforts and initiatives.

We support the use of the Middle East Quartet
of international mediators as a unique mechanism to
assist the peace process that has been approved by the
relevant Council resolutions. Russia is doing its utmost
to promote the full spectrum of measures related to
the peace process, including by providing a potential
platform for meetings, without preconditions, between
the leaders of Israel and Palestine. We are also taking
steps to restore intra-Palestinian unity and welcome the
steps taken by our Egyptian colleagues in that regard.

Against that backdrop, it is clear that sending
a Security Council mission to the region is long
overdue. Its goal will be to enhance trust, facilitate the
relaunching of negotiations between the parties and to
prevent the collapse of the international community's
efforts to ensure conditions for the implementation of
the only viable solution, based on international law.
This basis was developed by the Security Council, and
its revision should be undertaken within the Security
Council, too. No unilateral steps can replace the key
principles of a two-State solution, the Madrid principles
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

We continue to support the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, whose work has both humanitarian and political
dimensions, as it has an important stabilizing role
in the Palestinian territories and the countries of the
Middle East.
All final status issues, including Jerusalem,
fundamental security issues and refugees, must
be resolved through direct negotiations between
Palestinians and Israelis.

The unresolved Palestinian issue is one ofthe factors
contributing to the emergence of new challenges in the
Middle East. We are concerned about another flare-up
of tension in the Gulf region. Against the backdrop of
the ongoing exchange of accusations, we are seeing an
increase in the military presence, including on the part
of States outside of the region, which creates the risk
of a military confrontation. Any incident could lead to
a conflict that would have devastating consequences.
We consistently call on all parties concerned to take
steps to de-escalate and resolve the problems in the
subregion through political and diplomatic means.
It is becoming increasingly important to develop
a sustainable mechanism for collective security in
the region on the basis of dialogue among equals. A
Russian initiative to that effect is aimed specifically at
resolving conflict and developing confidence-building
and oversight measures.

Russia will contribute actively to stabilizing the
situation in the Middle East. We are ready to cooperate
with all interested actors and invite everyone to engage
in collective efforts.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Expatriates of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.

