Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): Mr. President, we
would like to thank your delegation for having organized
this discussion today. My delegation wishes to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Abou Moussa, for his comprehensive briefing on
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) and the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA).

The political, economic and security situation in
Central Africa continues to improve. During the past
few months, we have witnessed successful and peaceful
elections in certain countries of the region. There have
also been electoral reforms in countries of the region
aimed at ensuring credible and transparent elections.
As noted by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2012/923), the concern remains that election-related
violence could be a source ofinstability in the absence of
transparent legal, participatory and inclusive processes.

South Africa commends the excellent economic
growth rate of over 5 per cent that has been registered
by many countries in the region despite the current
difficult economic and financial climate. That
notwithstanding, efforts must be employed to translate
that growth rate into the alleviation of poverty in
order to benefit the majority of the vulnerable and
marginalized communities.

We remain convinced that economic development
and security are mutually reinforcing, and we therefore
commend the work of UNOCA in supporting States
of the region in strengthening conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and dealing with cross-border threats. The
proliferation of weapons and the spread of transnational
organized crime and terrorist groups continue to pose
a threat to the region's security. Insecurity in the Sahel
region is of particular concern, because of its impact on
peace and stability and on socioeconomic development
in the Central African region.

The activities of the Lord's Resistance Army
remain a grave threat to peace, security and stability
in the region, with serious humanitarian consequences.
South Africa is concerned about the devastating effects
of the LRA and its continued activities in a number of
African countries, including the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Uganda, South Sudan and the Central
African Republic. The brutality of those activities
continues to haunt thousands of innocent civilians,
including women and children, and has resulted in
the massive displacement of about 443,000 people
and an acute humanitarian crisis. The African Union
has declared the LRA a terrorist organization, and
the Security Council should therefore deal with the
LRA in the same manner. The five strategic areas of
intervention in the United Nations Regional Strategy to
Address the Threat and Impact of the Activities of the
LRA remain critical in the global efforts to combat the
scourge of the LRA. Our energies should be focused on
its full implementation.

South Africa commends the ongoing military
cooperation between the countries affected by LRA
activities in addressing that challenge. In that regard,
my delegation welcomes the efforts of the Special
Representative in convening a meeting with national,
regional and international partners in Entebbe, Uganda,
to develop a joint road map for the implementation of
the Regional Strategy on the LRA in July 2014. That
road map would, inter alia, strengthen the operational
capabilities of the countries affected by the atrocities
of the LRA and facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
aid to affected areas. We also welcome the efforts by
Uganda and South Sudan in contributing a total of
2,500 troops to the African Union Regional Task Force
during September 2012.

In that regard, it is Vital for the international
community to support the African Union by mobilizing
international assistance and by providing all necessary
assistance for operationalizing the African Union
Regional Cooperation Initiative against the LRA,
particularly in logistical, financial and technical terms,
so as to facilitate the effective functioning ofthe various
components ofthe Initiative. It is also necessary to build
the capacity of the armed and security forces of the
affected countries. Inter-mission cooperation among
the various United Nations peacekeeping operations
in the region, such as the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan,
would also be a useful tool in the common approach to
addressing the LRA issue.

We reaffirm that military action against the LRA
should be conducted in a manner that minimizes civilian
casualties and should be in compliance with applicable
international law, including international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee law. South Africa wishes to
reiterate that those military operations should be part
of a broader strategy that should include the granting
of amnesty, policies for facilitating defections and
reintegration, and the arrest of LRA commanders
indicted by the International Criminal Court. In that
respect, we call on all States to cooperate with Uganda
and the International Criminal Court to effect the arrest
warrants issued against LRA leaders.
Finally, my delegation wishes to express its
appreciation for the work done by UNOCA under the
leadership of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Abou Moussa. It must be emphasized that for
UNOCA to be able to implement all of its plans and
programmes for the region, it needs to be equipped with
all of the resources it requires.

My delegation supports the presidential statement
that will be adopted by Council later today.

