Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like first of all to thank you, Mr.
President, for your warm words of welcome. I shall do
everything in my power to strengthen our cooperation
in the interests of international peace and security.

The humanitarian and political situation in the
Sudanese province of Darfur remains complex.
Unfortunately, large-scale violations of human rights
and the norms of international humanitarian law are
continuing there. Units of the Janjaweed and other
illegal armed groups, despite appeals and warnings
from the international community, are attacking the
peaceful civilian population, killing, plundering and
destroying property and the means for survival of
completely innocent people.

The situation of internally displaced persons in
Darfur itself, and of the Sudanese refugees in
neighbouring Chad, is dire. All of this is fraught with
destabilizing consequences, both for the Sudan and the
subregion as a whole.

This violence must end. As we understand it,
Khartoum is aware of the need to adopt urgent
measures to redress the present situation. A further
build-up of international humanitarian assistance, with
the active participation of the United Nations, is now
necessary. The priority must be to ensure reliable
security for the civilian population and for
humanitarian personnel. The primary responsibility for
this lies with Khartoum, but the armed opposition must
also share in it.

An important role in assisting with and promoting
a normalization of the situation in Darfur lies with the
African Union. Its peacekeeping efforts deserve
vigorous support from the United Nations. Everything
necessary must be done for the speedy resumption of
negotiations, under United Nations and African Union
auspices, on a political settlement in that region of the
Sudan. The Security Council cannot remain passive in
the face of the Darfur crisis. The Russian delegation
participated constructively in reaching agreement on a
draft resolution on this problem. We hope that the
Security Council's decision sends a clear signal to the
Government of Sudan and to the rebels that they must
fulfil their commitments to the letter and as quickly as
possible, first of all regarding the disarmament of all
illegal armed groups. The Security Council will
continue to carefully follow this process.

Of fundamental importance is the fact that the
resolution does not foresee possible further Security
Council action with regard to Darfur - which could be
taken to implement the Council's decisions in the light
of further developments in the situation and on the
basis of relevant recommendations of the Secretary-
General.

The Russian Federation supported the adoption of
the resolution and will continue to make practical
contributions to efforts being made under United
Nations auspices for a speedy normalization of the
situation in Darfur and for a lasting political settlement
in the region throughout the Sudan.

