Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would like to
welcome Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Foreign Minister of Serbia,
and Mrs. Vlora Citaku, Acting Foreign Minister of
Kosovo, and thank them for their statements. I also
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for his presentation of
the report before us (S/2010/562). We very much
appreciate the work the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK) is doing to
promote dialogue and cooperation among all parties in
order to promote stability and reconciliation.

Austria welcomes the fact that the security
situation in Kosovo has been largely calm during the
reporting period. However, we have again witnessed
how recent developments have managed to increase
political tensions in northern Kosovo and have in some
instances triggered isolated acts of violence.

It is our firm conviction that the gradual
integration of the north into the rest of Kosovo would
be beneficial to all its inhabitants. At the same time, we
are convinced that that goal will be achieved only
through dialogue. Austria calls on all sides to exercise
restraint, to adopt a constructive and pragmatic
approach and to actively engage with the international
presence, including in northern Kosovo, in order to
avoid further violence and tension.

Kosovo police, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) have again demonstrated effective cooperation
and have succeeded in tackling violence and ensuring
stability. Austria continues to fully support the important
work of the KFOR and EULEX and will continue to
keep up its commitment in both these missions.

As it was pointed out in the recent progress report
of the European Commission, many challenges persist.
Improving governance and the rule of law in Kosovo,
for example, is essential, as are steps to fight
corruption and impunity. We commend the efforts by
the Government of Kosovo towards those ends.

In order to make further progress and consolidate
the gains made so far, it is important for the
international community to remain engaged in Kosovo
and to assist the local authorities by sharing expertise
and resources. Kosovo must remain committed to
carrying out the necessary reforms. Stability, security,
the rule of law and governance are fundamental pillars
for all of Kosovo's communities.

In that respect, Austria encourages all sides to
reach an agreement on a multi-ethnic court in Mitrovica
and on customs arrangements in the north. We welcome
the efforts undertaken by EULEX in that regard.

Austria would also like to highlight the valuable
contributions made by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Mission in Kosovo
in the monitoring, protection and promotion of human
rights, including community rights, as well as the
Mission's endeavours to improve conditions for the
return of internally displaced persons and refugees.

Likewise, Austria commends the OSCE Mission in
Kosovo for the continuous support to the development
of democratic institutions, such as the assistance
offered to the Central Election Commission and the
Electoral Complaints and Appeals Subcommission.

We hope that all ethnic groups in Kosovo will
actively participate in the upcoming elections in
December, as they will be decisive for the future of
Kosovo. We hope that those elections will result in an
encouraging signal for the future of all inhabitants of
Kosovo. We appeal to both Kosovo and Serbia to
exercise pragmatism and self-restraint in order to make
the elections a success and to avoid increased tensions,
particularly in the north.

Austria welcomes the unanimous adoption by the
General Assembly, on 9 September, of a resolution on
the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice delivered on 22 July (resolution 64/298). We
welcome, in particular, that that resolution was based
on agreement between Serbia and the European Union.
As others have already said, there is general
agreement, as we have seen in the General Assembly,
on the role of the European Union in facilitating a
process of dialogue between the parties.

We are encouraged by signals from both sides
showing their readiness to engage in a dialogue
facilitated by the European Union on practical
problems affecting the daily lives of people from both
ethnic backgrounds living in Kosovo. I was also
encouraged by what I heard from Foreign Minister
Jeremie on this subject and pleased that Deputy
Foreign Minister Citaku told us about the Government
of Kosovo getting ready to participate in this process.

This is an important opportunity to promote
cooperation, to achieve progress, as the resolution says,
on the path to the European Union, and to improve the
lives of the people. We hope for an early launch of this
dialogue, which can contribute to creating the conditions
for a shared future within the European Union. That is
a goal to which Austria has always been committed,
and we stand ready to continue lend our support to that
endeavour.

