Judge Sang-Hyun Song: It is an honour to have
this opportunity to address the Security Council
on the occasion of the tenth anniversary year of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). This is the first
time that a President of the ICC has been invited to do
so, and I would like to thank the Guatemalan presidency
of the Council for taking this initiative.

Let me apologize in advance if I slightly overstep
the conventional time limit allocated to speakers. I am
afraid I would not be able to limit my statement to 10
minutes even if I were to speak in Gangnam style.

The ICC, together with the Rome Statute that
underpins it, is the realization of a compelling vision
that those responsible for the most serious crimes of
concern to the international community must face
justice. The Rome Statute makes it clear that the
primary responsibility for prosecuting such crimes lies
with States. The ICC is a court of last resort, called on
to act only where States are unable or unwilling to do
so.

The ICC was preceded by several temporary courts
and tribunals, which made a huge contribution to the
development of international criminal law. But the
vision behind the Rome Statute was to have a permanent
court that would be readily available whenever needed.
It would deal with clearly defined crimes, and could
develop over time a unified body ofjurisprudence that
would enhance legal certainty for those affected by its
work.

The Rome Statute establishes a carefully considered
institutional balance within the ICC. There is an
independent Prosecutor, an independent defence and an
independent judiciary. The Prosecutor decides which
cases to pursue, but it is the judges who have the final
say on whether to issue an arrest warrant or summons
to appear, or whether there is sufficient evidence for
charges to proceed to a trial.

Ten years from its foundation, the ICC is fully
functioning at all levels. Judgment was given in our first
trial earlier this year. A second case is close behind,
and several others are at earlier stages in the judicial
process. Our current cases arise from seven distinct
country situations, three of which were referred by the
States themselves and two by the Security Council.

The first 10 years have seen a welcome growth in
international support for the ICC. From the 60 States
parties required to bring the Rome Statute into force a
decade ago, the ICC has grown into a community of 121
States. More are joining every year, the most recent of
which was Guatemala. Each step the ICC takes towards
universality reduces the potential for impunity and
strengthens the prospect of justice for the victims of
terrible crimes.

Today's discussion is about peace and justice. The
relationship between the two has been the subject of
debate since ancient times in all the world's cultures,
and continues to be so. We have, however, taken a step
forward in recognizing that we need to pursue both.
One must not override the other.

While the ICC's contribution is throughjustice, not
peacemaking, its mandate is highly relevant to peace as
well. The Rome Statute is based on the recognition that
the grave crimes with which it deals threaten the peace,
security and well-being of the world. The Statute's
objective is to ensure their effective prosecution at the
national or ICC level, putting an end to impunity and
thereby contributing to the prevention of further crimes,
as well as laying the foundation for a sustainable peace.

But I must be clear that, as ajudicial institution, the
ICC can work only on the basis of the law. It can pursue
only those cases where it has jurisdiction and where the
Prosecutor can obtain the necessary evidence to justify
criminal proceedings. In dealing with the cases before
them, the parties and the judges make great efforts
to understand conditions on the ground, but can take
these into account only insofar as they are relevant to
the factual or legal issues under consideration in the
proceedings. The role ofa criminal court is to establish
guilt or innocence in accordance with the law; it is not
for a court to take a view on political or other factors
extraneous to the proceedings.

In saying this, I fully recognize the challenges that
may face the international community over how best to
achieve peace and security in situations in which the
ICC plays ajudicial role. In addressing these challenges,
however, it is important to remember that the ICC
does not deal with ordinary crimes. The Rome Statute
crimes are considered to be the gravest in the eyes of
the international community; the victims are often
numbered not in the hundreds but in the thousands, and
the perpetrators therefore carry an especially heavy
burden of personal responsibility for their actions.

That is one of the reasons why the drafters of the
Rome Statute included a provision enabling the Security
Council, acting under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter, to refer situations inside or outside the normal
limits of the ICC's jurisdiction to the Prosecutor. As we
all know, it has done so twice, in relation to Darfur and
Libya. Those referrals have been an important sign of
the growing confidence of the international community
in the ICC. In both instances, however, it is clear that
follow-up to the referrals at the international level has
sometimes been problematic, and the ICC has needed
on occasion to inform the Security Council of specific
instances of non-cooperation.

I will not comment further on the specifics of
those referrals, as the Prosecutor reports to the Council
regularly on them. I would simply like to underline
that, once such a referral is made, the Prosecutor and
the judiciary are bound to act in accordance with the
requirements of the Rome Statute, and to follow the
referral wherever it leads them, in accordance with
those requirements.

If the Prosecutor decides to launch an investigation
and bring charges against individuals, the ICC has to
pursue these proceedings as it would any other active
case.

The Security Council, on the other hand, does
have a potential emergency brake at its disposal if
it considers suspension of ICC action necessary in
order to maintain or restore international peace and
security. Under article 16 of the Rome Statute, the
ICC must comply with a request to defer investigation
or prosecution made by the Council in a Chapter VII
resolution.

If the ICC is to effectively deal with situations
referred by the Council under Chapter VII, it needs to
be able to count on the full and continuing cooperation
of all United Nations Members, whether they are
parties to the Rome Statute or not. This includes
cooperation not only in investigations and the gathering
of evidence, but also in areas such as the execution of
arrest warrants and tracing the assets of suspects. In
making any future referrals, it would be very helpful
if the Security Council could underline this obligation
of full cooperation, without which it is very difficult
for the ICC to discharge the mandate the Council has
given it.

An area of concern for many ICC States parties
has been the financial implications of these referrals.
This complex issue is principally for United Nations
Members to consider. Clearly, it will be difficult to
sustain a system under which a referral is made by the
Security Council on behalf of the United Nations, but
the costs of any investigation and trial proceedings are
met exclusively by the parties to the Rome Statute.

In this context, I welcome the encouragement
in General Assembly resolution 66/262 of voluntary
contributions by United Nations Members to help meet
the costs of ICC investigation and prosecution. The ICC
stands ready within the framework of its Relationship
Agreement with the United Nations to help with the
implementation of any longer-term solution that would
be workable on both sides.

The Security Council and the ICC are two highly
distinct bodies with very different roles, but we are
connected by the shared objectives of peace, justice
and respect for international law, enshrined in both
the United Nations Charter and the Rome Statute. The
worst nightmares of humankind lie at the intersection
of our respective mandates. When massive crimes
against innocent victims threaten international peace
and security, both the Council and the ICC have an
important role to play. And in the ICC, the Council may
recognize a unique avenue for ensuring justice as a
crucial element in wider international efforts.

In adopting the Rome Statute, States created
important possibilities for the Security Council to use
its Chapter VII powers in the ICC framework. The
Council has the unique prerogative to create a specific
judicial mandate for the ICC to extend the Court's
jurisdiction where it otherwise would not reach, and to
require non-States parties to cooperate with the Court.
Furthermore, a referral by the Security Council allows
the ICC Prosecutor to open an investigation without
waiting for judicial authorization. When the Council
exercises these prerogatives, it is important for it to
take due account of how the ICC will have to carry out
any mandate it is given, and of the cooperation that it
will require to do so effectively.

The ICC warmly welcomes the trust that the
Security Council has placed in it through its referrals.
the ICC hopes that the Council will actively support its
ability to act on these referrals by ensuring compliance
with the Council's resolutions and by underlining the
need for full cooperation by United Nations Members.
The ICC is grateful for the support we have received
from the Security Council, such as the statement on the
ICC staff detained in Libya in June.

The ICC welcomes the concept note (S/2012/73l, annex) circulated by the Guatemalan presidency in
preparation for today's debate, and looks forward
to hearing the reactions of members of the Security
Council to the ideas in it. The ICC is keen to maintain
a close dialogue with the Security Council in the areas
where our mandates intersect, not least with a view to
ensuring the effective implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the Council.

The International Criminal Court is a young
institution by international standards, with plenty of
work in progress and much still to learn. As we move
forward, I can assure the Security Council that we will
hold fast to the principles of prosecutorial and judicial
independence and the rule of law.

