Mr. Ruiz Blanco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this debate on the situation in Haiti and also thank
Special Representative Sandra Honore for her proven
commitment and leadership at the head of the Mission.

Colombia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the Ambassador of Peru on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.

Colombia underscores once again the invaluable
work undertaken by the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to ensure the sustainable
well-being of the Haitian people. My country thanks
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2016/225) and
wishes to highlight a few aspects of it.

Although the number of cases of, and deaths from,
cholera in 2015 was a cause for concern, we are pleased
to note that the last quarter of 2015 had the lowest
number of cases since the epidemic began. We hope
that trend can be maintained.

We are concerned about the repeated violations of
children's rights mentioned in the report, especially
the cases of child trafficking for labour and sexual
exploitation. We regret all the acts of sexual violence
against women; however, we recognize the progress
achieved by the community violence reduction
programme, which has provided assistance to 1,919
vulnerable women. Particular consideration is given
in the report to the more than twofold increase in the
number of Haitians affected by food security issues as
compared to the figures reported six months ago.

We reaffirm the need to create institutions both
for the justice and prison systems in Haiti, since both
scenarios present humanitarian challenges given the
conditions in which people are detained in prisons in
the country. We acknowledge MINUSTAH's support to
local Governments in preparing newly elected mayors
and municipal councils to take office appropriately.
However, we note with concern the absence of women
elected in the elections on 25 October, in disregard
of the country's Constitution, as well as what was
stated in resolution 1325 (2000) on the importance of
increasing the representation of women at all levels of
decision-making in national institutions.

My country has indicated that the central
responsibility in the Haitian process corresponds to the
Government and its leaders. That is why we appreciate
the joint work carried out between MINUSTAH and
the United Nations team in Haiti to define a transition
plan for the country aimed at strengthening national
ownership, in particular for its contribution to the
progressive drawdown of the Mission's functions,
which will then need to be assumed by the Government
of Haiti.

We note with concern the repeated postponement
of elections in Haiti. In that regard, we are confident
that corrective measures are being taken to ensure the
holding of the second round of presidential elections
free of the violent incidents and irregularities that took
place in previous rounds.

We welcome the agreement achieved to avoid a
vacuum of governance in Haiti, and we reiterate that the
next democratically elected President should assume
as part of his policies a security and development
approach, which will enable the country to overcome
its current difficulties.

We highlight the observation made by the
Secretary-General in his report with regard to the need
for Haitian stakeholders to be able to overcome the
current climate of political uncertainty. That will make
it possible for the country to make important advances
in terms of political stability and lay a foundation for a
democratic culture.

Haiti must continue with its efforts to strengthen
its institutions and the police force in the country.
MINUSTAH must protect its achievements at all costs.
We must have a coherent sustainable results-oriented
framework and ensure a successful and peaceful
transition to the next Government.

I want to conclude by reiterating the support
of Colombia to the invaluable work carried out by
MINUSTAH in ensuring the sustainable well-being
of the Haitian people. My country remains committed
to continuing to contribute to the strengthening and
training of the Haitian National Police by supporting
training and advisory activities for officers, as well
as through the involvement of Colombian police in
MINUSTAH. I am pleased to announce that, in the
first week of April, a contingent of 24 Colombian police
officers, including four women, will reach Port-au-
Prince to join the Mission with the aim of strengthening
the rule of law, good governance and the level of
security and well-being in the country.

