Mr. Mukerji (India): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the delegation of Jordan
for organizing this debate on the theme "Wwar, its
lessons and the search for a permanent peace", and
for circulating the revised concept paper (S/2014/30, annex) for this debate. We have listened with interest
to the views expressed by other delegations so far on
this subject.

The topic of our debate today is directly relevant
to the work of the Security Council as the organ
responsible for maintaining international peace and
security. It is useful to recall that in 1945, when the
Charter of the United Nations was agreed to, the focus
of the Organization was on preventing the "scourge of
war", a direct reference to the destruction caused by the
First and Second World Wars.

This year, when we commemorate the
one-hundredth anniversary of the outbreak of the First
World War, my delegation would like to recall the fact
that tens of thousands of Indian soldiers paid with
their lives for the eventual victory of the Allied forces
in both of those Wars. India is committed to finding
lasting solutions to the scourge of war and was among
the original founders both of the League of Nations, in
1919, and of the United Nations, in 1945.

As we see it, the concept paper for this debate deals
with five broad issues. On the first issue, relating to
international and internal conflicts, India's position is
that the mandate of the Security Council must remain
focused on international conflict situations. As the
single largest troop-contributing country to Security
Council-mandated peacekeeping operations over the
past six decades, we have deployed more than 170,000
troops in 43 out of the 64 United Nations peacekeeping
operations so far. Our experience shows that robust
international cooperation among the concerned
Member States of the United Nations is the most
sustainable method for addressing conflicts between
them. That would also apply to the robust mandate
given to a portion of United Nations peacekeepers
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, adopted in
resolution 2098 (2013), in March 2013, and the United
Nations peacekeeping response to the internal conflict
in South Sudan, as set out in resolution 2132 (2013), of
December 2013. An internationally supported political
process in those two operations would sustain the
efforts of the more than 6,000 Indian soldiers actively
engaged in carrying out the Security Council's mandate,
including the protection of civilians.

On the second issue, offorging deeper reconciliation
among ex-combatants, it may be useful to look at the
historical record in international relations. The most
relevant one for our debate today, as has been referred
to by several speakers before me, is the evolution of
the European Union since the end of the Second World
War. That is a case of ex-combatant Governments
coming together to create, with the Treaty of Lisbon in
December 2010, a new political reality on a continent
that had historically been fractured into warring
parties. There are similar practical examples in other
parts of the world, where the strengths of individual
nations formerly in conflict against each other are
being voluntarily and collectively pooled to craft a new
paradigm of constructive international cooperation,
contributing to the maintenance of international peace
and security. That process of constructive cooperation
based on dialogue is the biggest strength underpinning
the United Nations system today.

The third issue ofwhat is called reverse engineering
history, while conceptually an interesting one, is,
in our view, a task best handled by distinguished
academicians, including historians, rather than being
entrusted to the intergovernmental structure at the
United Nations. As we discover each passing day, there
are many more important facts related to historical
narratives that have been, and indeed continue to be,
suppressed from public dissemination by Governments
of Member States. The process of the declassification
of those historical records is subject to governmental
rules and procedures, and is not automatic. Even the
documents that are declassified often are heavily
redacted. Therefore, reverse engineering historical
narratives is dependent upon an ideal situation, which
perhaps can never prevail in our imperfect world,
namely, the full and unedited disclosure of facts. It is
because of that important aspect that my delegation
would caution against any proposal for the United
Nations to re-examine historical narratives.

With regard to the fourth issue, that of sustainable
peace, my delegation is ofthe view that the maintenance
of international peace and security will become more
sustainable if we agree to adopting a holistic and
equitable approach to relations between Member States.
The United Nations has an extensive agenda devoted
to issues under the purview of the General Assembly,
including on the economic, social and environmental
dimensions of development. Sustainable development
will play a crucial role in sustaining and contributing
to international peace and security.

Fifthly, there is a proposal in the concept note for
mandating a small United Nations historical advisory
team to assist in setting up national archives or
historical commissions. As has been pointed out, that
is indeed a sensitive issue. However, it is an important
issue. Perhaps the best place for us to make a beginning
on formulating a way forward on such an idea would be
the Sixth Committee ofthe General Assembly. I suggest
this because the work that any proposed United Nations
historical unit would eventually have to do would
need to be grounded on an approach based on the core
principles of international law and the interpretation of
documents. In our view, such a concept should therefore
be entrusted to our colleagues in the Sixth Committee
who, with their legal acumen and gravitas, would be
best placed to deal with the concept in a sound and
objective manner.

In conclusion, I come back to where we began,
which is the role of the Security Council in maintaining
international peace and security on a sustainable basis
so that the scourge of war is indeed prevented. In our
View, the most important challenge to international
peace and security and conflict prevention as far as the
United Nations is concerned is not the understanding of
the historical process but a realization that our platform
for global governance in this area, namely, the Security
Council, is no longer reflective of contemporary
reality. The Security Council requires comprehensive
reform in its membership, with an expansion in both
the permanent and non-permanent categories. That is
essential both for its credibility and for the continued
confidence of the international community in the
institution.

