Mr. Ali (Malaysia): 1 would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, and Uganda for
having assumed the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October 2010. We have no doubt that
under your able leadership, the Council will continue
to deliberate and take action on those most pressing
questions regarding the maintenance of international
peace and security.

Malaysia has continued to follow with avid
interest the progress of our neighbour, Timor-Leste. We
thank the Secretary-General for his most recent report
on the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste (UNMIT) (S/2010/522) and the briefing provided
by Ms. Ameera Haq, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.

Malaysia is encouraged by the recent
improvement in the security situation, which augurs
well for the ongoing work on the resumption of
policing responsibilities by the national police of
Timor-Leste (PNTL). We are also encouraged by -
and congratulate the Government of Timor-Leste with
regard to - the recent report, which indicates that
Timor-Leste had made advances in strengthening the
security and justice sectors and enhancing human
rights by making the PNTL responsible and
accountable for all its actions.

I said to the Council in February 2010:

"adherence to the rule of law is crucial to
ensuring the respect of the people for its own
security forces. Accountability for criminal acts
must not only be seen to be paramount but must
also be so, as it is the cornerstone of trust in the
system." (S/PV.6276, p. 22)

Malaysia is encouraged that the ongoing process
begun in May to help establish a professional and
credible police force in the country has been chalking
up success after success following the good work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and UNMIT. Today, we are witnessing the Timorese
national police force resume primary responsibility for
the nation's Immigration Department, the Border Patrol
Unit and the Interpol Office from the United Nations as
the gradual transfer of security functions continues. We
are also aware that policing responsibilities have so far
been handed over to the PNTL FOR 10 districts,
leaving only three districts under United Nations
policing command. However, we urge the continued
presence of United Nations police in those districts
where the PNTL has resumed responsibilities to
monitor, advise and support the national force.

Following those achievements, Malaysia is of the
opinion that the Government of Timor-Leste should
focus more attention on the socio-economic
development of the country. We urge the Government
to invest in more infrastructure and facilities that could
create socio-economic activities and jobs, which would
benefit the local population, in particular young
people. In this regard, Malaysia will continue to
undertake to encourage its own businessmen and
investors to consider Timor-Leste as a viable business
partner.

Malaysia reaffirms its continued support and
cooperation to Timor-Leste at the multilateral level
through UNMIT, where we have one formed police
unit and 90 police personnel serving in the United
Nations police. Bilaterally, we will continue to assist
Timor-Leste through our Technical Cooperation
Programme. We will also continue to provide training
to Timorese armed forces personnel through the
Malaysian Defence Cooperation Programme. To date,
we have trained 24 of the Timorese personnel under
that programme.

In closing, Malaysia would like to put on record
our heartfelt condolences to the Government of Japan
and to the family of the late Mr. Takashisa Kawakami,
former Deputy Special Representative for Security
Sector Support and the Rule of Law for UNMIT. The
late Mr. Takashisa Kawakami contributed immensely to
progress in bringing about stability and changes for the
betterment of the Timorese nation.

