Mr. Hamburger (Netherlands): The Netherlands
welcomes the briefings given today by the President
and the Prosecutor of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone on its ongoing work, and we appreciate this
opportunity to address the Council. We align ourselves
fully with the statement to be delivered shortly by the
representative of Germany on behalf of the European
Union.

Today's debate on the Special Court is taking
place at an important moment in the Special Court's
history. This week saw the start of the trial of Charles
Taylor, and judgements are expected in the Armed
Forces Revolutionary Council and Civil Defence
Forces cases, later this month and in July, respectively.

The work of the Special Court has made a
significant contribution to our common fight against
impunity. The trial of Charles Taylor makes it clear that
even heads of State do not and will not enjoy impunity
and that they will be brought to account if they commit
war crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide.

In our view, the work of the Court will - parallel
with the work in the justice sector of, among others,
the Peacebuilding Commission - contribute to long-
term peace, security and development in Sierra Leone.

The Netherlands has been a committed supporter
of the Special Court since its inception. It is a
dedicated member of the Management Committee and
one of its major donors, and intends to continue to
provide such support until the completion strategy has
been realized.

The Netherlands has accepted the responsibility
of being the host State for the trial of Charles Taylor. In
addition to financial support, we have provided the
Special Court with gratis personnel and security. For
the trial of Charles Taylor, use is being made of
International Criminal Court facilities. We note with
satisfaction that the cooperation between the Special
Court, the International Criminal Court and the host
State is working very well.

As has already been said, the Court is well known
for its excellent outreach programme. We commend the
Court for its efforts to make the proceedings against
Charles Taylor accessible for the people of Sierra
Leone and West Africa more widely, and we will assist
the Court in those endeavours wherever possible.

The Special Court for Sierra Leone has made
substantial progress over the past year. It is essential
that the completion strategy be adhered to. We
therefore call on the Court to do everything in its
power to ensure that that is the case.

Clearly, without adequate financial resources the
Court cannot complete its important work. It is
essential that the international community ensure that it
can do just that. Like others, the Netherlands calls
upon all countries present to ensure that there is
sufficient funding for the Special Court.

Finally, it is indeed important to emphasize that
the work of the Special Court will not end completely
in 2009. Important residual functions will continue to
exist well beyond that date. Also, the legacy of the
institution needs to be assured for the public in general
and the people of Sierra Leone, in particular.

