Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to welcome Foreign Minister Jeremie and Foreign
Minister Hyseni to the Council today and thank them
for sharing their perspectives on the situation in
Kosovo. I would also like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zannier for his
remarks today. The United States commends
Mr. Zannier's service to the international community.

Fifty-two countries from around the world have
now recognized Kosovo as a sovereign and
independent State, and more are expected to do so in
the coming months. In the nine months since its
declaration of independence, the Republic of Kosovo
has established the framework for a stable, multi-ethnic
democracy. It is realizing the vision set forth in the
comprehensive status proposal of United Nations
Special Envoy and now-Nobel Peace Prize laureate
Martti Ahtisaari.

Kosovo's independence is irreversible. The
Secretary-General's report (S/2008/692) notes the
changed reality in Kosovo and highlights the progress
made - the adoption of a modern and progressive
constitution that ensures the rights of all ethnic groups;
the establishment of institutions of governance,
including a Ministry for Foreign Affairs; steps to
provide for Kosovo's basic security needs through the
establishment of a civilian-controlled security force;
and the issuance of Kosovo passports.

Real challenges remain, however, with regard to
inter-ethnic relations, although the Secretary-General's
report makes clear that inter-ethnic violence remains
low. For that, my Government commends the
stewardship of the Government of Kosovo. We
encourage Kosovo's leaders to build on their previous
efforts to develop multi-ethnic institutions and to fully
implement the Ahtisaari Plan.

It is appropriate that the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) should
adapt its role in response to changed realities in
Kosovo. We welcome the Secretary-General's decision
to accelerate the reconfiguration of UNMIK to allow
for the deployment of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) throughout Kosovo.

The Secretary-General's report calls for certain
interim arrangements related to UNMIK cooperation
with Belgrade pending full deployment of EULEX, the
so-called six-point plan. Kosovo's leaders made clear
in their 18 November statement that they reject the six
points but that the Republic of Kosovo welcomes and
will facilitate the deployment of EULEX. We have
heard today that the Government of Serbia also
welcomes the deployment of EULEX on the territory
of Kosovo.

08-6204]
The United States underscores the importance of
respecting Kosovo's sovereignty and territorial
integrity. In this context, we welcome the commitment
of the Secretary-General to consult and coordinate
continuously with Kosovo authorities on the
implementation of these interim arrangements.

The Secretary-General's decision will accelerate
the transfer of UNMIK's residual rule of law
responsibilities to EULEX throughout Kosovo. Of
course, the Government of Kosovo has a major and
complementary responsibility for exercising functions
related to the rule of law in the country.

The deployment of EULEX under the mandate
specified in the EU Joint Action of 4 February will
ensure a unified customs regime and a single police
chain of command. It will help address the problem of
parallel institutions that currently hinders economic
and political development. The United States will have
an active role in EULEX, with United States police
officers, judges and prosecutors working alongside
their European counterparts throughout Kosovo. We
urge all stakeholders, especially the Governments of
Serbia and Kosovo, to ensure that EULEX is deployed
without delay.

Minister Jeremie has raised several concerns. My
Government is committed to ensuring that Kosovo
Serbs enjoy full rights and privileges in Kosovo. We
will continue to work alongside the Government of
Kosovo and all the people of Kosovo to create a safe,
secure and prosperous future for all ethnic groups in
Kosovo. We are also committed to our relations with
Serbia, and we share the aspirations of Minister
Jeremie for Serbia's European future. We will work to
promote that future for Serbia, Kosovo and all
countries in the Western Balkans.

