Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Thank you, Mr. President. I would like to thank you for
having convened this important meeting and thank
Mr. Holmes for his valuable report on the current
situation in the field and the principal challenges
linked with the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

My delegation would have preferred to hear
about today's panorama in very different terms from
those that the Council encountered six months ago.
However, once again we are witness to situations in
which many Governments disregard the pressing needs
of their populations. It is regrettable that those
allegedly responsible for serious crimes, including
some who have been called before the International
Court of Justice, go unpunished, making a mockery of
international law and justice.

As Mr. Holmes has told us today, there are many
and very diverse obstacles to protecting civilians. My
delegation wishes to highlight limitations on
humanitarian access, as we have seen in Myanmar in
recent weeks, as well as other obstacles that prevent
the deployment of peacekeeping missions, as we see in
Sudan, where the Government raises obstacles to the
full implementation of the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
Violations of international law in the conduct of
hostilities are also a source of concern to us, such as
the use of human shields by terrorist groups and the

08-3528]
indiscriminate use of force by private security
companies and the multinational force in Iraq, or
deliberate attacks against civilians in the conflict
between Israel and Palestine. There, civilians,
particularly children and women, are direct victims of
the escalation of violence through rocket attacks,
military incursions or the obstruction of a continuous
supply of humanitarian assistance. Sexual violence and
gender-based violence, used as a weapon of war, as we
see in Sudan and in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, are also a particular source of concern to my
delegation.

On this topic, as a member of the open-ended
group that last year adopted a strategy of providing
support to the victims of sexual exploitation and abuse
by United Nations personnel and associated staff, I was
very distressed to see the report on Save the Children
in the London Daily Telegraph today, reporting on
what seems to be an abiding problem - the abuse and
sexual misuse linked to United Nations staff, even to
humanitarian personnel. That has cast a shadow over
the whole Organization, which is the lesser evil. The
greater evil is the fate of the children - the boys and
girls, as well as adults, who are victims of those
terrible acts. Zero tolerance must stop being just a
slogan used to condemn sexual violence as a tool of
war or intimidation. It should also stimulate our efforts
to ensure that humanitarian staff, and United Nations
personnel, in particular, are always seen as bringing
relief, hope, peace and well-being to those whom we
are committed and obliged to protect.

My delegation is also concerned by the
continuing use of cluster bombs, which are killing
innocent people along the borders between Lebanon
and Israel. We could go on listing all types of situations
where owing to different factors, but in particular a
lack of political will, hundreds of thousands of
civilians are killed or are the direct targets of this
violence daily. We see it in Sudan, in Somalia, in Chad
and in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where it
is clear the protection of civilians must be part of the
political strategy to reduce short and long-term risks to
the population while there is action to provide physical
protection and the vital assistance they need to survive.
It must be clear to us that, while humanitarian
assistance and peacekeeping missions are important
protection mechanisms, these are only temporary
solutions, that are unsustainable without the
appropriate political framework, as sadly we see in

08-3528]

Somalia, where for the time being it is not even
possible to deploy a peacekeeping operation and
hundreds of people are dying every day.

We clearly understand that constrained resources
are one of the greatest challenges for missions, such as
in Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
when it comes to discharging their mandate
appropriately. But we must bear in mind that the same
resources could produce far greater dividends, if they
were also invested in tackling the roots and causes of
the conflict. A development-based perspective on
protection could, for instance, provide increased access
to water in cases like Sudan, where the struggle for
access to natural resources is an important part of the
conflict. That is why we restate our appeal that, every
time the Council extends or authorizes a peacekeeping
mission, it should incorporate a suitable peacebuilding
component, with coordination of United Nations
system activities, so as to turn it into an integrated
mission.

My delegation is concerned by the fact that,
although the majority of us agree that the protection of
civilians is a general objective and one of the main
justifications for United Nations presence in the field,
at the same time we lack a unified and adequate
understanding of the topics and dimensions that
comprise the protection of civilians, particularly in
multi-agency operations, where a concerted focus is
particularly necessary to provide effective protection.

The different political, humanitarian, military and
development components of the various United
Nations missions in the field lack such an integrated
focus on the protection of civilians. Compliance with
protection mandates depends on the interpretation that
each mission wishes to give it. The protection of
civilians should be one of the main mandates in any
United Nations mission in the field, whether it is a
peacekeeping operation, or a political or peacebuilding
mission. As established in resolution 1674 (2006), we
must work on drawing up clear guidelines to ensure
effective coordination among the various actors
involved, in particular between the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

My country gives priority to the Council
receiving extensive information on the implementation
of the eight civilian-protection mandates created since
1999 so that we may assess their effectiveness and
impact in the field and take the necessary measures to
strengthen them and extend their application to other
situations where it may be necessary.

Finally, my delegation would like to say that it
looks favourably upon the recommendations to create a
working group on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. This could be a useful tool to strengthen the
work of the Council in this field through ample,
systematic and, above all, continuous analysis and
debate of the necessities for protection in each case.

