The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

It was interesting to hear my Russian colleague
talk about the independent investigations and their
importance, because the entire Security Council
decided on what the Joint Investigative Mechanism
would be and what it would do, and it was actually
voted on unanimously. The Joint Investigative
Mechanism reported that the Syrian Government had
used chemical weapons against its own people three
different times. But somehow now we do not like what
the Joint Investigative Mechanism does.

Having said that, I will say that in the life of the
United Nations there are times when we are compelled
to do more than just talk; there are times when we
are compelled to take collective action. The Security
Council thinks of itself as a defender of peace, security
and human rights. We will not deserve that description
if we do not rise to the challenge and take action today.

Yesterday morning we awoke to pictures of children
foaming at the mouth and suffering convulsions being
carried in the arms of desperate parents. We saw rows
of lifeless bodies, some still in diapers, some with the
visible scars ofa chemical-weapon attack. Look at those
pictures. We cannot close our eyes to those pictures. We
not cannot close our minds to the responsibility to act.

We do not yet know everything about yesterday's
attack, but there are many things we do know. We
know that yesterday's attack bears all the hallmarks of
the Al-Assad regime's use of chemical weapons. We
know that Al-Assad has used these weapons against
the Syrian people before; that was confirmed by the
Council's own independent team of investigators. We
know that yesterday's attack was a new low, even for
the barbaric Al-Assad regime.

Evidence reported from the scene indicates that
Al-Assad is now using even more lethal chemical
agents than he did before. The gas that fell out of the
sky yesterday was even more deadly, leaving men,
women, the elderly and children gasping for their very
last breath. And as first responders, doctors and nurses
rushed to help the victims, a second round of bombs
rained down. They died in the same slow, horrendous
manner as the civilians they were trying to save.

We all also know this. Just a few weeks ago, the
Council attempted to hold Al-Assad accountable for
suffocating his own people to death with toxic chemicals.
Russia stood in the way of ensuring such accountability.
It made an unconscionable choice and chose to close its
eyes to the barbarity. It defied the conscience of the
world. Russia cannot escape responsibility for this. In
fact, if Russia had been fulfilling its responsibility,
there would not even be any chemical weapons left for
the Syrian regime to use.

There is one more thing we know. We know that if
nothing is done, these attacks will continue. Al-Assad
has no incentive to stop using chemical weapons as
long as Russia continues to protect his regime from
consequences. I implore my colleagues to take a hard
look at their words in the Council. We regularly repeat
tired talking points in support of a peace process that
is regularly undermined by the Al-Assad regime. Time
and time again, Russia uses the same false narrative to
deflect attention from its allies in Damascus. Time and
time again, without any factual basis, Russia attempts
to place blame on others.

There is an obvious truth here that must be spoken.
The truth is that Al-Assad, Russia and Iran have no
interest in peace. The illegitimate Syrian Government,
led by man with no conscience, has committed untold
atrocities against his people for more than six years.
Al-Assad has made it clear that he does not want to take
part in a meaningful political process.

Iran has reinforced Al-Assad's military, and Russia
has shielded Al-Assad from United Nations sanctions.
If Russia has the influence in Syria that it claims to
have, we need to see it use it. We need to see it put
an end to these horrific acts. How many more children
have to die before Russia cares?

The United States sees yesterday's attack as a
disgrace at the highest level, an assurance that humanity
means nothing to the Syrian Government. The question
that the members of the Council must ask themselves is
this: if we are not able to enforce resolutions preventing
the use of chemical weapons, what does that say about
our chances of ending the broader conflict in Syria?
What does that say about our ability to bring relief to the
Syrian people? If we are not able to enforce resolutions
preventing the use of chemical weapons, what does that
say about our effectiveness in this institution?

If we are not prepared to act, then the Council will
keep meeting, month after month, to express outrage at
the continuing use of chemical weapons, and it will not
end. We will see more conflict in Syria; we will see more
pictures that we can never unsee.

I began my remarks by saying that, in the life of the
United Nations, there are times when we are compelled
to take collective action. I will now add this: when
the United Nations consistently fails in its duty to act
collectively, there are times in the life of States in which
we are compelled to take our own action. For the sake of
the victims, I hope that the rest of the Council is finally
willing to do the same. The world needs to acknowledge
the use of chemical weapons and the fact that it will not
be tolerated.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

