Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (Spoke in Arabic): I should
like to begin by thanking and commending Judge
Hassan Jallow of the brotherly country of the Gambia
for the important role he has played in his capacity as
Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda.

I congratulate Mr. Serge Brammertz, the current
Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, on his appointment as Prosecutor of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, and I wish him the greatest of success.

In that regard, the delegation of Egypt will abstain
in the voting on the draft resolution before the Council
as a reflection of the consensus reached among the three
African States members ofthe Security Council. We do
not object to the person of Mr. Brammertz. Rather, our
decision is based on the following two reasons.

First, it is unsatisfactory and unacceptable to set
aside the former Prosecutor of the Residual Mechanism,
Mr. Jallow, who was not nominated by the Secretary-
General to retain his position. Our objection is based on
the fact that Mr. J allow is the only Tribunal official from
a country that is not a member of the Group of Western
European and other States, which represents a failure
to observe the principle of equitable geographical
distribution set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations and the statute of the Residual Mechanism.

Secondly, the arguments offered by the Secretariat
for not nominating Mr. Jallow are inconsistent. They
include the desire of the Secretariat to ensure the
effectiveness of the Residual Mechanism by appointing
Mr. Brammertz to continue work on the cases currently
before him as Prosecutor of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia. Indeed, according to
information in the possession of the African Group,
Mr. Brammertz has not yet begun his work as
Prosecutor of the ICTY on the cases to be submitted to
the Residual Mechanism. Mr. Jallow and his colleagues
have the expertise necessary to pursue the mission they
have successfully carried out since 2012, including on
the cases to be submitted to them as members of the
Mechanism.

Similarly, we cannot accept Mr. Brammertz's
appointment as a function of cost-cutting because he
would be covering both roles. Indeed, this is in no way
a convincing argument. The criteria in this case are
based on clear principles that should be respected in
this regard. The principle of double-hatting applied by
the Secretariat to Mr. Jallow was not applied when the
Secretary-General reappointed the American President
of the Residual Mechanism. This raises questions
concerning the apparent application of a double
standard in this case.

The second reason for our abstention today is our
reservation concerning the Secretariat's behaviour
in this instance, in particular its unjustified delay in
submitting the nomination of the Prosecutor until late
February, which raises a number of questions. We fully
support the contents of the latter sent by members of the
Group of African States to the President of the Security
Council on this issue.

