The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Libyan Arab J amahiriya.

I wish to offer a few observations on the matter
before us. First, I express our thanks to the Secretary-
General for his detailed and comprehensive report
(S/2009/135), on which we were just briefed by Mr.
Kai Eide. I wish also to welcome the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan.

I commend the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), under Mr. Eide's
leadership, for its efforts and excellent performance
with the purpose of rebuilding that sisterly country
despite all the security challenges the Mission faces.

Most of what is taking place in Afghanistan today
is the responsibility of the international community,
which neglected Afghanistan after the cold war. It is
regrettable that, despite all the tragedies suffered by
Afghanistan due to the civil war that raged for six
years between 1990 and 1996, the Security Council
took no action and adopted no resolutions attempting
to put an end to the war and the fighting there.

Paragraph 2 of the report of the Secretary-
General tells us that the situation in Afghanistan is
deteriorating. The report gives several reasons for that,
the most important among them being the lack of
security and the fact that the results of Government and
international assistance efforts have fallen short of the
Afghan people's expectations. The report reaches the
logical conclusion that the situation in Afghanistan
cannot be addressed by military means alone, and it
affirms the need for a political process based on
comprehensive national reconciliation, as called for by
President Karzai and, previously, by the country's
legislature and most other Afghan leaders. It is
important that this political process be accompanied by
a parallel effort in the sphere of development, with a
view to creating economic and social conditions that
can provide a dignified life for all Afghans and that
will not compel them to turn to illegal livelihoods such
as drug trafficking. This would put an end to corruption
and extremism and enable the Afghan Government to
regain the people's trust in its ability to meet their
needs. That requires a strong international commitment
to support Afghanistan's development strategy.
Paragraph 23 of the report informs us that
insurgents continued to expand their presence in
previously stable areas. This is combined with the
deteriorating security situation, the poor economic
situation and the spread of unemployment and
corruption. The situation demands a solution based on
a comprehensive approach to addressing all of those
problems.

The international community's ultimate goal must
be to help the Afghan people build a democratic, stable
and prosperous State. Combating extremism is not a
goal in itself, especially because the use of force by
itself will not bring about stability and security; it must
be bolstered by a parallel dialogue aimed at achieving
national reconciliation among all sectors of the Afghan
people willing to engage in dialogue and accept the
national constitution as a basis for governance.

My delegation remains gravely concerned about
the killing of civilians in defiance of all the appeals
and statements issued by Afghan authorities, by the
United Nations and by other international bodies and
organizations. In that context, we note that paragraph
66 of the report speaks of an increase in civilian
casualties of 40 per cent over the figures for 2007.
Thirty-nine per cent of these were caused by
international and national Afghan forces. We reaffirm
our conviction that this trend, if it continues, will not
help establish peace, security or stability. It can only
fuel animosity among Afghan citizens and will
ultimately serve the interests of the opponents of the
Government.

Libya expresses its deep concern over the food
crisis that the Afghan people could face as a result of
drought, as well as over rising food prices. We fear that
the world financial crisis could exacerbate the food
crisis in Afghanistan. We deeply regret the inadequate
response to the $404 million appeal issued by the Vice-
President of Afghanistan and the United Nations to
address the crisis. We hope that the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy will soon be
implemented, and we hope that donors will fulfil the
pledges they made at the 12 June 2008 Paris
Conference.

The March 2008 report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/159) outlines human rights violations and
instances of torture and abuse of detainees. It notes
allegations of prolonged and arbitrary detention in
places of detention run by international military forces

and indicates that UNAMA was unable to assess those
allegations. The report before us today makes no
mention of any progress in that regard; rather, it notes
that detention centres and prisons are in a serious state
of neglect. My delegation wishes therefore to indicate
its concern about the state of prisons in Afghanistan
and to call for respect for human rights, international
law and international human rights law.

Some progress has been made in a number of
areas, including with respect to mine clearance,
counter-narcotics and preparations for the upcoming
elections. But shortcomings remain, despite all the
efforts and pledges that have been made. We must
study and review those shortcomings and try to
identify their causes.

My delegation welcomes the progress that has
been made in bilateral cooperation between
Afghanistan and Pakistan, and we affirm the need to
strengthen that cooperation, because of the historical,
demographic and economic ties between the two
countries.

Finally, Libya supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation to extend the mandate of UNAMA
and strengthen its role in coordinating international
efforts, as well as to guarantee it sufficient resources
and financing to enable it to establish regional offices
to bolster its activities, especially in the fields of
governance, justice and human rights.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Afghanistan.

