Ms. Bishop (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for initiating this meeting today, for we must send a
clear signal of the international community's strong
support for Iraq.

Australia endorses the terms of presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/20, which is an affirmation of
Iraqi and international efforts to combat the terrorist
threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and to provide humanitarian relief to prevent
further suffering.

The attacks by ISIL have brutalized the Iraqi
population and shocked us all. Atrocities against women
and girls and against vulnerable minorities and security
force opponents, as well as the barbaric use and then
beheading of captured journalists, an aid worker and
others, to advance their depraved agenda, are utterly
despicable. Who can forget the grotesque image shown
around the globe of an Australian child, not more than
nine years old, standing with his father, an ISIL leader,
holding up the severed head of a soldier? That showed,
beyond any ambiguity, the kind of hideous acts of which
the group is capable.

Australia condemns absolutely ISIL and its ilk and
their barbarism and their ideology. The international
community cannot, with any conscience, turn away. We
cannot leave the people and the Government of Iraq to
face that cruelty alone.

ISIL's actions leave in no doubt the severity of
the threat to the region and the wider world. It poses
a threat to Australia, our friends in South-East Asia
and beyond. We have seen it before - extremists and
foreign fighters, returning home - responsible for
terrorist attacks in our region.

Australia's security and law enforcement agencies
have taken steps in recent days against a group in our
country inspired by ISIL that was seeking to emulate its
brutality in Australia. ISIL is a threat to the fundamental
values of the international community and an affront to
our shared sense of humanity.

Australia has announced its preparedness to
do more to help Iraq and its partners in the fight. In
cooperation with Iraq, we are deploying a military
force to the region for possible involvement in a United
States-led effort to support Iraq against ISIL. We are
willing to provide strike, early warning and air-to-
air refueling aircraft, and a special forces task group
to advise and assist the Iraqi security forces. That is a
prudent and proportionate response to the threat posed
by that murderous terrorist organization.

Efforts to effectively end ISIL's ravages and
territorial ambitions will necessarily involve measures
to cut off ISIL's support network, including the flow
of fighters, arms and funding. There is more we can
all do. Australia is introducing legislative reforms to
address the threat from home-grown terrorism and is
intensifying its counter-terrorism engagement with
others. We urge other Member States to do the same.

Political measures are also needed. The formation
of a new Iraqi Government is a positive step towards
addressing issues that contributed to ISIL's advance.
Australia supports Prime Minister Al-Abadi as he seeks
to form an inclusive Government capable of rebuilding
a stable and cohesive Iraq that can counter the forces of
violent extremism.

The security situation in Iraq remains grave. The
humanitarian needs, including of innocent women
and girls in conflict zones, are multiplying. Nearly
2 million people are believed to be internally displaced.
Those people are vulnerable. Their protection needs are
urgent. ISIL has explicitly targeted minorities, and also
women and children for sexual violence. There must be
consequences for the perpetrators.

Australia will help to specifically address the needs
of displaced women and girls and victims of gender-
based violence and will provide a further $2 million to
help the United Nations Population Fund to scale up the
delivery of reproductive and other health care. Australia
has provided $5 million in emergency humanitarian
funding to Iraq, and we have undertaken air drops
of emergency supplies to besieged communities on
Mount Sinjar and in Amerli. We have also provided
approximtely $130 million in humanitarian aid for
those in dire need in Syria and have assisted Lebanon
and Jordan in facing the outpouring of refugees across
their borders.

The humanitarian crisis must end. The international
community cannot stand by and do nothing in the face
of ISIL's threat to humanity. That is why Australia
is joining international partners to assist the Iraqi
Government in its fight against ISIL.

