Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to welcome the
participation of Foreign Minister Hyseni of Kosovo. I
am also pleased with the presence of Foreign Minister
Jeremie of Serbia.

I would like to thank Special Representative
Lamberto Zannier for his very comprehensive briefing
this afternoon. We are very grateful to the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative for their
contributions to the gradual improvement of the
situation in Kosovo. We particularly appreciate the
Secretary-General's initiative of reconfiguring the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), which is now approaching its final
stage. The European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) is now deployed throughout Kosovo
and reached full operational capabilities in early April.
We commend EULEX and other international
presences, such as the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
for the stabilization of Kosovo.

We appreciate Serbia's cooperation with the
EULEX operation. We believe Serbia's commitment to
the European integration process serves to promote the
stability and prosperity of the entire West Balkan
region, including Kosovo. Therefore, we expect Serbia
to continue to further advance its integration into
Europe, in cooperation with the international
community.

Exactly one year has passed since the entry into
force of the Constitution of the Republic of Kosovo.
During this period, Kosovo has made steady progress
in its own nation-building by strengthening various
State agencies. We hope that Kosovo will develop fully
as a democratic, multi-ethnic country that will
contribute to the stabilization of the West Balkan
region.

It is gratifying that the number of countries that
recognize Kosovo has been increasing gradually.
Kosovo's recent accession to membership in
international financial institutions - the International
Monetary Fund in May and the World Bank this
month - represents a significant opening for its future
development within the global economy. We hope that
Kosovo will continue to play a constructive role as a
responsible member of the international economic
community.

The situation on the ground is generally stable,
but there are occasionally interethnic tensions in
certain areas of Kosovo. I share the concern about the
recent incident in Mitrovica. We wish to see more
efforts made for the effective protection of minorities. I
believe that UNMIK can play a useful role in the
interethnic mediation and the dialogue on the six
points, in close cooperation with other partners,
including KFOR, EULEX and their member States.

Japan has actively supported Kosovo, through the
United Nations Trust Fund for Human Security, in its
efforts towards peaceful coexistence and sustainable
development as a multi-ethnic society, particularly in
the northern part of the country.
Japan will continue to extend its strong support
from a human security perspective to meet the needs of
the people of Kosovo. We remain committed to helping
Kosovo develop as a vibrant, multi-ethnic and
democratic country.

