Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Let me first thank all those who have highlighted and supported the Berlin conference and the subsequent process. I wish to reaffirm that the conference was held exclusively in the interests of the Libyan people and in support of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative, Mr. Ghassan Salame, in their efforts to bring peace to the country. Therefore, my intervention will be very brief, as we continue to support what Mr. Salame is trying to do. At this stage, I would like to thank him personally, as well as his team, for their unwavering commitment to the Libyan people. First, I wish to state that I wholeheartedly share his frustration about the present situation. He highlighted the unfortunate suffering of civilian victims due to the parties not adhering to the ceasefire, thereby breaching the truce that they committed to in Berlin. Women and children are once again among those most affected. Secondly, I also share in Mr. Salame's dismay that certain countries that committed in Berlin to refrain from interfering in the armed conflict and the internal affairs of Libya are among those that are now delivering weapons, foreign fighters, ammunition and advanced weapons to the parties. I share Mr. Salame's anger and disappointment at the cynical behaviour of those States. As several speakers already mentioned, such behaviour represents a flagrant violation of international law. Thirdly, I also wish to appeal to those who have influence over the Libyan parties to activate the Joint Military Commission, as that is long overdue. All those with influence should spare no effort in that regard and implement the other follow-up mechanisms that were agreed in Berlin. Fourthly, I listened very carefully to Mr. Salame repeat an appeal that we have made on several occasions in the Security Council following the Berlin conference: that the Council should rapidly adopt a draft resolution that endorses the outcome of the Berlin conference, which would serve two functions. First, it will send a signal to the people of Libya that the Security Council will not abandon them. As my Indonesian colleague said earlier, we are here to save lives and, by sending that message and adopting a draft resolution that has weight, we will show the population that we stand with them. Secondly, it will send a very strong message to the spoilers, because Security Council resolutions are legally binding under international law. I urge all those around this table that have been dragging their feet tonow forge ahead and adopt a draft resolution as soon as possible for the benefit of the people in Libya.
