Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me begin by thanking
the Secretary-General's Special Representative,
Mr. Yamamoto, for his comprehensive briefing, and
both him and his staff for their tireless efforts.

Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.

Afghanistan continues to require our joint
and dedicated attention. Germany remains fully
committed to its support of the Afghan people, without
artificial timelines.

Long-term stability in the region can be achieved
only through a comprehensive peace and reconciliation
process. We agree with the conclusions outlined in
the report (S/2017/696) on the strategic review of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), which underscore that the Mission must
prioritize political stability and the creation of an
environment conducive to reaching an Afghan-owned
peace agreement. Sustainable solutions can be attained
only by bringing together all instruments of conflict
resolution and prevention in a coherent political strategy.
That is in line with the sustaining peace approach and
the Secretary-General's current reform efforts, which
Germany strongly supports. It has to come together in a
coherent, well-coordinated way.

Achieving durable peace is the only way to end the
suffering of the Afghan people. When citing the sad
statistics of civilian casualties, we must not forget that
behind every statistic lies a personal tragedy. Even
more needs to be done to protect the most vulnerable
in Afghan society. We expect that the national policy
on civilian casualty prevention and mitigation will be
implemented quickly.

We condemn the suicide attacks on Shia mosques in
Herat on 1 August and Kabul on 25 August, which were
carried out right before the holy Islamic feast of Eid
al-Adha and left over 110 people dead. Those attacks
clearly aim to cause division along social, ethnic and
religious lines within Afghan society, and we call on all
Afghan citizens not to give in to such provocations but
to stand united to face terrorist threats.

The Independent Election Commission's
announcement to schedule the overdue parliamentary
and district council elections for 7 July 2018 is a
very important step. The holding of transparent, fair
and credible elections is an indispensable component
for a peaceful and stable future in Afghanistan.
Conflicts need to be resolved in Parliament, not on the
battleground. But that can be achieved only when there
is trust in the electoral system. Germany stands ready
to assist Afghanistan in that process and encourages
the National Unity Government to proceed with
outstanding electoral reforms.

Let me conclude by reiterating Germany's full
support for the crucial role played by UNAMA and
United Nations agencies working in Afghanistan. We
welcome the results of the strategic review, which seek
to optimize the structure of UNAMA and strengthen
the Mission even further. We recommend swift
implementation. Germany welcomes the decision to
retain the UNAMA field presence in Afghanistan, as it
is one of the most visible manifestations of UNAMA's
and our joint commitment to the Afghan people.
Following the withdrawal of the Police Advisory Unit,
the Rule of Law Unit and the Military Advisory Unit,
Germany trusts that the important tasks of those units
will be fully integrated into UNAMA's core activities.

As Chair of the International Contact Group on
Afghanistan, Germany especially commends UNAMA's
efforts to help strengthen cohesion among international
and regional stakeholders in Afghanistan. Germany
remains committed to supporting Afghanistan, in close
cooperation with the Afghan Government and our
international partners, and commends efforts to foster
regional and international cooperation in support of
peace under the umbrella ofthe so-called Kabul process.

