Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
The evolution of the peace process in Angola has always
been a contrasting mixture of progress and setbacks, of
violence and peacemaking. We note, however, that in recent
months important steps have been taken towards the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. We hope that these
steps will be irreversible. The extension of the State
administration, especially in Andulo and Bailundo, must
be achieved. It would be good if the long-awaited meeting
between President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi sealed the
completion of this process.

Nonetheless, one cannot fail to be struck by the
contrast between this positive and encouraging evolution
of the peace process and the fact that on the ground the
situation remains precarious and hazardous. In some areas
there has even been an increase in violence. Of particular
concern in this regard are the attacks against United
Nations personnel. These attacks must cease. We expect
all the parties to show restraint and to use only peaceful
means in all future political actions. Armed conflict must
yield to democratic contests.

During last week's debate devoted to the Secretary-
General's report on Africa, we noted that the United
Nations has achieved undeniable successes on that
continent. Certainly the activities carried out in Angola by
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM) and then by the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola (MONUA) count among these
successes. Tribute should be paid to all of those -
Mr. Blondin Beye, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the Secretariat staff and the staff
provided by Member States - who contributed to this
success. We must also express our appreciation for the
efforts that have been achieved recently on the ground by
our colleague the Ambassador of Kenya, Mr. Mahugu.

France supports the recommendations made by the
Secretary-General for an extension of MONUA' s mandate
for a two-month period and a reduction of its military
component. Subsequently, the Council will be taking a
decision based on how the situation develops and on the
new report to be submitted by the Secretary-General.
With the completion of the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol, MONUA will have accomplished and concluded
its mission, possibly in the months to come.

Experience in recent years suggests that we should
be prudent and watchful. But the message of the Council
is clear. It is high time to turn this long and tormented
page in Angola's history. In the future, the Angolan
people must know that the United Nations will remain by
their side to help them in their efforts for reconstruction
and development.

