Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation wishes to express its
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his report dated 10
June 1995 on the situation in Tajikistan and the activities

 

carried out by the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT).

My delegation believes that the conflict in Tajikistan
must be resolved through peaceful means. Consequently,
we welcomed the results of the fourth round of talks
between the parties, held in Almaty from 22 May to 1 June
this year, where, while the parties were unable to reach
mutually acceptable solutions in the political and
institutional sphere, they did achieve important agreements
on the exchange of detainees and prisoners of war and on
the voluntary return of refugees.
We also welcome the decision taken in Kabul on 19
May by the President of the Republic of Tajikistan and the
leader of the Islamic Revival Movement to extend the
Tehran Agreement on a cease-fire until 26 August this year.

My delegation believes that direct dialogue between
the Tajik parties is essential for reaching a comprehensive
political settlement of the conflict. We therefore urge the
parties to continue their dialogue so that they can overcome
the outstanding problems and make substantive progress on
institutional issues in order to consolidate Tajikistan's
statehood. We also urge them to cooperate fully with
UNMOT, the Secretary-General's Special Envoy, the
Commonwealth of Independent States Peace-keeping Force,
the Russian border forces and the Mission to Tajikistan of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

With regard to confidence-building measures, we
believe that the voluntary return of refugees is an important
element for establishing the necessary favourable climate
for national reconciliation. We are therefore pleased to see
that the Government of Tajikistan has committed itself to
assisting the return and reintegration of refugees and
displaced persons in dignity and safety. In this context, it is
important for international organizations and States to
provide the refugees and the Joint Commission with the
necessary financial and material support.

Finally, we wish to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General, his Special Envoy and the regional
organizations that have fostered the dialogue between the
Tajik parties for their renewed efforts for peace in
Tajikistan. My delegation supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation to extend UNMOT's mandate for an
additional period until 16 December 1995, on condition that
the parties keep up their commitments to an effective cease-
fire, national reconciliation and the promotion of
democracy. We also support his recommendation to deploy
a group of observers in northern Afghanistan, in the way he
suggests. My delegation will therefore vote in favour of
the draft resolution before the Council.

