Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on France's
accession to the presidency of the Security Council this
month. I thank you and the members of the Council
for providing me with this opportunity to address the
Council.

I thank Mr. Bernardino Leon, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing
and I wish him the greatest of success in his efforts.
I also wish to thank Ambassador Hussein Haniff,
Permanent Representative of Malaysia and Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), for his briefing. I wish him and his delegation
the greatest of success in leading the work of the
Committee throughout his chairmanship.

I would like to re-emphasize that, when discussing
the work of that Committee, there is a need for
transparency and cooperation in the relationships
between the Libyan Mission to the United Nations and
the Sanctions Committee because the legitimate Libyan
authorities, as I have previously said, are a partner of
the Security Council in guaranteeing that the arms
embargo is not violated by non-State parties or terrorist
organizations. We hope to receive the reports of the
Panel of Experts in a timely manner so that we can
share that share them with experts in our Government
before they are submitted to the Council. We hope that
the Committee will take that into consideration in the
future.

Considering that the Libyan Army is waging a

war against terrorist organizations in Libya, some of
which have declared their loyalty to the Islamic State

in Iraq and the Sham, it is in the interest of peace and

security not only in Libya but also in the broader region

to facilitate the procedure for the Libyan army to obtain

weapons, either by lifting the embargo completely or

by facilitating the procedures for exemptions from the
embargo. We have informed the Sanctions Committee
of the new procedures adopted by the provisional Libyan
Government to guarantee that the weapons exempt from
the arms embargo will not reach no other party except
the Libyan army. The procedures include limiting the
points of contact to one, as the Chair of the Sanctions
Committee mentioned. That focal point is the Chief
of Staff of the Libyan army and the Libyan Mission to
the United Nations in New York. This procedure was
adopted in response to the wishes of some members of
the Sanctions Committee. The Libyan Army is ready to
accept an observer to ensure that the weapons approved
by the Committee are in effect delivered to the official
Libyan Army.

Allow me also to commend the efforts of the Panel
of Experts of the Sanctions Committee, as well as the
clear and objective report submitted to the Council
(S/2015/128), which addresses the relevant topics from
all sides and clearly indicates that that the Libya Dawn
militias are responsible for derailing the political
process. It also lists the damage inflicted on the country
and indicates the responsibility of some leaders of that
militia. At the same time, the report also refutes the
allegations that the Libyan Air Force was responsible
for losses among civilians.

The report of the Panel of Experts differs from
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/144), which
uses the same terminology as the Libya Dawn militias
and tries to ignore the existence and presence of the
Libyan army and its achievements in Benghazi. I take
this opportunity to repeat what I have said before at the
Security Council. No country has the right to intervene
in the decisions of the elected Libyan authorities
concerning the identity of the leaders of the Libyan
army or State institutions.

We have reached a stage where it is no longer possible
to overlook the acts of terrorism being committed in
Libya against civilians, the legitimate authorities,
State institutions and economic facilities. I want to
make it very clear that the silence of the international
community in the face of the terrorist organizations
overtaking the cities of Derna and Benghazi has
encouraged those organizations and their allies to take
over the capital Tripoli. The silence in the face of the
destruction by these organizations of the international
airport in Tripoli, their overrunning of State institutions
and expulsion of the legitimate Government therefrom
has encouraged the militias to continue the war in order
to take control ofthe country's oil resources, especially
after the Libyan army succeeded in expelling the
militias from most neighbourhoods of Benghazi and
halted their progress in the western mountains.

Terrorism is not merely an ideology; it is first and
foremost action. The definition of terrorism in the Arab
Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism is any
action that causes harm to the environment, damages
or occupies a public or private facility or property, or
exposes national resources to danger. This definition
of terrorism by the Arab Convention is what led the
Libyan House of Representatives to classify Libya
Dawn alliance as a terrorist militia. I do not believe
that anyone would dispute that it applies perfectly to the
actions of that coalition in burning the Tripoli Airport,
the Tripoli neighbourhoods of Zintan and Warshafana,
and the houses of Government officials, in overtaking
State institutions in the capital and in attacking the oil
crescent. The House of Representatives was therefore
not wrong at all, in spite of objections by some members
of the Security Council.

The Libyan people feel that the international
community has failed them, given its lack of adequate
support for the elected House of Representatives and
the Government it established, and given the silence of
certain countries that back the militias that are seeking
to defeat and eliminate the legislature, including
hteir encouragement of the militias to continue their
occupation of the capital, Tripoli, and the institutions of
State. Indeed, some have misrepresented the truth and
overlooked crimes in order to perpetuate the prevailing
situation.

A representative of one permanent member
of the Council was not ashamed to claim that one
militia allied with Ansar al-Sharia was the only party
combating terrorism in Libya. If he was asserting the
opinion of his Government, I challenge him and his
Government to persuade those militias to announce
their disengagement and dissociation from Ansar
aI-Sharia or to describe Ansar al-Sharia as a terrorist
organization, as the Council itself has done. Such
statements require an official apology from that
Government to the Libyan people. It is quite clear that a
certain permanent member does not wish the legitimate
authorities to reclaim the capital, and is pursuing
that agenda by providing political support to certain
militias and by objecting to the arming of the Libyan
army. Such behaviour raises many questions among the
Libyan people, which aspires to restoring peace and
security and to ending the bloodshed.

I should like to share some of the analysis now
current within political and cultural circles in Libya.
According to this analysis, the State to which I refer is
either planning, with its proxies, the division of Libya
or is trying to pave the way for its citizens of Libyan
descent to take control of Libya on the grounds that
they represent the majority of the leadership of the
so-called Islamist movement. Whatever the objectives
may be, they do not serve peace and security in Libya
or anywhere else, and are not compatible with its
responsibility as a permanent member of the Security
Council. Such conduct will damage the good relations
that have emerged between our two countries in recent
years.

Other States, including members of the Security
Council and Libya's neighbours in the region, that have
not responded to the request of the legitimate Libyan
Government to replace their accredited ambassadors.
They are thereby, in practical terms, establishing
diplomatic relations with the militias controlling the
capital, which are in alliance with Ansar al-Sharia. The
Libyan Government could well be compelled to take
the necessary steps to correct this situation, even if it
should mean suspending relations with those States.

Any delay in restoring legitimate authority over
State institutions in the capital and in expanding State
authority throughout the national territory can only
reflect support for ongoing violations of human rights,
including the forced expulsions of Libyan citizens
from Warshafana, Tawergha and several other Libyan
villages. It will compel hundreds of thousands of
Libyan refugees to continue to suffer in dire conditions
in neighbouring countries, where their children are
deprived of schooling.

The resolution of such tragedies cannot be tied to
the outcome of a national dialogue that remains hostage
to the whims and desires of militias that survive on
crime and enjoy demeaning and humiliating Libyans,
and that have emptied the country of intellectuals,
political activists and tourists, who have fled under
threat. Efforts to address the security situation and
combat terrorism must not remain hostage to the success
of the national dialogue. They should be undertaken in
parallel with the dialogue if we wish to prevent Libya
from falling under the total control of terrorists and to
stop terrorism from spreading throughout the region.

The Libyan people look forward to Mr. Ledn's
successful persuasion of the militia leaders, as opposed
to the political leaders, to accept the formation of a
Government of national unity consisting of Libyans
who do not hold foreign passports or citizenship, and
that would be ratified and supported by the entire
membership of the House of Representatives. The
Government would assume its functions in the capital
at a date certain once all the militias have withdrawn
and once it enjoys the security necessary to carry out
its tasks without threat of force.

I stress that, for the first time since 2011, there is
a legitimate Government in Libya that is not amenable
to the threats and extortion of the militias. This could
not have come about without the regrouping and
reorganization of some units of the army in the eastern
part of the country. The performance and achievements
of the Government would still be weak and fall short
of the expectations of the Libyan people and the
international community if that had not occurred, yet
objective circumstances prevent it from meeting the
aspirations of the Libyan people, including the fact that
it is not working from its seat and offices in the capital
and that it is unfortunately operating on a war footing
with a limited staff, few financial resources and very
little support from the international community.

The Government cannot be prohibited from
obtaining the weapons and other military equipment
needed to strengthen the capacity of army and the
security apparatus while blaming it for its inability
to control the security situation internally and at the
borders or to stop the flow of weapons inside and
outside the country.

The Libyan army leadership has presented specific
requests to the Sanctions Committee for exemptions
from the arms embargo designed to strengthen the
capacity of the Libyan air force to monitor Libyan
territory and borders and prevent the terrorists from
taking over oil fields and related facilities, in order to
protect the wealth of the country. In the next few days,
we will see how serious the Security Council is in terms
of its concern about the security and stability of Libya
and the region. From now on, the Libyan people will no
longer accept a position of neutrality on the issue of the
legitimate authorities versus the terrorist organizations.
It will not accept any State that claims to want the best
for Libya while continuing to provide the Libyan Dawn
militias with weapons and political and media support.
The Council's position and that of the United Nations
Mission in Libya must be very clear to those who do The President (spoke in French): I now invite
so. And it must be in line with Council resolutions, Councilmembers to informalconsultations to continue
especially resolutions 1373 (2001) and 2174 (2014). our discussion on the subject.

Those who want to be Libya's partner and an honest
broker must listen to the legitimate Libyan authorities,
who were properly elected, and must respect Libyans"
interests and wishes, as expressed through elections.

The meeting ruse at10.5()a.m.
