Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
congratulate you, Mr. President, and the Gabonese
delegation for bringing this issue to the Security
Council today. I also welcome the presence of the
President of Nigeria, the Deputy President of South
Africa and the Foreign Minister of France. I also want
to thank the Secretary-General and Michel Sidibe for
their informative briefings.

We warmly welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1983 (2011). This resolution and today's
debate send a strong message that the HIV epidemic
still has a serious impact on international peace and
security. Taking action on HIV and AIDS remains a

key priority for the United Kingdom. We look forward
to agreeing on a strong statement of commitment at
this week' s high-level meeting of the General
Assembly.

The United Kingdom welcomes the concerted
action taken across the United Nations system to
combat the HIV epidemic. We are committed to the
vision of a world with zero new HIV infections, zero
discrimination and zero AIDS-related deaths. In
support of our collective efforts to achieve targets set
out in the Millennium Development Goals, the United
Kingdom warmly welcomes the leadership and
guidance shown by the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS, including in its Outcome
Framework for 2009 to 2011.

In the past, the Security Council has focused on
minimizing the chances of transmission from United
Nations peacekeepers to local populations. We have
called for greater focus on implementing HIV and
AIDS awareness programmes within national
militaries. We have seen how Member States providing
troops to United Nations peacekeeping operations have
made concerted efforts in the past decade to provide
sufficient prevention, treatment, care and support to
their personnel. We should be proud of significant
improvements.

But we should also remain concerned at the high
number of fatalities and repatriations due to HIV and
AIDS-related illnesses among United Nations
peacekeepers deployed overseas. Today, United
Nations peacekeepers are more likely to die from
illness than from activities undertaken to fulfil their
mandate. We owe it to those men and women, who risk
their lives in the pursuit of international peace, to
understand why that should be the case, and then to do
something about it.

Tackling HIV and AIDS among peacekeeping
personnel is essential. But both peacekeepers and the
communities they are protecting are susceptible to HIV
and AIDS. As our understanding of the HIV epidemic
has developed, so we have together seen considerable
improvements in the methods we use to tackle it. We
used to fear that during the fog of war itself, the
unchecked spread of HIV and AIDS could have a
debilitating effect on peace and security. We now
understand that the risk of infection can be even
greater in communities emerging from violent conflict.

11-3654]

United Nations peacekeeping operations, with
their military, police and civilian elements, are well
placed to engage with vulnerable communities that
have been affected by conflict in order to ensure that
the epidemic does not gain a foothold among them. We
believe that we should see United Nations
peacekeepers as positive agents for change in our
efforts to combat the spread of HIV and AIDS in post-
conflict societies.

We encourage peacekeeping operations to
incorporate HIV awareness in the execution of their
mandates. Such activities may involve awareness
training for demobilized combatants or HIV education
programmes pursued in tandem with initiatives to
combat sexual and gender-based violence. The United
Kingdom welcomes the outreach to local communities
already seen in a number of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Peacekeeping operations can
effect real change on the ground.

In recent months, we have discussed in this
Chamber ways to combat the disturbing incidence of
sexual violence used as a weapon against vulnerable
communities. We have heard how sexual exploitation
and abuse have the ability to prey on those parts of the
community that are most vital to longer-term peace and
stability. The risk of HIV infection and the burden that
the disease can place on the very fabric of local
communities are additional horrors from which those
communities require protection.

We have discussed at length whether the spread
of HIV and AIDS constitutes a threat to international
peace and security. The United Kingdom believes that
we have an obligation to such communities to consider,
from time to time, whether the Security Council has a
complementary contribution to make in our overall
efforts to combat the spread of HIV and AIDS. It is for
that reason that we thank you, Mr. President, for
bringing this important issue to the attention of the
Council today.

