Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
His Excellency Mr. Sameh Shokry Selim, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Arab Republic of Egypt, for
presiding over the earlier session of the open debate and
you, Mr. President, for convening this very important
meeting. I would also like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, the Secretary-General of Al Azhar
Islamic Research Academy and the Vice-President of
Microsoft for their briefings.

Indonesia associates itself with the statements
to be delivered by the representatives of Kuwait and
Thailand on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, respectively.

The concept note (S/2016/416, annex) for this
debate underlines the grim reality of the global nature
of terrorism. Terrorist groups recruit and train new
members, operate and seek funding anywhere they
wish, regardless of State boundaries. Supported by those
capacities, certain terrorist groups, notably the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Boko Haram and other
groups linked to Al-Qaida, have devastated regional
peace and stability and threatened the stability of other
regions. Terrorist groups have also used information
technology extensively to spread messages of hatred
and violence. Their propaganda has also contributed
to the rise of lone wolf terrorists. With those facts in
mind, it is imperative to strengthen synergy at all levels
and all aspects of our cooperation.

Countering the narratives and ideologies of
terrorism is indeed critical in preventing terrorism
and violent extremism. Indonesia believes that more
efforts must be made in this regard with a view
to establishing effective strategies at the national,
regional and global levels. Along that line, I wish to
share some of Indonesia's experiences in developing
and implementing strategies to counter narratives and
ideologies of terrorism, as part of our contribution to the
efforts to enhance global cooperation in this particular
matter. First, our national efforts to counter narratives
and ideologies of terrorism are conducted within the
framework of the blueprint on deradicalization, which
focuses on at least three critical programmes: dialogue,
empowerment and reintegration.

Dialogue is conducted among convicted terrorists
and a team of experts in religious, social and
psychological counselling. It aims at building trust and
eradicating the ideology of terrorism. Education and
training are provided to equip former terrorists with
practical trades to assist them in their reintegration into
society, following the conclusion of their sentencing
period. The role of family and women is important
in educating individuals and assimilating them into
the communities.

It is important to note that, in order to succeed,
we must be able to identify the root causes of the
ideologies of terrorism. Based on our experience, the
misinterpretation of religion is not the only reason
behind the ideologies of terrorism. There are many
other factors that must be taken into account, such as
individual backgrounds and motivation, or collective
grievances and victimization.

It must be emphasized that deradicalization is a
long and challenging process. At the same time, we
also have to be watchful of the danger of the terrorists
spreading their ideologies among inmates in prison. Yet
the result of our de-radicalization strategy is tangible.
Today, terrorists who have denounced their ideologies
are among our allies in countering terrorism. On
account of their past, they are in a good position to
explain the danger of terrorist ideologies, as well as
its impacts on the public, the terrorists themselves and
their families.

Secondly, deradicalization programmes must be
complemented by counter-radicalization, which aims
at providing the public with narratives to counter
those of the terrorists. Our counter-radicalization
programmes involve many important stakeholders,
such as educational and religious institutions, youth
organizations, media, women, victims of terrorist
attacks and even former terrorists, at both the national
and provincial levels. Within the context of counter-
radicalization, we have put in place appropriate
measures to prevent the spread of terrorists' messages
through the Internet. We also use the Internet to
prevent, detect and deter acts of terrorism. That include
creating websites to disseminate messages of peace
and respect and the gathering of information that may
lead to the prevention of terrorism and prosecution of
terrorist suspects.

Thirdly, we remain faithful to the belief that
respecting human rights contributes to effective
counter-terrorism efforts. This is so since respect for
human rights, while countering terrorism, can help
secure the confidence of terrorists and their families
in the Government. Building this confidence is a
fundamental element in de-radicalization because the
ideologies ofterrorism are often built upon views of the
illegitimacy of the Government. Moreover, violations
of human rights and lack of good governance may
contribute to the spread of ideologies of terrorism.

In conclusion, I wish to underscore the importance
of the sharing of best practices and lessons learned in
de-radicalization and counter-radicalization, as part of
our continuous efforts to strengthen States' capacities.
In that regard, Indonesia will continue to utilize the
Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation
as a platform for regional and global cooperation in
capacity-building and invite others to do so.

We look forward to a closer collaboration
among States and the United Nations system in this
important task.

