Mr. Kim Bonghyun (Republic of Korea): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to address the Security Council today on
the important topic of mediation and settlement of
disputes. I also express my appreciation to the
Secretary-General and his team for their hard work and
for the insightful report before us on enhancing
mediation and its support activities (S/2009/ 189).

As we witness the increasing cost of dealing with
the shattered remnants of peace, the value of timely
and efficiently engaged mediation is being more and
more widely recognized. Considering the increasing
importance and value of mediation, it is imperative to
sum up the lessons learned so far and to devise the
most effective mediation tools for resolving disputes at
an early stage. My delegation agrees with the
Secretary-General that mediation has proved to be the
most promising means for the peaceful settlement of
disputes; however, the practice of mediation has
received disappointingly little attention and support.

In that regard, today's open debate is most timely,
taking the lead from the results of the high-level
meeting of the Council last year (see S/PV.5979), and
will help us to promote and support mediations and
other means of the peaceful settlement of disputes
more professionally and consistently. In contributing to
that discussion, my delegation would like to highlight
the following points.

First, although the United Nations does not have
a monopoly on mediation, the Organization is in an
ideal position to provide mediation in most cases. With
192 Member States, which have agreed to resolve

disputes peacefully, the United Nations is the only
global intergovernmental organization whose primary
function is the maintenance of international peace and
security. Thanks to the universality and the multilateral
nature of the United Nations, the trustworthiness and
impartiality of mediation are more readily and easily
recognized by the parties concerned when mediation is
practiced by the United Nations itself or by other
organizations or individuals endorsed by it. More
often, the Organization's endorsement of a mediator
has also helped to bolster the tools and the capacity of
the mediator. In that regard, the United Nations
deserves the focused investment of strengthening and
consolidating mediation capabilities.

Secondly, increasing mediation capacity needs to
be focused on providing mediation at the earliest
possible phases of conflict by the most capable and
relevant mediators, aided by professional and sufficient
support. In particular, the importance of engaging at
the earliest possible stage needs no further emphasis.
To achieve this, thorough databases of dedicated
mediators should be created so that when a need for
mediation arises, we will spend the least amount of
time and energy locating mediators with the right set of
attributes for the situation.

Thirdly, a basic platform of support that
encompasses experts, finances and administrative
services should be established for effective and
responsive mediation. Considering the increasing
professional and complex nature of mediation,
systematic programmes should be devised to create
future professional mediator corps. However, it was
alarming to learn from the report that adequate and
dedicated human and financial resources have not yet
been secured in the United Nations. A comprehensive
mediation education system is also yet to be realized.

Further efforts need to be made in those areas,
and I believe that the Secretary-General has taken the
right steps to remedy this issue by establishing the
Mediation Support Unit in the Department of Political
Affairs. The recently established mediation start-up
funds will also be instrumental in providing necessary
financial support to the mediation team. My delegation
supports the Secretary-General in proactively seeking
ways to mobilize adequate funding for mediation
support and to establish a sufficient support platform
for mediations that are responsive to the demands of
fast-moving peace processes.
Fourthly, disputes should be considered within a
regional or subregional context if mediation is to be
successful. Therefore, close partnerships with
established regional organizations are very important
and a more strategic discussion should be held on ways
to establish a clearer framework for effective decision-
making and coordination with regional organizations.
We also need to find ways to ensure that the proper
regional and subregional context is incorporated into
the mediation process when there is no relevant
regional or subregional organization established.

Fifthly, good offices and mediation have been
more effectively and successfully pursued and
practiced when they have been backed up by unified
and sustained support from the Security Council. As
illustrated in the Secretary-General's report, the
Security Council has many tools that it can wield to
support and promote mediation and to call spoilers into
the process of mediation. My delegation believes that
the Security Council should continue to keep actively
abreast of the overall progress of peacemaking efforts
and stay unified in providing necessary support for
mediation processes when needed.

Finally, my delegation is concerned about the low
number of women in formal roles in the mediation
process. The Security Council, in line with its
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), should
encourage women's participation in all stages of peace
processes and in all official and unofficial roles. We
should remember that the low proportion of women in
mediation processes represents not only a gender
imbalance, but also the possible neglect of constructive
resources for mediation and untapped talent pools.

My delegation values the cost-effectiveness of
successful mediation and believes that the core aspect
of successful mediation rests on helping concerned
parties to build confidence, identifying the core
interests of each party with a view to starting a
successful negotiation, and envisaging the benefits of a
peaceful settlement of the dispute. Re-emphasizing our
view that the United Nations should be at the centre of
promoting and supporting the mediation process with
an adequate support platform, I would like to end my
remarks by asking the Secretary-General and the
Security Council to continue to promote mediation and
to establish an adequate and sufficient support platform
for mediation.
09-30856
