Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the initiative of the United States presidency
to convene today's meeting and thanks Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and President Je-Yoon Shin of the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) for their briefings.

At present, international terrorist activities are
rampant. The international community is experiencing
a severe resurgence of terrorism, which has become its
most severe and urgent security challenge. International
terrorist forces are using all sorts of channels to raise
funds for their terrorist activities, thereby endangering
the stability of the global financial system. In recent
years, the international community has worked
diligently to combat the financing of terrorism, but
many challenges remain in that regard.

First, the sources of terrorist funding are many.
International terrorist forces, in addition to such
traditional methods as receiving donations and
committing armed robbery, are using new channels
to raise funds, including the illegal exploitation of
and trafficking in oil and other mineral resources, the
smuggling of cultural relics and ransom payments.

Secondly, the financing of terrorism is becoming
ever more discreet, due to the growing number of ways
to transfer funds in today's world, in particular the
rapid growth of electronic payment platforms. It has
become more difficult to precisely identify the sources
of funding of terrorist organizations.

Thirdly, international cooperation in that regard
needs to be strengthened. At present, coordination in
this field remains inadequate and double standards
persist. Some countries are still facing real difficulties
in implementing the Council's resolutions and FATF
rules.

Fourthly, efficiency in combating the financing of
terrorism needs to be further improved. The current
lists of terrorists lack information that is crucial
to identifying them, thereby hampering effective
monitoring by the financial organizations.

With respect to combating the financing of
terrorism, China wishes to emphasize the following
five points. First, the fundamental principles of
counter-terrorism action must be strictly followed.
Terrorism is the common enemy of humankind and any
act of terrorism - whenever, wherever or by whomever
conducted and for any motivation - constitutes a
serious crime. There must be no double standards in
counter-terrorism. International counter-terrorism
activities must adhere to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and other recognized
fundamental norms of international relations, and bring
into full play the leading role of the United Nations.
That is the primary principle in our efforts to combat
the financing of terrorism.

Secondly, the resolutions of the Council and relevant
rules of FATF must be implemented effectively. China
welcomes the adoption today of resolution 2253 (2015).
All countries should comply with the provisions of
the resolution so as to further improve their domestic
legislation, establish appropriate mechanisms
and ensure the effectiveness of the measures they
undertake. All countries should also comply with the
rules ofthe FATF to strengthen cooperation in financial
monitoring and crack down on illegal activities, such
as underground banking, so as to cut terrorist funding
channels.

Thirdly, international cooperation in combating
the financing of terrorism should be further enhanced
in the light of new trends and changes in methods
of terrorist financing, the international community
should adopt targeted measures and approaches at the
international level. It is important to fully exploit the
advantages of the United Nations and other international
organizations, including through the establishment of
databases and information-exchange platforms for that
purpose. At the national level, it is imperative to enhance
interdepartmental coordination and information
analysis. At the industrial level, Internet companies
and network carriers should exercise self-discipline and
consider the adoption of a global industry-wide code of
conduct at an early date.

Fourthly, continuous efforts should be made to
increase efficiency in the financing of terrorism,
China hopes that the countries concerned will provide
detailed information when submitting listing requests
for individuals and entities. The Ombudsman and the
Council's sanctions Monitoring Teams should assist the
sanctions committees in further improving the current
sanctions lists.
Fifthly, assistance should be provided for capacity-
building of developing countries, which are limited in
their means and resources to confront terrorist threats.
The international community should focus on the
real difficulties faced by the developing countries in
combating financing for terrorism, and provide them
with effective assistance, including financial resources
and training of personnel.

China is firmly opposed to all forms of terrorism
and is an important actor in international counter-
terrorism efforts. We will strengthen our counter-
terrorism cooperation with the international
community, including by combating the financing of
terrorism through joint efforts in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

