Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
The United States voted in favour of resolution 2153
(2014) because we fully support the renewal of these
sanctions and the mandate of the United Nations Group
of Experts, both of which constitute an important part
of the Council's effort to support peace and stability in
Cote d'Ivoire. We welcome the progress C6te d'Ivoire
has made under the leadership of President Ouattara
and his Government. We also applaud the Ivorian
Government's achievement of the Kimberley Process
Certain Scheme's minimum requirements, thereby
allowing for the lifting of the embargo on the import of
rough diamonds originating in C6te d'Ivoire.
Despite this progress, however, we note that the
security situation in Cete d'Ivoire remains challenging
as the country moves into its 2015 electoral cycle.
The Council has expressed repeatedly the importance
of significant security sector reform, the effective
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants,
meaningful reconciliation, and equitable justice for
crimes committed during the crisis.

In the light of the challenges, the United States had
advocated a more gradual approach to adjusting the
arms embargo. We recognize the Government of C6te
d'lvoire's need to build capable and professional security
forces. We were concerned, however, by the findings
in the report of the Group of Experts (S/2014/266)
regarding inconsistent compliance with existing arms
embargo procedures. We therefore urge Cote d'Ivoire
to tighten its control over arms and ammunition and to
continue the important work of security sector reform.
We urge the Council to closely monitor developments
on the ground. If the arms embargo modifications in
resolution 2153 (2014) have any negative repercussions
on stability in Cote d'Ivoire, then the Council should be
prepared to take appropriate action.

Cote d'Ivoire is an important partner of the United
States. We look forward to continuing to work with the
Government and people of C6te d'Ivoire to further the
country's peace, stability and prosperity.

