Mr. Lopes da Rosa (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): We wish to express our satisfaction at the
efforts being deployed by the Secretary-General, the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), the European Union
and all those who are contributing to the search for peace
in Burundi.

The situation in that brotherly nation is of great
concern to my country, which has always upheld the
principles of national reconciliation by peaceful means.

Guinea-Bissau once again welcomes the Convention
of Government of 10 September 1994, which constitutes an
institutional framework for national reconciliation in
Burundi, and we support the governmental institutions
established pursuant to its provisions as well as the Cairo
Conference of Heads of State of the Great Lakes Region,
whose final decisions have had most important implications
for the situation of refugees and displaced persons in that
region of Africa.

We must acknowledge that despite the slowness of the
process of national reconciliation in Burundi, some progress
has been made in the framework of efforts aimed at a
rapprochement between all the peoples of Burundi and at
the establishment of peace and lasting stability in the Great
Lakes region, and in this brotherly nation in particular.

Once again we support the efforts of the Secretary-
General, as well as those of other entities aimed at
facilitating a comprehensive political dialogue in order to
promote national reconciliation, democracy, security and the
rule of law in Burundi.

In this context, we call once again upon all parties
concerned to refrain from any action that could undermine
the process of national reconciliation and to commit
themselves without delay to a dialogue in a positive and
constructive spirit.

We wish to emphasize the importance we attach to the
continued provision of humanitarian aid for refugees and
displaced persons in Burundi. For this reason, we believe
that without a guarantee of security, agencies of the
United Nations and of non-governmental organizations
will not be able to fulfil their humanitarian assistance
mission in that country.

In this regard, we welcome the intention of the High
Commissioner for Refugees to create a permanent
mechanism for consultations on security measures
between the Government of Burundi, the United Nations
and non-governmental organizations.

On the basis of that position, Guinea-Bissau will
vote in favour of the draft resolution before the Council.
We hope it will cast a ray of hope even though the
process of national reconciliation in our brother country
is at an impasse.

