The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

I would like to warmly thank Deputy Secretary-
General Jan Eliasson, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross Peter Maurer and Director
of The Liaison Office Masood Karokhail for their
powerful briefings today.

Eleven years ago today, a heinous attack on the
United Nations compound killed 22 United Nations
staff members, including the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Sergio Vieira de Mello. I,
like many others in the Chamber, paid my respects to
their memeory at a moving ceremony downstairs this
morning.

It is appalling that 11 years later, attacks against
humanitarian workers still continue. Indeed, the
problem is getting worse, with 2013 providing a record
high for the number of attacks on aid workers - a
66-per-cent increase on 2012. The year 2014 is on course
to exceed even that number. Seventy-nine aid workers
have already been killed this year, which is more than
were killed in the whole of 2012. The issue cannot be
ignored. That is why the United Kingdom arranged this
briefing to the Security Council today.

The Council has just Visited Somalia and South
Sudan, which are two of the top five countries in the
world most affected by attacks on aid workers. Such
attacks are a war crime and exactly the sort of crime
that we entrusted the International Criminal Court with
prosecuting, as we heard in The Hague last week.

Across the world, aid workers operate in
unprecedentedly dangerous environments. Four of the
top five countries for attacks, namely, Afghanistan,
South Sudan, the Sudan, including Darfur, and
Syria, are on the Council's agenda. Aid workers
face unprecedented threats. The rise in asymmetric
conflicts and the number of non-State actors poses new
challenges. The reality is that humanitarian workers are
viewed as a soft target. That is a moral outrage and is
totally unacceptable.

With the increasing demands on the United Nations
to operate in increasingly insecure situations, it is clear
that humanitarian workers will remain in the firing
line. I applaud the bravery of United Nations and other
international and national humanitarian staff, risking
their lives to get aid to people in need.

Today, the United Kingdom has announced a
further $1.5 million of funding to protect humanitarian
workers, including support for non-governmental
organization safety offices in Afghanistan, Syria, Iraq
and Libya. The increasing disrespect for international
humanitarian law in those environments is of particular
concern. As Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos
has repeatedly told the Council, even wars have rules.
Attacks on humanitarian workers and their vehicles,
supplies and facilities have an impact not only on
the safety, security and psychology of those workers,
but also on their ability to reach people in need. The
international community must come together to ensure
greater compliance with international humanitarian
law and accountability for those who flout it.

As Mr. Karokhail powerfully reminded us this
morning, it is important to recognize that the vast
majority - 80 per cent - of attacks are directed against
national, locally recruited staff. We heard at first hand
from him about the impact of insecurity on the front
lines of humanitarian operations in Afghanistan. But
it is the same pattern elsewhere. Recently, in Bunj,
South Sudan, we saw fatal ethnically motivated attacks
on South Sudanese aid workers. The shift towards
managing risk by using local staff to deliver aid will
only put those staff more and more at risk of attack.

Against that worsening background, it is the
Council's duty to act. As colleagues have recalled,
we have a number of tools at our disposal. There is
condemnation. The Council's statement on the killing
of aid workers in South Sudan was a welcome step and
raised awareness ofthe attack. There is direct action. We
raised the Bunj attack directly with President Kiir last
week, calling on him to speak out clearly against such
attacks irrespective of who committed them. We should
use our legislative role to ensure that peacekeeping
operations are mandated and equipped to create safe
conditions for the rapid and unfettered delivery of aid.
Special political missions have a key role in promoting
institutions to ensure accountability for attacks. We
should also, in the case of persistent behaviour, consider
sanctions, including against non-State actors.

Eleven years ago, the Council came together to
adopt resolution 1502 (2003) in the wake of the attack
on the United Nations compound in Baghdad. After
today's briefing, there is a strong case for renewed
Security Council action. We shall therefore propose
a new draft resolution on how the Council can better
protect humanitarian workers. It is time for the Council
to be heard again.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The Council has concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at noon.
