Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council and to
congratulate your predecessor on his able leadership.
We also want to thank you for having convened this
important debate on the situation in Afghanistan. This
is an issue in which not only the Afghan people and
Afghanistan's neighbouring countries, but also the
entire international community, have an enormous
stake.

Let me join previous speakers in expressing our
thanks and appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his valuable report and to his Special Representative,
Mr. Arnault, for his comprehensive briefing on recent
developments in Afghanistan. Indeed, the efforts and
dedication of the Secretary-General and Mr. Arnault
deserve our profound admiration and support. We
firmly believe that such commitment is indispensable
in the striving of the Afghan people and Government
for peace, security and development.

Allow me, Mr. President, to join other colleagues
before me in extending our sympathy on the loss of 17
Spanish peacekeepers in the recent tragic helicopter
crash.

After successfully meeting several benchmarks
set by the Bonn Agreement, the Afghan people and
Government are resolutely heading towards another
major milestone by preparing for timely, fair and free
parliamentary and provincial council elections in
September. Despite the enormity of the task, we are
confident that the Afghan people, ably led by President
Karzai and benefiting from international and regional
assistance, will be capable of bringing the process to a
successful conclusion. The Islamic Republic of Iran
stands ready, as always, to extend its unreserved
cooperation to the Government of Afghanistan in the
successful holding of these elections.

The recent report of the Secretary-General on
Afghanistan (S/2005/525) refers to the progress made
and reforms planned in the economic and social fields,
particularly in public administration, fiscal
management and the national education system.
Indeed, the Afghan people and Government deserve
our collective admiration for their achievements.

However, despite these commendable efforts and
achievements, there is no room for complacency, and
much remains to be done, since major daunting
challenges still lie ahead. Different hurdles in the way
of economic and developmental progress in
Afghanistan, including, inter alia, a pervasive drug
economy, coupled with the onus of terrorism and
violent insurgency, have burdened the reconstruction of
the country with a truly formidable combination of
challenges. The host of problems that Afghanistan is
facing in these fields, if left unchecked, may disrupt
the smooth return of the country to peace and stability.

Indeed, the completion of the political transition
is a vital step, but, as mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report, that alone will not be sufficient for
the establishment of lasting peace in Afghanistan. It
will certainly require a long-term commitment on the
part of the international community to see the process
of economic development, along with the
reconstruction and rehabilitation of Afghanistan, to a
successful conclusion. By the same token, we support
the Secretary-General's idea that the international
donor community must resist the temptation to move
on after the elections are held.

As the Secretary-General mentioned in his report,
the security situation in Afghanistan remains of
paramount concern. Since security is a prerequisite to
ensuring development in the political and economic
reconstruction of the country, my Government is
concerned about the increase in insurgency and
terrorist threats in Afghanistan, particularly in the
southern and south-eastern parts of the country, mostly
posed by the remnants of the Taliban and Al-Qaida, as
well as by drug traffickers.

We believe that in combating the elements of
disorder in Afghanistan, priority should be given to
enhancing the capabilities of the Afghan National
Army and Police and the expansion of the authority of
the central Government across the country. That is the
best way to provide security throughout Afghanistan
and help contain the terrorist threat.

In our View, the impact of a pervasive drug
economy on the reconstruction of Afghanistan, and the
fact that terrorism and insurgency feed on drug
trafficking, should always be kept in sight. Undoubtedly,
insecurity and drug trafficking in Afghanistan are
mutually reinforcing, while at the same time both
exacerbate other forms of transnational crime.

Moreover, opium cultivation in Afghanistan
jeopardizes regional stability and adversely affects
social order in the neighbouring countries. We fully
agree with the Secretary-General that the widespread
availability of drugs tends to increase local and
regional addiction rates, thus contributing to the spread
of diseases such as AIDS throughout the country and
the larger region.

Situated on the smuggling route from
Afghanistan to Europe and beyond, Iran has done much
more than its share to fight a costly war against heavily
armed drug traffickers in the last two decades, losing,
inter alia, close to 3,400 law enforcement personnel in
the process. Nonetheless, we are ready to stay at the
forefront of the worldwide war against drugs. We have
cooperated sincerely with the international community
in fighting opium cultivation in Afghanistan and have,
moreover, tried to promote and implement crop
substitution projects in different parts of the country.

Despite all the sincere efforts undertaken by the
Afghan Government, assisted by the international
community, to combat the scourge of narcotic drugs,
we cannot conceal the fact that our expectations have
yet to be met. While certain efforts by the Government
of Afghanistan have resulted in the reduction of opium
cultivation in some regions traditionally famous for
producing opium, it is beyond comprehension as to
why at the same time opium cultivation should increase
in the regions bordering my country, especially in the
Farah province. It is a development that arouses our
grave concern.

Correspondingly, despite our costly campaign, we
have witnessed an increase in drug trafficking from
Afghanistan over the past year. For Iran to sustain its
ongoing fierce fight against drug trafficking,
international support, especially the cooperation of
neighbouring countries, is indispensable. There is a
pressing need to send an unequivocal message that all
States are united in the face of this threat.

Because opium cultivation has turned into a
major source of income for many Afghan farmers, we
believe that the major cure lies in accelerating the pace
of Afghan reconstruction in all fields. Thus the
international community should also redouble its
efforts in providing international assistance for the
reconstruction of Afghanistan. By pledging at the
Tokyo Conference to allocate a credit amounting to
$560 million to this end - the highest pledge in terms
of per capita income of the donor countries - Iran is
actively playing a role. In fulfilling our pledge, we
have engaged in various infrastructure activities in
Afghanistan, including electricity projects, road
construction, manpower training and humanitarian
services.

In general, Iran's contribution to the
reconstruction of Afghanistan has so far amounted to
$170 million. At the same time, we are also engaged in
many projects, both in Iran and Afghanistan, to help
promote foreign trade in this landlocked country. I will
not go into the details in the sake of time.

The Islamic Republic of Iran hosted almost 3
million Afghan refugees for about three decades,
incurring huge costs in the process. Our expectation
that in the new era, and with the cooperation of the
international community and the Afghan Government,
the voluntary repatriation of the refugees could occur
in a more timely manner has yet to be met. Despite the
implementation of the Trilateral Agreement signed
with the Afghan Government and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the implementation of several programmes in this
respect, the process is not progressing satisfactorily. In
our view, it is important that the Afghan Government
and the international community adopt a more
thorough approach to creating a stable basis to
facilitate the voluntary return of refugees.

I should not close my statement without
reaffirming our determination to continue helping the
Afghan Government and people overcome the huge
challenges they still face and to move smoothly
through the remaining stages of their political,
developmental and reconstruction process. The
international community should also foster closer and
broader cooperation, under the auspices of this world
Organization, towards the consolidation of peace,
security and stability in Afghanistan.

