Mr. Laurin (Canada) (spoke in French): The
signing of the Darfur peace agreement represents an
essential step towards the achievement of lasting peace
for the people of that region. Canada congratulates the
signatories of the agreement on having seized the
opportunity for peace. We also commend those who
have chosen to associate themselves with the peace
agreement. Canada is proud to have played a
diplomatic role in the process, in partnership with the
African Union (AU) mediation team.

The agreement marks the successful conclusion
of a very complex process, as well as the beginning of
a significant commitment by the international
community. The agreement provides a viable basis for
achieving a sustainable peace in Darfur and for
addressing the needs of its people. The parties must
now work together to put an end to violence and
impunity in Darfur.

They must commit themselves to protecting
civilians and guaranteeing safe and unimpeded
humanitarian access to populations in need, and they
must implement the agreement - translate words into
action - and begin the difficult process of
reconciliation.

(spoke in English)

I am addressing the Council today to say that
Canada fully supports the efforts of the parties, the AU
and the United Nations to resolve the conflict. Along
with our international partners, we have taken a
leadership role in assisting the African Union Mission
in the Sudan (AMIS).

With the signature of the peace deal, a new hope
has emerged for the people of Darfur and all of the
Sudan. The displaced must now be able to return home
in safety and dignity. Special measures must be taken
to eliminate sexual violence, and women must
participate fully in the implementation of peace.
Attention must be devoted to rehabilitation,
reconciliation and sustainable development. In the near
term, we - Canada and our partners in the
international community - must enhance AMIS to
ensure that that hope is translated into reality by
improving the security situation on the ground. The
pact must be monitored and verified, and violators and
would-be spoilers must be held accountable and
punished. Canada will work with our partners to ensure
that AMIS has the necessary resources to enforce the
agreement.

At the same time, we must proceed urgently with
a transition to a United Nations mission that has a
strong mandate to protect civilians. Such a transition
has been requested by the African Union and would be
welcomed by Canada. The time is ripe for a new level
of international engagement. In that regard, the
planning process must move forward as soon as
possible, with continued close cooperation between the
AU and the United Nations. Canada will work closely
with both organizations to ensure that they have the
necessary support.

Finally, reaching a sustainable peace in Darfur is
vital for the Sudan and for the security of the region. It
remains a priority for Canada. We urge the Security
Council to remain seized of the matter.

