Mr. Khalil (Egypt): I have the honour to speak
today on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

At the outset, I would like to express our
appreciation to the Pakistani presidency of the Security
Council for organizing today's debate on United
Nations peacekeeping, a subject of great interest to
all members of the Non-Aligned Movement. I would
also like to thank the Foreign Secretary of Pakistan
for being here with us to chair this debate and for his
opening remarks.

Egypt and the Non-Aligned Movement welcome
the adoption by consensus of resolution 2086 (2013).

The concept of peacekeeping emerged just a few
years after the United Nation was founded. It has
evolved over the past decades to constitute one of the
most important tools within the collective security
system of the United Nations for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Peacekeeping
operations range from traditional peacekeeping,
focused on maintaining peace between warring parties
and monitoring the cessation ofhostilities, to a complex
and multidimensional process that involves conducting
peacebuilding tasks and addressing the root causes of
conflict. Through the years, peacekeepers have truly
become the early peacebuilders.

While recognizing that the mandate of each
peacekeeping mission is specific to the needs and
situation of the country concerned, the nature of
peacekeeping operations and their mandates emanates
from the changing characteristics of conflicts, in
particular the increase in intra- rather than inter-State
conflicts. The triggers of conflict are increasingly
linked to underlying deficits in the capacity of State
institutions to provide security, justice and inclusive
economic development.

In that context, it is imperative to make sure
that peacekeeping and peacebuilding are mutually
reinforcing in the pursuit of lasting peace and stability.
This will happen only through support for the crucial
transition phase ofpeacebuilding that follows immediate
post-conflict peacekeeping and precedes long-term
recovery. Recovery should ensure the achievement of
sustainable economic and social development in order
to avoid a relapse into conflict.

The United Nations has been fully cognizant of
these changes in the characteristics of conflicts and
their impact on peacekeeping operations mandates.
In his introduction to the valuable book entitled From
Global Apartheid to Global Village: Africa and the
United Nations, Boutros Boutros-Ghali mentioned that
the new characteristics of conflict have placed a much
greater demand upon the United Nations and forced the
Organization to respond in a variety of ways.

In recent years, the United Nations has come a
long way in incorporating peacebuilding tasks into the
mandate of multidimensional peacekeeping operations.
Multidimensional peacekeeping operations have in
turn made a significant contribution to support for
peacebuilding priority areas, including basic safety and
security, the political process, the provision of basic
services, the restoration of core Government functions
and economic revitalization. Those tasks should be
aligned with the strategies of the host country in order
to ensure national ownership.

The Non-Aligned Movement believes that
peacekeeping is an important tool at the disposal of
the United Nations for addressing conflict situations.
Yet it should not be a substitute for others, such as
preventive diplomacy and political efforts to resolve
conflicts, particularly at their earliest stages. It
should be resorted to after a thorough assessment of
a conflict situation based on accurate information and
with a clear understanding of the objectives of the
peacekeeping operation, as well as a clear vision for
exit strategies. Enhancing the safety of peacekeeping
operations personnel should also be high on our agenda
when planning and deploying peacekeeping operations.

The Non-Aligned Movement emphasizes that, in
the establishment of any peacekeeping operation or the
extension of the mandate of existing operations, the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
and the main principles governing such operations - the
consent of the parties, the non-use of force except in
self-defence, and impartiality - should be strictly
observed. Respect for the principles of sovereign
equality, political independence, the territorial integrity
of all States and non-intervention in matters that are
essentially within their domestic jurisdiction should
also be upheld.

The Non-Aligned Movement stresses that
peacekeeping concepts, policies and strategies should
be developed through intergovernmental processes
in order to ensure their applicability and consensus
among Member States. The Non-Aligned Movement
reaffirms the role of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations as the sole body responsible
for peacekeeping policymaking.

Cooperation between the Security Council, the
Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries and,
by the way, the Non-Aligned Movement includes the top
10 troop-contributing countries among its members - is
an indispensable factor in the success of peacekeeping
operations. The role of the troop-contributing countries,
whose troops are put at risk for the sake of peace, in the
overall process of peacekeeping, and the importance
of their full participation in policy formation and
decision-making in matters pertaining to the strength,
mandate and composition of peacekeeping operations
cannot be overemphasized. Providing all the necessary
financial and logistical support to peacekeeping
operations is crucial to the successful implementation
of their mandates. Peacekeepers should not be asked to
do more with fewer resources. In addition, the issue of
the reimbursement of troop costs should be resolved.
The financing of peacekeeping operations should not
become a burden to troop-contributing countries.

 
While reaffirming the primary responsibility of the
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security, it is imperative to continue to
enhance cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in addressing
conflict and post-conflict situations through joint
efforts in the areas of conflict prevention, conflict
resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The
existing cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union is a model that demonstrates the
potential for cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations, as envisaged in Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

Finally, the Non-Aligned Movement wishes to
pay tribute to the men and women who are serving
in peacekeeping operations around the world, as well
as to those peacekeepers who have paid the ultimate
price in advancing the cause of peace. The members
of the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirm that they will
remain fully committed to supporting United Nations
endeavours in the pursuit of peace and stability around
the world.

Lastly, speaking in my national capacity, I would
like to voice my support for the remarks ofAmbassador
Ge'rard Araud of France regarding multilingualism in
peacekeeping operations, and of course to reaffirm
that this should include the six languages of the United
Nations, including Arabic.

