Ms. Ramirez (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): For
more than a year now, the United Nations has been
prevented from carrying out its Security Council mandate
to monitor Iraq's disarmament and to adopt permanent
inspection and verification measures. The serious and
complex causes of this state of affairs are clearly reflected
in the fact that we needed more than 10 months to
conclude negotiations, the first phase of which will come
to a close with the adoption of the draft resolution before
us.

Argentina cooperated in this process as a sponsor of
one of the first draft resolutions drawn up. The purpose
of that initiative was to help us out of the stagnation in
which the Council found itself. It is reassuring to see that
a number of the ideas embodied in that document have
been incorporated into this new draft submitted by the
delegation of the United Kingdom after several months of
negotiations among the permanent members.

We have stressed the need to reach consensus in the
Security Council to convince Iraq to resume cooperation
with the United Nations. We have also supported the View
that Iraq's opinions should have some relevance in this
process. Nevertheless, the price of consensus cannot be
the loss of the Council's authority; nor can it be an

 

abandonment of the principles upheld ever since the
adoption of Security Council resolution 687 (1991).

I shall now refer to what we believe are the main
aspects of the draft resolution. In the first place, appropriate
interaction between the Security Council, the new entity
that will succeed the United Nations Special
Commission - the United Nations Monitoring, Verification
and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) - and Iraq is re-
established. It will be the Security Council's responsibility
to adopt the programme of work of that Commission and
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and its
fulfilment will be one of the conditions for suspending
sanctions. UNMOVIC and the IAEA, for their part, will
have to return to Iraq to prepare work programmes that will
allow them to fulfil their mandate, after having determined
the current state of affairs on the ground. These provisions
of the draft, inter alia, indicate positive changes towards
arriving at a clear-cut redefinition of competencies.

The concept of the suspension of sanctions to
encourage compliance with resolutions is beginning to take
root in the practice of the Council. The machinery
envisioned in section D of this draft resolution reasonably
makes the suspension of certain sanctions imposed on Iraq
dependent on that country's cooperation with UNMOVIC
and the IAEA in all aspects of the work programmes
envisaged in operative paragraph 7. In the light of the
precedents set, and in view of the subregional situation,
which has not changed, it seems to us that cooperation
without hesitation or reservation is an indispensable
condition and a central element of the draft.
This draft resolution, once adopted, will have to be
implemented, and it is to be hoped that Iraq will so comply.
Thus, it would again be an interlocutor within the United
Nations system and would benefit from the establishment
of a suspension of sanctions at the halfway mark towards
their lifting.

In any event, most of the humanitarian measures in
section C will be applicable for the benefit of the Iraqi
people immediately after the adoption of the draft
resolution. The definitive lifting of the ceiling for oil
exports from Iraq under the system established under
resolution 986 (1995) and the establishment of a simplified
machinery for approving imports of food, medication or
educational items are decisions that will have an immediate
effect.

Finally, the evaluation of the applicability of this draft
resolution will also have to take into account the role that
we, the members of the Council, have to play. For
sanctions to be suspended, not only will Iraq have to
comply with its obligations, but the Security Council will
have to approve the programme of work of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). Moreover, the Council will have
to agree upon a financial monitoring system to ensure that
the suspension is effective. These two decisions are vital
in the process, and we hope that they will be successfully
implemented in the near future.

We also hope that Iraq will comply fully and
unconditionally with paragraph 30 of resolution 687
(1991), in accordance with section B of the draft
resolution.

The creation of UNMOVIC begins a new phase in
the mandate concerning the ongoing disarmament,
monitoring and verification of Iraq established in
paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 of resolution 687 (1991) and in
resolution 715 (1991). The new draft resolution includes
all the necessary precautions to maintain the objectivity,
technical capacity and professionalism needed to
guarantee that this subsidiary body of the Council will
report impartially on compliance with its mandate and the
cooperation it receives from the Iraqi Government. It also
makes it possible to take advantage of the knowledge and
experience acquired by the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) in its eight years of work.

In conclusion, we should like once again to express
our appreciation for the efforts that you, Mr. President, as
well as your delegation and your capital have made to
make progress towards a text that would allow us to get
out of the situation that has faced us since the end of
1998.

