Mr. Emvula: The Committee on the Exercise ofthe
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People welcomes
recent efforts to break the political stalemate. These are
the first rays of hope since bilateral negotiations came
to a halt in the spring of last year. The Government of
France brought key international stakeholders to Paris
in June, who agreed on multilateral efforts to help
advance the prospects for peace, including by providing
meaningful incentives to the parties to make peace.

Two weeks ago, the Middle East Quartet published
its long-awaited report, in which it highlighted
major threats to the two-State solution and provided
recommendations on how to create the conditions
for meaningful peace negotiations. The Committee
underscores the need for strong and determined steps to
reverse the negative threats immediately. In all of those
efforts, the international community is unanimous in its
view that the only way to achieve an enduring piece will
be on the basis of relevant resolutions, including of the
Council, and a negotiated two-State outcome that meets
Palestinian aspirations for statehood and sovereignty
and Israeli security needs, ends the occupation that
began in 1967 and resolves all permanent status issues.

The Committee fully and expressly supports
peace efforts. On 29 and 30 June, we organized
and international conference in support of Israeli-
Palestinian peace in Geneva under the theme "Peace
Is Possible 4 Frameworks for a Way Forward".
It assembled experienced peace negotiators and
international experts, including from the State of
Palestine and Israel, to discuss lessons learned and past
initiatives and to discuss new ideas.

To facilitate a similar exchange of ideas, in early
May, the Committee also organized a conference
on Jerusalem, which is at the heart of a peaceful
settlement to the question of Palestine. I have describe
those recent international efforts as the first rays of
hope. Too often we have seen such rays vanish because
we, the international community, the United Nations
and the Council did not do enough to support and
bolster previous efforts, or because the international
community prioritized other seemingly more urgent
issues. However, in doing so, we overlooked one key
issue, namely, that the long-standing inability to find
a durable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
one of the reasons for radicalization in the Middle East
and beyond.

In the same vein, visions of security for Israel
without a just and sustainable peace with Palestine are
delusory. Collective punishments, such as the blockade
of Gaza, demolitions of houses of suspected terrorists
and the denial of working permits, do not produce
acquiescence. They produce resentment and resistance.
Likewise, preventing Palestinian development in
Area C of the occupied West Bank, building illegal
settlements and the taking of land for exclusive Israeli
use only increase a sense of frustration and hopelessness
and call into question Israel's commitment to a two-
State solution.

A recent example is the decision by the Government
of Israel on new settlement construction in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem, just two days after the Quartet
report was published. Unilateral security measures also
can never be enough to resolve the underlying causes
of violence. What is needed is leadership, providing a
political horizon and immediate changes on the ground
so that Palestinians can start regaining hope. What is
needed is a fundamental return to agreed negotiating
principles and parameters as reiterated the Arab Peace
Initiative, at the Paris ministerial conference and the
various Quartet reports. In this, the State of Palestine
is a partner for peace. However, its capacity and ability
to deliver are severely hampered by the continuing
occupation and by the destruction of its physical and
social infrastructure.

In May, our Committee held a seminar in
Stockholm on assistance to the Palestinian people, at
which experts reviewed the challenges and constraints
to the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals for the State of Palestine under the Israeli
occupation and looked at ways of building resilient
and sustainable economic growth while addressing
humanitarian needs. A main focus of the seminar was
on long-term investment in youth and women as a key
to building a peaceful and inclusive society. It was
encouraging to hear the voices of Palestinian youth,
as well as testimony by Ms. Hanan Al-Hroub from the
West Bank, the recipient of the 2016 Global Teachers
Prize, who is teaching Palestinian children traumatized
by the constant violence against them that saying no to
Violence is the right path towards a good future.
The de facto political division of Gaza and the
West Bank continues to affect Palestinian society and
efforts towards a peaceful solution of the conflict.
The Committee welcomes recent reconciliation talks
and expresses its hope that they will soon come to
fruition. However, this division cannot be an excuse for
international inaction or a delay in donor support for
Gaza reconstruction. The people of Gaza deserve better.

The Committee also welcomes the call for local
council elections in October of this year and hopes that
they will be held throughout the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in Gaza. Good governance and
transparent political structures are essential for
Palestine and Palestinians to develop their State and its
institutions and to take their rightful place among the
nations of the world. For those efforts to be carried out,
the continued and increased support of the international
community is needed. The notion that development must
wait until the humanitarian crisis is over or a political
solution is reached is short-sighted, as is the one that
the beginning of development projects indicates that
there is no longer any need for humanitarian aid. There
is no law that prevents education programmes, health
care and the creation of livelihoods from starting even
while the rubble is being cleared.

Today, I have deliberately focused on the rays of
hope shining against the backdrop of all the violence
and despair in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem and the region beyond. It is very
tempting to adopt a bleak and morose view. We must
fight that temptation. As was said at the Committee's
conference last month in Geneva, peace is possible, but
it requires the efforts of everyone and leadership. Both
peoples, Palestinians and Israelis, expect and depend
on it from their own leaders and all of us. Let us not
disappoint them.
