Mr. Duval (Canada): I would like to thank all of
the judges of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for their report on the
operation of the Tribunal, and thank especially
President Claude Jorda for meeting with us today to
discuss the recommendations set out in that report.

The work of the two Tribunals is extremely
important to end impunity for those who have
perpetrated the most heinous crimes. That is the
mandate which the Security Council entrusted to these
two institutions when they were created. It is therefore
incumbent upon us - the members of the Security
Council - to do all in our power to support the
Tribunals, without politicizing their work and
undermining the authority and legitimacy critical to the
fulfilment of their mandates.

Canada categorically rejects claims that the work
of the ICTY is biased or in contradiction with the
mandate that the Council has entrusted to it. These are
claims simply not substantiated by facts.

My delegation is committed to working
constructively with all Council members to improve
the effectiveness of the Tribunals. For the thousands of
victims of the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda, the wheels of justice are turning too slowly.
We must find ways to expedite the work of both
Tribunals, recognizing, of course, the imperatives of
impartiality and respect for the rights of the accused.
Canada recognizes that international justice is
expensive. However, we are appreciative of the
implicit recognition in the reports that financial
resources are not unlimited and that the Tribunals must
therefore explore cost-effective options to achieve their
mandates.

We also welcome and completely endorse the
remarks of Judge Jorda as to the importance of the
work of the Tribunal in the ongoing efforts to establish
a permanent body, the International Criminal Court.
That work is occurring here even as we speak.

With respect to the report of the ICTY introduced
by Judge Jorda, it is an extremely useful start in our
efforts to achieve the objective of more efficient
international justice. As a preliminary reaction, Canada
generally supports the contents of the report. In
particular, we are interested in the two-pronged
approach recommended by the judges: first, partially
delegating certain pre-trial management tasks to senior
legal officers, and secondly, creating a pool of ad [item
judges.

The delegation of certain pre-trial tasks could
indeed shorten the length of proceedings, and the
designation of ad [item judges could allow more cases
to be heard simultaneously. It is an important
observation, we believe, that ad [item judges would
need to be properly integrated into the system, and it
would be valuable to include some former judges of the
Tribunals for Rwanda and Yugoslavia in that pool to
ensure consistency with the jurisprudence and practice
of the Tribunals.

These recommendations bear further examination.
Canada would support the French proposal to establish
a Security Council working group of experts to
examine the contents of the report expeditiously and to
develop recommendations for changes to the ICTY
statute as appropriate.

In addition to the examination of this report by
Security Council members, it is important to consult
with others, including States that have made significant
contributions to the operation of the Tribunal. Also, it
will be important for the General Assembly to examine
certain aspects of the report- for example, those
recommendations that have financial implications.

I would like to conclude my statement this
morning by asking two questions of Judge Jorda. First,
could he provide us with more details of the judges'
vision of how the pool of ad [item judges would work?
And secondly, many of the recommendations in the
report of the Expert Group would improve the
efficiency of the ICTY. Can you, Judge Jorda, provide
information on the steps already being taken by the
different organs of the Tribunal to implement these
recommendations?

