President Macron (spoke in French): First of all, I
would like to thank the United States presidency of the
Security Council for convening us today to address the
serious threat to international peace and security posed
by the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for being present with us today.

The first question that comes to mind with regard to
this issue as I contemplate our differences - speaking
frankly - over the past year on such important issues as
Iranian nuclear power and the use of chemical weapons
by the Syrian regime, is simply: "What is it that we, the
States members of the Security Council, still want to
do together?"

The non-proliferation regime, which organizes
nuclear weapons control to limit the risk of nuclear war
and imposes an absolute ban on certain weapons so that
our people will forever be protected from the horror
of gas or bacteriological warfare, is a relatively recent
construction that reached maturity in the 1990s. It is the
result of the tragedies of the twentieth century and the
firm determination of our predecessors, their vision of
the good of humankind and their spirit of responsibility.
That edifice is based on the mutual concessions,
interdependencies and mutual trust that we built at that
time. In a word, it is based on a multilateral approach
to security.

Our responsibility, which I strongly believe in
today, is that we owe it to those who came before us
and to those for whom we are responsible is to preserve
and strengthen that regime at a time when it is being
seriously tested. The States members of the Council
must set an example in that respect, and, in my view,
stand united on this issue even more than on others, .

We have been remarkably united on the issue of
North Korea, most recently in December 2017 with
resolution 2397 (2017). The management of that crisis,
as just recalled by the United States President, is now
in a new phase thanks to his initiative to engage in
a direct dialogue with the Chairman of the Workers'
Party of Korea. France welcomes and supports his
efforts, as well as those made by South Korea, which
he highlighted.

At no point should the Security Council lose
sight of the fact that North Korea continues to pose
a nuclear and ballistic threat to the region and the
world. France expects the Pyongyang regime to take
concrete actions to demonstrate its genuine willingness
to engage in a process of dismantling its nuclear and
ballistic programme in a complete, verifiable and
irreversible manner. Until those actions have been
taken, the dialogue must be accompanied by rigorous
implementation ofthe sanctions decided by the Council.
On that issue, we were united.

We were also united on the issue of Iran with
resolution 2231 (2015), but that was in 2015. Since
then, the trajectories of the signatory States of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) have diverged.
And yet, I reiterate, I am convinced that everyone at
this table still has the same goal ofpreventing Iran from
acquiring nuclear weapons and ofguaranteeing, through
strict international control, the peaceful purpose of its
nuclear programme. The JCPOA is imperfect, but it is a
decisive step in that direction.

While a serious crisis of confidence was triggered
by the reimposition of extraterritorial sanctions by the
United States, Tehran continues to honour its nuclear
obligations. That situation must be reinforced by
compliance with all the provisions of the JCPOA and
the resolution that endorses it, and that applies to all
Members of the United Nations - not just France,
Germany and the United Kingdom.

We must also go beyond the current framework, as
I said that here at the United Nations a year ago (see A/72/PV.4). That is why I share the goals that were
recalled by the President of the United States, even
if we may disagree on the methods with regard to the
JCPOA. I believe that, together, we must build a long-
term strategy for managing the crisis, which cannot be
reduced to a policy of sanctions and containment. The
foundations ofnew negotiations must be based on, first,
the framework for Iran's nuclear power beyond 2025-
2030, which is an essential complement to what was
attained in 2015; secondly, the issue of Iran's increase
in the range and accuracy of its missile arsenal and
thus the framework of its ballistic activity; and thirdly,
on regional stability. All of those issues can be part
of useful international action to reduce the regional
dangers and achieving the goal we all seek, namely,
that Iran never acquires a nuclear weapon.

We were united on the elimination of Syrian
chemical weapons with resolution 2118 (2013), but
that was in 2013. Since then, threats to the credibility
of the prohibition norm have accumulated. The
reappearance of chemical weapons during the Syrian
regime's offensives, after Damascus had acceded to
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction and declared its programme,
was not met by the necessary resolve by the Council.
For its part, Da'esh has used those weapons in Syria
and Iraq.

In February 2017, a member of the North Korean
ruling family was murdered in Malaysia with the help of
a powerful nerve agent, VX. This year, on the territory
of the United Kingdom - and thus in the European
Union - another nerve agent was used, killing one
person and wounding four. France recalls here that it
shares the British analysis that there is no plausible
explanation other than that Russia is responsible, and it
calls on Russia to take all necessary measures to put an
end to that threat.

On 23 January 2018, France launched an
international partnership against impunity for the use
of chemical weapons, which all States are invited to
join. It also had to take action against Syrian chemical
capabilities, together with the United States and the
United Kingdom, and I would like to thank President
Trump and Prime Minister May in that regard. France
is working to strengthen the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons by setting up a
new investigative and attribution mechanism, which
is essential.

France will work tirelessly to unite the Council on
non-proliferation issues. We must remain united because
in recent years, whenever we have been divided, it has
been at the expense of our principles and our collective
effectiveness. It is a condition of our legitimacy as
permanent and non-permanent members. We must be
united also because the spread of technology carries the
seeds of new threats to peace that directly concern us.

The development of intercontinental missiles by
North Korea is a matter of concern. Until now, only a
few States had those powerful weapons, which placed
a particular responsibility on them. In the future, if
sufficient control is not ensured by all and if North
Korea proliferates, how many countries will have them?

In the Middle East, ballistic assistance to Hizbullah
and the Houthis is a new and worrying development.
It must stop before those entities destabilize a tense
region even further.

The fight against Da'esh has confirmed the interest
of terrorist groups in weapons of mass destruction.
The threat of nuclear or radiological terrorism has not
disappeared despite the leadership shown by the United
States in this area with the Nuclear Security Summits.
France calls for continued international cooperation,
which is more necessary than ever.

France will continue to strictly respect its
commitments under the international non-proliferation
regime and to strengthen the various institutions that
form its framework. In particular, it will continue
to support the efforts of the United Nations and its
experts, and will address the challenges of combating
nuclear, chemical, biological and ballistic proliferation
during its presidency of the Group of Seven in 2019. To
that end, I call for unity and a spirit of responsibility
because the non-proliferation regime is the backbone
of our collective security system. We have built it
decade upon decade. It is still young and requires our
mobilization, our spirit of responsibility and our unity.

