The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
in which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mladenovie
(Yugoslavia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council expresses its shock
at, and strongly condemns, the criminal attacks
perpetrated on the home of the Head of the liaison
committee of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
in Pristina on 22 November 2000, as well as on
Serbian policemen in the south of Serbia on 21
November 2000, both of which resulted in several
deaths and injuries.

"The Council calls for an immediate and
full investigation to bring the perpetrators to
justice.

"Fully aware of all the measures already
taken to provide security for all inhabitants of
that region, the Council calls on KFOR and
UNMIK to continue to make all necessary efforts,
including along the ground safety zone, to
prevent further attacks.

"The Council demands that all those
concerned refrain from any act of violence, in
particular against ethnic minorities, and cooperate
with KFOR and UNMIK.

"The Council will continue to follow the
matter closely."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2000/35.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.20 pm.

