Mr. Belle (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
the Presidents and Prosecutors of the two Tribunals for
their briefings. Let me also congratulate Judge Patrick
Robinson on his election as President of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) at a challenging time in the life of the Tribunal.

I will not reiterate in any detail my country's
attachment to international justice and our strong
support to the Tribunals in their endeavours to
complete their work within the deadlines decided by
the Security Council and to continue to comply with
their mission, in appropriate conditions of work, to
bring to justice those most responsible for crimes
committed in the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda.
These points were made in my delegation's three
previous statements and they remain valid.

As regards the cooperation of States with the
Tribunals, my delegation welcomes the substantial
progress noted by Prosecutor Brammertz concerning
the cooperation of the authorities of Serbia with the
ICTY. We encourage Serbia to continue its efforts to
that end and hope that Mr. Mladic and Mr. Hadzic will
be apprehended soon. We encourage all other States
involved with the ICTY or the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) to enhance their
cooperation with the Tribunals, in particular with a
View to arresting the fugitives. Cooperation should
result from a general commitment and not just from
progress achieved now and then. With respect to the
ICTY, it is regrettable to note that some form of
pressure or other international intervention is often
needed in order for cooperation to progress.

Rather, I would like to take this opportunity
above all to update the Security Council and the wider
United Nations membership on the activities of the
Security Council Informal Working Group on
international tribunals, which Belgium has had the
honour to chair in 2008. In particular, I note the
significant progress made by the Working Group on the
issue of the establishment of a residual mechanism or
of two mechanisms to carry out certain essential
functions of the ICTY and the ICTR after their closure.

I call attention to the fact that I will provide a
more detailed account in a letter that I will send to the
President of the Council and that I will ask to be
circulated as an official document of the Security
Council.

The Working Group held 29 meetings in 2008. Its
discussions were informed by a paper produced jointly
by the ICTY and ICTR in March 2007 and revised in
September 2007. There was considerable dialogue
between the Working Group and the Tribunals
throughout the year by means of letters, meetings and
video conferences with the principals of the Tribunals
and of a visit to each of the Tribunals by the Working
Group at the end of September, as noted by earlier
speakers.

The Working Group was briefed by Justice
Richard Goldstone, Chairman of the Advisory
Committee on Archives, which was established by the
Registrars of the Tribunals to advise on the possible
location or locations of the archives and related issues.
The Goldstone Committee report was received too late
in the year for the Working Group to consider it in any
detail. The Working Group also had informal
consultations with the jurisdiction States - Rwanda
and the countries of the former Yugoslavia. The
Working Group also exchanged views with the
Registrar of the Special Court for Sierra Leone.

During the first part of the year, the Working
Group held general discussions of issues raised in the
Tribunals' joint paper. As of June, the focus shifted to
elements for a possible resolution, drafted by my
delegation with the valuable assistance of the Office of
Legal Affairs, to which I would like to express my
most sincere appreciation. The draft became the basis
of intense discussions and passed through three
successive versions. While many elements of the draft
resolution were agreed, significant areas of difference
remain and it will not be possible to finalize the draft
before the end of 2008.

The Tribunals' joint paper identified a number of
residual functions that might need to be carried out by
an international residual mechanism after the Tribunals
close. These include the trial of fugitives, the review of
judgments, the referral of cases to national
jurisdictions, proceedings for contempt, the protection
of witnesses, the archives, the supervision of sentences,
the prevention of double jeopardy, defence counsel and
legal aid issues, claims for compensation, public
information and capacity-building, and human
resources issues. The Working Group discussed each of
these possible residual functions, identifying questions
for the Tribunals and considering the answers provided
by them.

The focus then shifted to discussion of draft
elements for a Security Council resolution. Four areas
of early agreement emerged. First, the fugitives must
face trial; impunity is unacceptable. The most senior
fugitives - those most responsible - must face
international trial by the residual mechanism.
Secondly, the transfer of cases involving mid- or

lower-level inductees to national jurisdictions having
jurisdiction to try those cases is an important part of
the Tribunals' completion strategies. Thirdly,
continuing witness and victim protection was of critical
importance. Fourthly, the Tribunals' archives are the
property of the United Nations and must be kept under
its control.

Successive discussions on the three versions of
draft elements of the resolution largely identified the
structure of the possible residual mechanism or
mechanisms and the need for it or them to continue the
legal personality of the Tribunals, although some
important differences of view remain. Discussions
should continue on those matters, as well as on issues
that have not yet been considered in detail, such as the
archives. The main questions to consider with regard to

the archives relate to their location - whether they
should be located in the same place as the residual
mechanism - and how confidential materials should

be handled, including the question of access to such
material.

I would urge the Security Council to seize the
momentum created in 2008 to continue the work at the
same pace, on the basis of the draft resolution, so that
the necessary progress can be made early in 2009.

Belgium was pleased to be asked to chair the
Working Group during 2008. We believe it worked
effectively under a single rather than a rotating
chairmanship. I recommend strongly that again for
2009 a single chairman be nominated to continue the
important work.

A great deal of progress has been made in the
drafting of a resolution to establish a residual
mechanism to carry out certain essential functions and
to preserve the legacy of the ICTY and ICTR after the
completion of their work. Its basic structure and main
purposes are clear. The outstanding questions are
clearly identified. With sufficient common ground and
political will, a consensus resolution is within reach.

In conclusion, I would like to urge the Security
Council to bear in mind the fundamental reason for
establishing a residual mechanism: respect for the
rights of the victims, of the witnesses, of the accused
and of the convicted persons. After two years of
intense involvement in this issue, Belgium is more
firmly convinced than ever that the international
community - through the residual mechanism - must
assume responsibility for, at the very least, the trial of

fugitives, the protection of civilians and witnesses,
contempt proceedings, monitoring the enforcement of
prison sentences, review of judgments and
management of the Tribunals' archives.

