Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): The International Tribunal for
Rwanda was established by the Security Council to bring to
justice persons responsible for the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda. The Tribunal cannot undo what was done, but it
can have an important preventive effect by ensuring that
there is an end to impunity. The work of the Tribunal is
crucial for national reconciliation in Rwanda and its
liberation from the traumas of the past, and is also
important for the stabilization of the whole Great Lakes
region. The Tribunal should be provided with appropriate
means to fulfil its mandate in its entirety.

In resolution 955 (1994), the Security Council
expressly kept open the possibility of increasing the number
of judges and Trial Chambers should this become
necessary. We believe that the current situation calls for
such action by the Council. The waiting periods in pre-trial
detention have become too long. There is a danger that
international standards of due process may not be fully
observed. In this connection, we wish to stress the
importance of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, which provides in article 14, paragraph 3
(c) for the right of everyone to be tried without undue
delay. This is an international standard of universal
importance.

The Tribunal has to be given the opportunity to
render justice fairly and swiftly in order to meet
international standards, as well as the expectations of
Rwandans and of the international community. We should
keep in mind that we are talking about the gravest of
crimes - genocide and crimes against humanity - and
that the performance of this Tribunal also effects the
ongoing preparations for the establishment of the
international criminal court. The International Tribunal for
Rwanda cannot afford to fail in its mission, and the same
can be said for the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia.

In the light of what I have just said, Slovenia
supports the establishment of the third Trial Chamber for
the International Tribunal for Rwanda, consisting of three
judges. At the same time, we would like to reiterate our
commitment to the principle of independence of the
judiciary and our support for all the measures and
proposals that could help improve the functioning of the
Tribunal so that it can carry out its work in the most
effective and efficient way possible.

The draft resolution submitted for action by the
Security Council today contains all the elements of the
necessary assistance to the Tribunal. We wish to pay
tribute to the delegation of Sweden for its efforts in
preparing the draft resolution.

It is also important that the draft resolution stresses
the need for international cooperation to strengthen the
courts and judicial system in Rwanda, with particular
regard to the necessity for those courts to deal with the
large number of accused awaiting trial. We see such
cooperation as a necessary complement to the
strengthening of the International Tribunal.

Slovenia shall vote in favour of the draft resolution
before the Council today.

