Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I should like to
extend a warm welcome to the Tanaiste and Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Trade of Ireland, Mr. Gilmore,
to the Council today in his capacity as Chairperson-in-
Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). I thank him for his
briefing.

The United Kingdom fully supports the priorities
set out by the Chairperson-in-Office today. The
promotion and protection of human rights, fundamental
freedoms, democracy and the rule of law are
cornerstones of the OSCE. Greater effort is needed by
all OSCE participating States to ensure that they not
only fully meet the commitments they have freely
entered into, but that they also recognize that
commitments need to keep pace with developments in
the real world. For example, freedoms of the media
need to be updated to reflect the huge changes in
information technology of recent years. We recognize
that consensus in this sensitive area will be difficult to
reach, but we are confident that Irish leadership,
building on the excellent work of the Lithuanian OSCE
chairmanship in 2011, can take us further forward. I
welcome the emphasis on freedom of expression online
in the address that we have just heard from the
Chairperson.

As the Chairperson-in-Office has just pointed out,
conflicts within the OSCE space remain unresolved.
We very much welcome Ireland's intention to place
particular emphasis on the need to advance the
resolution of such conflicts. Of course, each conflict is
different, with its own history and circumstances, but
important lessons can be learned from successful and
unsuccessful efforts at conflict resolution and
prevention. We echo the thoughts of the Chairperson-
in-Office that sharing the successful experience of
conflict resolution in Northern Ireland may help reveal
some common ground for fresh ideas and renewed
impetus. We therefore welcome and look forward to
the planned conference in Dublin in April to look at
those issues. We will be ready to engage fully and at
high level in that event.

The United Kingdom also remains committed to
the conventional arms control and confidence and
12-22841
security building regimes across Europe, which
contribute greatly to transparency and predictability,
and therefore to European stability. We regret that
implementation in this area is incomplete. It is clear
that more effort is needed within the OSCE to update
and revitalize those key instruments, and we very much
welcome the intention of the Irish Chair to support
such an effort.

The United Kingdom currently has the honour to
hold the chairmanship of the Committee of Ministers
of the Council of Europe. We fully appreciate the
expectations that come with this rare opportunity to
lead the Council of Europe's work for six months. The
overarching theme of our chairmanship is the
promotion and protection of human rights, mirroring
the importance we attach to the human dimension work
of the OSCE. We urge all OSCE participating States,
first, to redouble their efforts to meet their existing
human dimension commitments fully, and secondly, to
recognize the need to extend those commitments
further. We must review issues such as the protection
of journalists and the freedom of expression in digital
media and cyberspace.

The continent of Europe has experienced
enormous political change over the past 30 years,
driven by the will of the people for greater freedoms
and true democracy. It is the duty of all responsible
Governments to listen and respond appropriately and
fully to the demands of the people whom they serve.

The role of chairmanship-in-office of the OSCE
is both a great honour and a heavy responsibility. We
applaud how Ireland has set about the task, with a
programme and priorities that promote those principles
of human rights and fundamental freedoms, democracy,
good governance and the rule of law on which the
OSCE is founded.

