Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I wish to thank Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe for his comprehensive
briefing and welcome the presence with us of the
Permanent Observer Mission of Palestine. I wish to
pay tribute to the Permanent Representative of Israel,
Ambassador Gillerman, who is sitting in the Council
for the last time in his tenure in New York.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of France on behalf of
the European Union.

As negotiations proceed, the concerns of the
parties are being clearly outlined in terms of the pain
that the inevitable compromises in the future peace
agreement will entail. Italy considers the security of
Israel as non-negotiable. Israel's security cannot be
truly guaranteed until an independent, modern,
democratic and viable Palestinian State is created. The
establishment of solid institutions based on the rule of
law and good governance is fundamental. We need to
facilitate the formation of a modern legal framework
by supporting appropriate reforms in public
administration at both the local and the central levels.
The reform and the strengthening of the Palestinian
security sector and the rule of law are therefore a
priority.

It is also essential to finalize a solution to the
inter-Palestinian crisis, fully restoring constitutional
legality in the Gaza Strip and reopening all crossing
points. It is important to increase the level of
coordination of all international contributions in
support of the Palestinian economy and administration.

However, Israel must be encouraged to reduce
obstacles to the free movement of goods and persons in
the West Bank and increase corporation with the
Palestinian security authorities. At the same time, the
Palestinian Authority must be supported and
encouraged in its endeavours to consolidate security,
particularly the control and repression of terrorism.

In view of a progressive realization of conditions
for a peace agreement, the Arab countries must play
their part in contributing to the development of the
Palestinian economy.

The lasting calm in the Gaza Strip and southern
Israel contributes favourably to a continuation of
negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority, as it considerably reduces the risk of
instability or violence jeopardizing the dialogue.

On Lebanon, Italy expresses great satisfaction at
the formation of the Lebanese Government. It is now
time for the international community strongly to
support the resumption of a national dialogue, in
keeping with the Doha Agreement. In that respect, Italy
reaffirms its support for the independence and
sovereignty of Lebanon. Our role in the United Nations

Interim Force in Lebanon, which constitutes a crucial
factor in the country's stabilization, is a clear sign of
our commitment. In view of thorough stabilization, the
progressive disarmament of militia through the
political process, in line with the commitments made in
Doha, could prove to be a vital contribution to the
future growth of Lebanon in conditions of lasting
peace and harmony.

It is also with great satisfaction that we learn of
Syria's recent decision to start constructive political
talks with neighbouring countries. The recent
statements by Syrian leaders expressing the will to
proceed with the normalization of relations with
Lebanon are promising. It is our hope that the
necessary steps towards normalization will be taken
first and foremost by restoring diplomatic relations and
beginning work on the demarcation of the border.

