Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Allow
me to add my voice to the expressions of condolences
following yesterday's Ethiopian Airlines crash, which
left many victims. We would also like to express
our condolences and support to the Government of
Ethiopia, as well as the countries of the region home
to the victims and to the United Nations, which lost
several staff members in that sad event.

My delegation thanks Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, for his briefing on the developments
in that country. I also thank Mr. Hamdullah Mohib,
National Security Adviser of Afghanistan, and
Ms. Storai Tapesh, Deputy Executive Director of the
Afghan Women's Network, for their relevant briefings
on bringing peace to the country and the inclusion of
women in the reconciliation process.

Cote d'Ivoire takes note of the recent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2019/193), which, among
other recommendations, calls on the United Nations
to continue its efforts in the framework of a forward-
looking vision, based in particular on an understanding
of Afghans' long-term aspirations and on development
scenarios that take into account the country's
socioeconomic and security environment.

My country believes that conducting a peaceful,
transparent, inclusive and credible electoral process
remains essential to restoring peace, stability and
sustainable development in Afghanistan. We therefore
deplore the shortcomings observed in the parliamentary
elections of 20 October 2018. In that regard, we
encourage the Independent Electoral Commission and
all Afghan stakeholders to take the necessary corrective
measures to ensure that the presidential election of
20 July is held under the best possible conditions.
Appropriate measures must therefore be taken to ensure
the protection of voters and to secure polling places
given the low rate of participation in the parliamentary
elections largely due to threats and deadly attacks by
the Taliban and the local branch of the Islamic State.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the negotiations
between the United States Special Representative for
Afghanistan Reconciliation, Mr. Zalmay Khalilzad,
and the Taliban, which offer hope for the restoration of
peace and stability in Afghanistan.

We also welcome the multifaceted efforts to
promote dialogue among Afghan political actors, as well
as with regional State actors. In that regard, it is worth
highlighting the second meeting of Afghan, Chinese
and Pakistani Foreign Ministers on 15 December
2018 in Kabul; the visit by Pakistan's Minister for
Foreign Affairs to Kabul on 24 December 2018, which
should contribute to the effective implementation of
the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and
Solidarity towards helping to resolve the security
problem in the region; the visits of the National Security
Adviser of Afghanistan to India, China, Saudi Arabia
and the United Arab Emirates in January; and the
meeting between the Afghan political stakeholders and
a Taliban delegation on 5 and 6 February in Moscow.

While the initiatives I have mentioned above are
encouraging, they cannot ensure lasting peace and
stability in Afghanistan without national ownership
and the participation of all political and social actors.

In that context, my delegation remains convinced
that it is crucial to work to promote the role of women
in accordance with the outcomes of the national
conference on women's participation in the peace
process, held in Kabul on 12 December 2018. It is also
important to strengthen Government action to combat
violence against women and girls, in particular by
amending the 2009 law that limits women's rights.

My country remains concerned about the security
and humanitarian situation in Afghanistan, where the
widespread use of explosive devices as well as the
systematic obstruction of humanitarian assistance in
Taliban-controlled provinces represent a real challenge.

In that regard, my delegation would like to commend
the assistance that the United Nations and its partners
are providing to more than 3.5 million people in need.
We urge the international community to continue its
financial support to the humanitarian response plan
for Afghanistan.

The complex multifaceted challenges facing
Afghanistan, in particular the fight against corruption,
terrorism and drug trafficking, require the ongoing
attention of the international community and the
substantial support of the Afghan Government.

That is at the heart of C6te d'Ivoire's call to support
the troops of the Resolute Support Mission and to fulfil
the funding pledges for the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces until 2024. It encourages all the
forces engaged in Afghanistan to further strengthen
their joint operations with the country's National
Defence and Security Forces in the provinces most
affected by a lack of security.

The most recent developments in the situation in
Afghanistan give us reason to believe that political
and security instability is not irreversible. Peace
in the country is possible and will be achieved as
a result of the will of the Afghans themselves to
write a new page in their history in harmony and
prosperity, with international support driven by the
regional stakeholders.

