Mr. Koudougou (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I should like at the outset to thank Justice
Renate Winter and Mr. Stephen Rapp, President and
Prosecutor, respectively, of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone, for the very useful information that they have
shared with us on the Court's judicial activities and its
completion strategy. We also welcome the presence
among us of the representative of Sierra Leone.

Established to shed light on all crimes, atrocities
and other human rights violations and thus to combat
impunity in a country ravaged by several years of civil
war, the Special Court has succeeded in integrating
itself into the Sierra Leonean institutional landscape
and in making a major contribution to the
reconciliation and reconstruction process and to the
establishment of a lasting peace in that country. That is
why, like previous speakers, I should like to
congratulate the Court on the results achieved, despite the
difficulties of every kind - particularly financial - that
it has had to face. We take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the Government and the people of Sierra
Leone for their cooperation with the Court, without
which those results would never have been achieved.
We welcome the cooperation shown by the States of
West Africa, and we are also grateful to those countries
and institutions that have provided the financial
support essential to the Court's functioning.

On the political front, we note that Sierra Leone
has made notable progress thanks to the firm resolve of
its people; to subregional support, in particular from
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS); and to significant support from the entire
international community, all of which have contributed
to Sierra Leone's admission to the Peacebuilding
Commission.

As a State member of ECOWAS, Burkina Faso
believes in the possibility of lasting stability in that
country. We call on the international community to
continue to support the Special Court, in particular in
implementing its completion strategy.

