Mr. Oshima (Japan) (spoke in French): I join
previous speakers in thanking you, Sir, for convening
today's open debate on this important subject. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Jan Egeland for his
informative briefing on the efforts being made and the
challenges ahead of us. As a former Emergency Relief
Coordinator committed to promoting that cause, I
commend Under-Secretary-General Egeland, his staff
at the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and other United Nations humanitarian
organizations, who have spared no effort in addressing
this very challenging issue.

I will focus on three areas to which my
Government attaches particular importance, especially
from the viewpoint of the concept of human security
that the Japanese Government is promoting in the
international community.

(spoke in English)

First, with respect to internal displacement, we
were deeply concerned over several recent instances in
which armed groups deliberately used displacement as
a means of exploiting civilian populations. Such acts
are unacceptable and must be condemned. They are a
reminder once again that renewed efforts should be
made to call the attention of the international
community, and of the countries concerned in
particular, to upholding the Guiding Principles on
Internal Displacement as the basic norm for the
protection of civilian populations. Unlike in the case of
refugees, no single United Nations entity holds a
mandate to protect and assist internally displaced
persons. We need norms and practical guidance to
harmonize the sovereign rights of States and the
international community's assistance and protection
activities, which the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement attempt to do. We believe that the time
has come for Member States to recognize the Guiding
Principles as an appropriate platform in the protection
regime for internally displaced persons. We strongly
hope that the declaration of the September summit will
reflect that point.

The Guiding Principles clearly state that

"every human being shall have the right to be
protected against being arbitrarily displaced from
his or her home or place of habitual residence"
(E/CN4/1998/53/Add. 2, annex, section 11, para. 1).

When internal displacement occurs in armed conflict
and national authorities are unable or unwilling to
protect and assist, the persons displaced should be
given protection and assistance by the United Nations,
other humanitarian organizations and, where
appropriate, by peacekeepers. The cooperation of
regional organizations should also be sought.

In such international assistance efforts, questions
sometimes arise between peacekeepers with a robust
mandate to protect civilians, on the one hand, and
humanitarian workers who uphold neutrality on the
other. Defining their respective roles can be a
challenge, often seen in integrated missions. That
question should be considered from a practical
viewpoint, namely, what will best achieve the purpose
of protecting and assisting internally displaced persons
on the ground. Form must follow function, as it were,
or the desired function should determine the mission
structure, as stated in the report on integrated missions
issued last month by an independent study team
commissioned by the Executive Committee on
Humanitarian Affairs.

Secondly, we strongly denounce the widespread
sexual exploitation and abuse committed in situations
of armed conflict, whether by civilian or military
personnel. Special attention should be paid to
protecting the vulnerable from exploitation. Victims
should receive special care and assistance, and
perpetrators must be brought to justice. Particularly
regrettable are recent incidents of misbehaviour in
which United Nations personnel, who, as guardians and
protectors of the vulnerable, must observe the highest
standards, have failed to do so.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General's
Special Adviser, Prince Zeid of Jordan, which was
presented earlier to the Security Council on that issue
and the robust measures agreed upon in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. They need to
be implemented and translated into action
expeditiously.

Earlier this month, the Security Council Working
Group on Peacekeeping, which I chair, took up that
issue, focusing on the case of the United Nations
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with
the participation of troop-contributing countries, major
stakeholders, and the bureau of the Special Committee.
We reviewed the state of implementation of
recommendations. We took note of active measures
that are being taken by the Secretariat and troop
contributors, but further progress is clearly needed and
we intend to keep the implementation of measures
under review.

Thirdly, the problem of small arms and light
weapons continues to be alarming. The widespread use
of small arms not only results in a large number of
casualties, but also gives rise to other problems, such
as the use of child soldiers and the disruption of
recovery and development in post-conflict situations.
In an effort to help tackle that problem, Japan has been
actively contributing to awareness-raising and
promoting normative discussion by sponsoring
resolutions in the General Assembly. My Government
has also been active in helping the implementation of
projects to collect and destroy surplus small arms and
light weapons on the ground. We should redouble our
efforts in this area as we approach the United Nations
Conference to review the implementation of the
Programme of Action next year.

In conclusion, as Under-Secretary-General
Egeland pointed out, the Security Council must ensure
that the thematic discussions we have had on this topic
will make a difference on the ground, where vulnerable
populations desperately need protection and assistance.
Mr. Egeland mentioned the idea of developing a
mechanism of systematic reporting to the Security
Council to facilitate its deliberations and to ensure that
protection concerns are more fully reflected in the
Council's proceedings. We welcome that idea, which
no doubt will help the Council to incorporate key
elements into its consideration of country-specific
resolutions. We fully support the Council's presidential
statement to be issued today and look forward to the
adoption of a resolution at the earliest possible time
that reflects the progress we have made on this subject.

