Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the High Representative for the
briefing that he has just given us and to assure him of
the support of France. I would also like to welcome
Mr. Radmanovic', Chairman of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

A few days ago, the 27 Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the European Union decided to lift the short-
stay visa obligation for citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. That is significant progress - first of all,
for the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, who will
now be able to travel more easily within Europe. But
this also means progress for political leaders, who can
see with this decision of the European Union the
specific results of their efforts. This decision also
shows to what extent the unity of the leaders of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in working towards a shared objective
can produce results. The European Union long ago
specified the conditions that needed to be met and,
indeed, once those conditions were met, the Union
honoured its commitments.
However, we regret that progress expected in
other areas has not been forthcoming. Thus, absent an
agreement between the two entities dealing with the
issue of the redistribution of defence property, the first
annual programme of the plan of action for accession
to NATO could not begin last September. Bosnia and
Herzegovina will be given a new opportunity to launch
that programme next September.

The High Representative has unfortunately
referred to several difficulties and internal conflicts in
his last report (See S/2010/575), and we can only
subscribe to his analyses.

Gone is the time when the international
community took decisions in place of the leaders of
countries. Let us recall that, 10 years ago in Zagreb,
the European Union sought a European perspective for
all countries in the region. These prospects gradually
took shape in stages, road maps and criteria. One by
one, all countries of the region have seized this
opportunity and is preparing, each at its own pace, to
one day become a full member of the European family.
The Sarajevo summit held in June confirmed the
European Union's commitment to that process.

At the same time, the European Union is helping
to stabilize Bosnia and Herzegovina with the European
Union Force Althea. For 10 years, the international
community has supported the Bosnian authorities and
helped them to build institutions capable of running the
country. Objectives and conditions have been laid out
to provide for a transition that will allow the Bosnian
authorities to decide their own future by themselves.
The international community will remain present in the
form of a strengthened Special Representative of the
European Union who will replace the High
Representative.

However, instead of taking advantage of these
opportunities, the leaders of the country, in particular
those of the Republika Srpska, as noted by Mr. Inzko
in his briefing, have been amplifying their criticism of
the international community that has steadfastly
supported the country for so many years. With
legislative elections approaching, recent months saw an
increase in public statements around the country that
are unacceptable in a country that is a member of this
Council and would like to become a member of the
European Union and NATO. We urge leaders to form a
Government as soon as possible following the elections
of 3 October. The electoral campaign should now come
to a close and allow the work suspended for this period
to continue.

We welcome actions undertaken recently in the
region, such as the adoption by the Serbian Parliament
last spring of a resolution condemning the Srebrenica
massacre, showing that dialogue and reconciliation
have their place in the Balkans and that the regional
cooperation so dearly sought by the European Union is
not in vain.

Once again, we call on the Bosnian leaders to put
into practice these initiatives at the national level and
finally to harness a positive momentum that would
confirm the European perspective of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The future of the country depends on its
leaders, particularly those who have just received
mandates from their citizens. Today, it is up to them to
demonstrate courage and determination in solving their
problems.

