Ms. Frogh: Iwould like thank you, Sir, the Japanese
Ambassador and President of Security Council this
month, for inviting me to participate in this meeting. I
would like to congratulate the members of the Security
Council on standing for peace and justice around the
world. The people of my country have great hopes of
this important institution on global justice.

In light of the ongoing armed conflict and sustained
violence against civilians, especially Afghan women,
it is particularly significant for me to be here. I have
been advocating for women's participation in peace
and security processes for the past 20 years, having
previously worked for gender and human rights at the
Ministry of Interior and Defence. 1 am currently one
of the 12 women at the 70-member Afghanistan High
Peace Council, but I am speaking as a civil society
activist today.

The National Unity Government has appointed a
number of Afghan women to leadership and management
positions in the Cabinet and as governors, judges and
prosecutors, and has increased efforts to increase the
number of women in the police and army. I would like
to recognize the efforts of Afghanistan's First Lady in
standing in solidarity with Afghan women.

Many Afghans, and I myself, see Afghanistan
moving in the right direction. However, there are
major concerns, especially about the convening of
parliamentary and presidential elections on time.
Afghans want an elected Government and elected
members of Parliament and provincial and district
councils, as those are important elements of checks and
balance for effective governance.

While every Afghan is asking for democracy and
justice, the impact of local armed groups, Taliban,
affiliates of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) and some political figures have hampered the
process for transitional justice and civil liberties
for Afghanistan. We are still considered to be one of
the most dangerous countries for media freedom and
for journalists, and have not seen due processes to
prosecute those elements that put the life of Afghan
men and women journalists at risk.

Despite national and international commitments
to women's empowerment in Afghanistan, only
one woman in the Government of Afghanistan is
female - the Minister of Women's Affairs - while the
Afghan Parliament failed to elect another strong women
as the Minister of Mines and Petroleum. Also, there is a
small number of female Deputy Ministers and Director
Generals. It is a question not of lack of capacity, but of
lack of political will.

In 2017, the Afghanistan Human Rights Commission
reported more than 5,000 cases of severe violence
against women in different parts of the country, while
scores of such incidents go unregistered and unheard
in areas where the Government and media have no
access. Only one in three women can read and write.
The Taliban and now the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIS) affiliates are targetting women and
children indiscriminately to create fear and control in
Afghan communities. Just last week, a woman was shot
dead in public by the Taliban in Sar-e Pol, a northern
province, her brother having been accused of having
links to the Government. The ISIS-affiliated militants
in Jowzjan province, which is also in the north, have
reportedly taken away more than 300 children from
their families to unknown training camps, and reports
of the provincial council members indicate that these
children - as young as six or seven - are being taught
how to become suicide bombers.

This year, we had more than 10 attacks on Shia
mosques in Kabul and other provinces that killed and
injured so many men, women and children. All of that
happens while the pro-Government armed militant
groups are still complicit in rape, abduction, forced
marriages and the extortion of women in families in
so many parts of the country. The political distance is
widening between the centre and the provinces.

Afghanistan's national action plan on women,
peace and security, in line with resolution 1325 (2000),
was adopted in 2015 and was internationally celebrated
at that time. It is of great importance and relevance
to the lives of Afghan women, and yet it has not been
operationalized at the national and provincial levels.
The ongoing war is not being fought on the borders. It is
being fought in our communities, in our markets and in
our mosques. The Taliban assert their presence in our
communities and the first attacks are against women.
We are seeing our previous achievements relating to
women erode. However, Afghan women do not have a
role in decisions on how to combat insurgencies at the
national or local level.

The changing nature of conflict is evident in
Afghanistan - from an insurgency towards the brutal
killing of civilians and women, in particular, to the
radicalization of young men with violent extremist
ideologies. And this continues at very local levels,
where mothers and women can play a big role. Weak
governance, the abuse of police and armed forces in
communities, the lack ofinclusion in local and national
processes and the impact of young boys are key to the
recruitment processes of the insurgents. The younger
generation does not have a place for meaningful
participation in political and Government structures,
and the lack ofjobs and justice is driving thousands of
our youth to militancy and insurgency.

My organization has been documenting and
reporting on the impact of armed conflict on women
in communities. We received reports in August that
around 47 young women and girls between the ages
of 11 and 12 had been taken away by a group of ISIS
affiliates in the north to an unknown area. The families
and provincial Governments continue to deny this
disappearance because it would bring dishonour on
the families and call into question the ability of the
Government to protect its civilians.

As ISIS affiliates are emerging in different parts
of the country, their brutality against women and girls
has shocked us all. There are reports that last week,
French and Algerian fighters had arrived in the north
of the country to support the ISIS affiliates. That adds
to the already identified foreign fighters from Pakistan,
Chechnya and many Central Asian republics that are
fighting alongside the Taliban and ISIS.

On the peace and security sector reform, while a
negotiated settlement is the only solution for the end
of ongoing armed conflict with the Taliban, the peace
process needs to engage all Afghans from all walks of
life and social groups to ensure the sustainability of
the results. If insurgency is incentivized, many will
resort to violence to get the same incentives. While
the Afghanistan High Peace Council is mandated to
facilitate a national level peace process, the Council
itself is sidelined from the major political decisions
that are taken at the Government leadership levels.
Therefore, public trust in the High Peace Council has
not yet strengthened and the organization's relevance
and importance is still being challenged. That was
revealed by communities during consultations in 24
provinces, carried out by the High Peace Council.

The security sector reform has started in the past
few months within the Ministry of the Interior and the
Ministry of Defence. We are seeing tangible results.
The bad news is that the participation of women is
still not the priority of reform. There are no women
in the leadership and management positions of these
institutions, when so many young women are risking
their lives for these institutions as police officers and
within the army. There is no systematic institutional
support yet. We women do not have a seat at the
Government's National Security Council, where most
of the political and security decisions are made.

My recommendations follow. As the country is
moving towards reforms and improving institutional
capacities, the role and contributions of women should
not be ignored. The national action plan on resolution
1325 (2000), if implemented properly and adequately,
will bring women into national peace processes and
help boost trust in the Government. Women, children
and the elderly in rural areas suffer from the ongoing
violence perhaps even more than men in Afghanistan,
yet women and civil society are excluded from the peace
and security processes, especially when negotiating
about the political peace being envisioned by the
leadership of the Government. Lasting peace can be
achieved only if women sit at the negotiation table with
men so that communities can become the guardians of
such an agreement. Women should be able to monitor
the impact of settlements on communities.

Civil society groups must be better supported
and resourced. The number of women's organizations
closing is alarming, given that it these organizations are
the ones that are raising the voices of Afghan women and
that need funding and support to continue functioning.
We call on the international community and members
of the Security Council to ensure that specific funding
is allocated for women organizations as part of the
empowerment agenda and the implementation of the
national action plan. Women's engagement in the
peace and security sector is a priority for all of us,
and the Security Council should call on the Afghan
Government and its international partners to work
alongside women's organizations to develop clear plans
on how to increase the number of women and leadership
in the management of the security sector and how to
ensure a safe and enabling environment for women in
the police and army.

Lastly, we call on the Security Council to ensure
that the Afghan Government and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan develop, in
consultation with the female members of the High
Peace Council, clear procedures to engage and include
Afghan women in the peace negotiations with the
Taliban and other parties to the conflict at every stage
in order to ensure meaningful participation. We look
forward to our presence at the Kabul process and
meaningful participation at other international and
regional platforms from time to time.

