Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): In casting
its vote today, the United States has once again expressed
its confidence in and its strong support for the United
Nations Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) and
its extension for a further six-month period until August
1999. UNPREDEP plays a critical role in monitoring
sensitive points along Macedonian borders with Albania and
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. UNPREDEP is a Vital
actor in promoting stability in the region.

Since achieving independence, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia has made enormous strides towards
democratization and economic stability. We welcome the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia's recent
strengthening of relations with several of its neighbours and
the successful holding of parliamentary elections in October
and November of 1998. These elections resulted in a pledge
by the new coalition Government - which continues to
include an ethnic-Albanian political party - to carry on the
important policy of working actively for inter-ethnic
harmony.

Despite these improvements, however, there remain
very real regional threats to the security of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. In this context, we
remain deeply troubled by the continuing strained relations
between Skopje and Belgrade, and by the lack of progress
towards the demarcation of their mutual border. This, in our
view, continues to be a major potential threat to the
stability of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
There is a distinct risk that tensions elsewhere in the
region will reverberate along this border.

The international community is maintaining its large
investment in consolidating peace and ending violence in
the former Yugoslavia and nearby areas. Kosovo is only
the most recent flashpoint posing a threat to stability in
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. Although
considerable progress towards a negotiated political
settlement of the Kosovo crisis was achieved at
Rambouillet, much more will be required in the weeks
and months ahead. In any event, we remain committed to
building peace in the Balkans.

Skopje in turn has contributed greatly to the
international community's efforts in Kosovo by
facilitating the work of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Kosovo Verification
Mission, by agreeing to authorize the deployment from its
territory of the OSCE Extraction Force, and by offering
to host the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
Kosovo Verification Coordination Centre and the
European Commission Monitoring Mission. UNPREDEP
itself plays a specific but very important role in achieving
the international community's goals for Kosovo. We
greatly appreciate the value of close cooperation between
UNPREDEP and each of these missions.

UNPREDEP's current mandate is to prevent the
spillover of tensions into the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia and by its presence to deter threats and
prevent clashes. This mandate has been sufficiently broad
to permit UNPREDEP to operate very effectively in
monitoring and reporting on cross-border activity. Such
activity includes any illicit arms flows across the border
with Kosovo, of which there has been very little. The fact
that the border between Kosovo and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia has remained secure despite
tensions in Kosovo demonstrates just how successful and
necessary UNPREDEP has been. Our vote today to
extend UNPREDEP's mandate is a vote of confidence in
a mission that is needed now as much as ever.

My Government very much regrets the decision by
one member of the Council to exercise its veto with
respect to this draft resolution. We believe the overall
interests of security in the region - particularly during
this sensitive period - should be sufficiently compelling
to outweigh other considerations. We believe
UNPREDEP's role is indispensable at this time.

 

Therefore, we hope to begin work immediately with
members of the Security Council to find a way to allow the
international community to continue to meet this critical
need, without disruption.

The United States has been proud to participate in this
groundbreaking preventive deployment operation. We
commend Mr. Henryk Sokalski, the former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General; his successor, Mr.
Fernando Valenzuela Marzo; and the Force Commander,
Brigadier-General Ove Stromberg, for their strong
leadership of this highly effective mission.

