Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): Indonesia is of the view
that the purpose of the draft resolution is not to punish
the Government or people of Iran, but to be a vehicle
for persuading the Iranian Government to comply with
previous resolutions of the Council and resolve
outstanding issues with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). It must therefore be clear that
the draft resolution is not a final, irrevocable position,
but a reversible one.

The draft resolution provides for suspension of
the implementation measure consequent upon two
related conditions. Those involve Iran taking action to
suspend its proliferation-sensitive nuclear activities,
that action to be verified by the IAEA, a compliance
that would then set the stage for negotiations that
should be in good faith and aimed at reaching an early
and mutually acceptable outcome. We understand that
the parties are in total agreement to that approach. It is
also of great significance that the measures specified in
Security Council resolution 1737 (2006) would also be
terminated following the determination that Iran has
complied with its obligations.

Should Iran feel it to be necessary to move ahead
towards a negotiated solution, the draft resolution
provides that opportunity in accordance with the
proposals made in June 2006, which are still on the
table and serve as the basis for operative paragraph 10
of the draft resolution. We therefore enjoin the
Government of Iran to keep that door open, because
through it lies a comprehensive negotiated agreement
based on mutual respect and international confidence
in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear
programme.

The delegation of Indonesia notes that the draft
resolution has accommodated some of the concerns of
my Government and that several of our amendments
were taken on board. Those include the reference to a
Middle East free of weapons of mass destruction that
firmly notes that we are concerned about the problem
of non-proliferation in general and in the region in
particular. We believe that the establishment of zones
free of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction
3
is a critical measure towards strengthening global
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. The
establishment of such zones, including in the Middle
East, will contribute to strengthening regional and
global peace and security.

One paragraph concerns the need for all State
parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) to comply fully with all of
their obligations under the Treaty. Our understanding
of the paragraph is that the three pillars of the NPT
should be pursued in a balanced and non-discriminatory
manner. We have consistently expressed our view that
not only should we emphasize the non-proliferation
obligations of non-nuclear-weapon States, but we must
also require nuclear-weapon States to comply fully
with their nuclear disarmament obligations under
article VI of the Treaty. The article expressly states that

"Each of the Parties to the Treaty
undertakes to pursue negotiations in good faith on
effective measures relating to cessation of the
nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear
disarmament, and on a treaty on general and
complete disarmament under strict and effective
international control."

It is our conviction that in the end, the only
guarantee for eliminating the fear caused by the
possible use or threat of use of nuclear weapons is their
total elimination. All concerned parties are called upon,
in the interest of an early and mutually acceptable
diplomatic outcome, to negotiate in good faith.

Finally, I wish to stress that the solution to the
issue of Iran should in no way affect or change the
inalienable rights of all parties to the NPT, including
Iran, to develop and research the production and use of
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, without
discrimination, in accordance with the Treaty. That
remains an inalienable right of all State parties to the
Treaty that should always be respected.

With that understanding, my delegation will vote
in favour of the resolution.

