Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Allow me to join
previous speakers in thanking Her Excellency
President Cristina Fernandez for presiding over this
important debate. I would also like to express our
gratitude to the Ministers, the Secretary-General and
the representatives of international organizations for
their presence and contributions this morning.

Armenia aligns itself with the joint statement made
on behalf ofthe member States ofthe Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO). However we would like to
make some remarks in our national capacity.
We welcome the increasing close relations between
the CSTO and the United Nations aimed at strengthening
the ties and seeking concerted actions in our quest for
international peace and stability.

In the area of preventive diplomacy, both
organizations have been working in close partnership
to address root causes and potential conflicts, as
well as promoting measures against cross-border
crime, terrorism and drug trafficking, so as to ensure
conditions for peaceful sustainable development, as
such transnational crimes continually threaten security,
stability and development, especially in the world's
vulnerable regions.

The cooperation with and between regional
organizations is being discussed more and more in
various United Nations organs and agencies as the
means for increasing responsibility and involvement in
addressing international challenges and transnational
regional threats. In an increasing number of its
operations on the ground, the United Nations is calling
on the services of the relevant regional agencies and
organizations, because, among other things, in certain
areas those organizations are able to provide expertise
and a better understanding of the local peculiarities
to complement those of the United Nations. In some
instances, they can be mandated to perform the same
tasks, and rightly so.

It is worth mentioning that, in recent years, regional
and subregional organizations have played an increasing
role in conflict prevention, management and resolution.
Many of them have developed tailored capabilities
for action in the maintenance of international and
regional peace and security, as evidenced in a number
of peacekeeping operations and mediations in different
parts of the world.

Armenia highly values the close cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
We are convinced that the OSCE is an inclusive
and comprehensive security organization in the
Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian areas. Its role should be
further augmented to tackle new challenges and threats
to security.
Since 1992, the OSCE has been engaged in the
settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh issue, which
erupted in the region as a result of aggression. Today,
Armenia attaches great importance to the efforts of the
OSCE Mink Group co-Chairs, aimed at reaching a fully
informed, just and peaceful resolution of the conflict
based on mutual compromise. We believe that this
agreed format, which includes the Russian Federation,
the United States and France, has enough capacity
to maintain its lead role in the negotiating process.
That role has been confirmed on many occasions, in
particular in the commemorative declaration of the
Astana summit of the OSCE.

Armenia is deeply confident that ongoing
negotiations within this framework will serve as one of
the major prerequisites for the maintenance of the 1994
ceasefire between the parties to the conflict, without
any peacekeeping forces deployed on the ground. One
of the advantages of the OSCE Minsk Group is that the
principles that have been established by the co-Chairs to
date are based on initial compromises reached between
the parties to the conflict as a result of negotiations.
Those principles should be treated as equal, without
establishing any arbitrary hierarchy among them.

In May, Armenia assumed the chairmanship of the
Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, a
regional intergovernmental organization that remains
a key partner of the United Nations in our shared
global quest united behind the principles of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms. The cooperation
between the United Nations and the Council of Europe
is also well established, inter alia, in the fields of the
fight against racism, discrimination, xenophobia and
intolerance; the fight against terrorism and human
trafficking; the promotion of intercultural dialogue, the
strengthening of the rule of law, and the fostering of
democratic societies.

These issues are also Armenia's chairmanship
priorities, and have been defined in response to the
challenges that States members of both the United
Nations and the Council of Europe are facing today, with
specific focus on issues that we consider to be the most
pertinent and to require immediate action. Armenia
will contribute to furthering the Council of Europe's
cooperation with other international organizations,
including the United Nations. Such cooperation is
essential to achieving better synergies among activities
and to the enhanced effectiveness and impact of efforts.

I wish to conclude my statement by thanking you,
Madam, for the initiative of convening this open debate.
We must all nurture and support steps and initiatives
aimed at expanding cooperation with existing
partners, and seek new opportunities for partnership
arrangements with other regional organizations that
are working to advance the cause of international peace
and security.

