Ms. Honore: I would like to express my gratitude
to the United States presidency of the Security Council
for convening today's meeting on Haiti.

(Spoke in French)
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome
the presence of the Permanent Representative of Haiti.

(spoke in Spanish)

I should like to thank, in particular, all the countries
that contribute troops and police to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), and all
Member States assisting in the stabilization process
in Haiti.

(spoke in English)

Six months ago, in the aftermath of the passage of
the devastating Hurricane Matthew, when I last briefed
the Security Council (see S/PV.7789), we called for
solidarity with the Government and people of Haiti
as the country struggled to keep on track an electoral
process, which was critical to the consolidation of its
stability. Today, as a result of the successful holding
of elections on 20 November 2016 and 29 January
2017, Haiti's political outlook for 2017 and beyond has
significantly improved, with the opening of a crucial
window of opportunity to address the root causes of
the political crisis that preceded the polls. The elections
provided for the installation of directly elected officials
at all levels of Haiti's governance structure for the
first time since 2006, including the peaceful transfer
of power to the third democratically elected President
since the deployment of MINUSTAH to Haiti in 2004.

In contrast with the parliamentary dysfunction
registered in 2015, all 119 Lower Chamber members
have been elected, and all but one of the 30 senators
have been seated. Among those are four women, and
the fiftieth legislature has been functioning regularly
since the opening of the second legislative year
on 9 January. Municipal authorities have been in
place almost a year now, and the publication of final
results for local elections is imminent. Following the
inauguration of Haiti's fifty-eighth President, Jovenel
Moise, on 7 February, Prime Minister Jack Guy
Lafontant and his Cabinet assumed their functions
after parliamentary endorsement on 22 March. Haiti's
return to constitutional order and the full functioning
of the executive, the legislature and local Government
has now set the stage to address the many pressing
challenges facing the country.

A relatively stable security situation prevails,
despite continuous signs of fragility. The Haitian
National Police (HNP), now 14,000 strong, has
demonstrated increased capacity in the planning and
execution of complex operations, including the securing
of the elections, while simultaneously performing
routine tasks in combating crime and more effectively
maintaining public order. The further development of
the National Police, including in the areas of internal
management and oversight, the police-to-population
ratio and geographic coverage, will have to occur
within the framework of the new five-year strategic
development plan 2017-2021 in order to ensure the
sustainability of the law enforcement body.

To that end, international support, including from
the United Nations, will be needed to enable the HNP
to eventually provide security for all Haitian citizens. I
have called on the Government to continue prioritizing
the further professionalization and the provision of
financial and material resources to the HNP, despite its
stated intention to reconstitute a national defence force.
The preservation by the Government of the apolitical
character of the police will be particularly critical to
the credibility of the institution and its ability to serve
all Haitian citizens.

Political challenges remain the primary impediment
to consistent progress in the administration of justice and
human rights to truly anchor the rule of law and render
police work more effective while creating conditions
conducive for foreign and domestic investment and
job creation.

The justice and human rights system continues to
suffer from multiple deficiencies, including a lack of
popular confidence, accountability, limited institutional
capacity, high rates of prolonged pre-trial detention
and inhumane detention conditions. These deficiencies
call for a renewed engagement of the executive and
the legislative alike to devise a comprehensive reform
package that can finally tackle these long-standing
hurdles to stability and development. In that context,
the discontinuation of the mandate of the Independent
Expert on the situation of human rights in Haiti is
regrettable, and I continue to call on the Government
to nominate a ministerial-level focal point for human
rights and to expedite the transparent and merit-based
appointment of the National Ombudsperson, even as
the United Nations monitoring role of the human rights
situation continues.

Equally, the outcome of the recent action taken to
fill key appointments in the Supreme Court and the
Superior Council of the Judiciary is eagerly awaited
as important steps to fully restore the judiciary and
underpin its independence from the executive and
legislative powers.

The resolution of Haiti's protracted politico-electoral
crisis has established the political space and institutional
stability needed for Haiti's democratic institutions to
develop a constructive and forward-looking agenda
to deliver tangible results that respond to the diverse
expectations of the Haitian people, in the wake of
post-hurricane reconstruction and a difficult economic
situation, while addressing the root causes of weak
governance and recurring political crisis. This will be
critical in order to establish conditions conducive to
lasting stability and sustainable development, also in
View of MINUSTAH's transition.

In that regard, I am encouraged by the President's
calls and those of Haitian political, civil society and
private sector leaders in support of a genuine dialogue on
a concrete road map for progress in key areas, including
the identification of clear development priorities and
the consolidation of the rule oflaw. It will be important
that this road map be driven by the desire to enhance
service delivery of the State and the confidence among
Haitian citizens in the democratic institutions.

The United Nations in Haiti looks forward
to intensifying our cooperation with all Haitian
stakeholders as they identify and implement those
national priorities. I am also encouraged by the calls
from a broad cross-section of Haitian society for
constitutional reform to, among other things, simplify
the electoral cycle and strengthen legal oversight bodies
with a View to stabilizing the country's democratic
institutions and reforming its governance.

The progress achieved during the past 13 years
in Haiti's stabilization process is notable. It is
therefore timely to reshape the partnership among
the international community, the United Nations and
Haiti with a View to ensuring the sustainability of that
progress. It is with this in mind that the Secretary-
General has recommended the closure of MINUSTAH
in six months from now and the establishment of a
smaller peacekeeping operation with concentrated
focus on the rule of law and police development, with
strong good offices and human rights monitoring roles.

With the Council's support, the transition from
MINUSTAH to a new and smaller mission would be
guided by a joint transition plan that would underpin
the gradual transfer of tasks to the Government,
international partners and the United Nations country
team. Government leadership and joint ownership
will be as crucial to a sustainable transition process
that underpins the implementation of the Secretary-
General's recommendation for the future of the United
Nations presence in the country, as will be a shift in
focus of the international community's support away
from stabilization to institutional strengthening.

(spoke in French)

I encourage the President of the Republic and
the new Government and Parliament to implement
a programme of institutional reforms aimed at
strengthening governance at all levels and addressing
the most pressing political and socioeconomic problems.

(spoke in English)

In the same vein, I can on Haiti's international
partners to forge a renewed partnership with the
Haitian authorities and the Haitian people and to lend
their support to assist the authorities in implementing
those reforms in a coordinated manner that helps to
consolidate the gains already achieved.

I thank all my colleagues in MINUSTAH and the
United Nations country team for their dedication and
commitment during this critical period for Haiti, and
I thank all of Haiti's international partners for their
continuous support in assisting the country to fully
seize this exceptional opportunity to begin a new
chapter in Haiti's history as the Mission transitions.

