Mr. Donigi (Papua New Guinea): First, I should
like to pay tribute to the presidency of Ireland for this
month and to you, Mr. Minister, for travelling to
preside over this special and public session of the
Security Council on the question of East Timor.

I should like also to welcome to this special
meeting Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Transitional
Administrator of East Timor, and Mr. Mari Alkatiri, Chief
Minister of East Timor. I appreciated the briefings they
gave this morning, which were very helpful. I appreciated
also the briefings by the representative of the World
Bank and the representative of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP).

Papua New Guinea welcomes the election of the
Constituent Assembly as well as the efforts being made
to draw up a new Constitution and the establishment of
new constitutional institutions. For East Timor to be a
democratic country, it must have, among other things,
freedom of speech coupled with a free press and media
institutions. We note the admission of an East Timor
journalist to membership of the Pacific Islands News
Association at a recent Association meeting, held in
Madang, Papua New Guinea, about two weeks ago.

Papua New Guinea continues to do what it can to
help in the process of establishing good governance
institutions in East Timor. Recently, Papua New Guinea
welcomed a visit by representatives of East Timor to
study our Ombudsman Commission facilities and to
obtain information from our Attorney General's
department. That visit was facilitated by UNDP.

We note that one of the constitutional law
consultants to East Timor was also a consultant to
Papua New Guinea's Constituent Assembly some 28
years ago.

We believe that we have a living Constitution,
and our Government institutions are not afraid to
defend their role and independence, as guaranteed by
the Constitution. We have also not been afraid of
changing our Constitution to suit particular political
developments or to meet changing value systems in our
country. As a developing country, we are limited as to
the type of assistance we can offer to East Timor, but
that does not mean that we cannot share our
development experiences with East Timor. We remain
prepared to continue to share with East Timor our own
particular experiences. Admittedly, not all of them have
been good, but we hope that East Timor will be able to
learn from them and to avoid the pitfalls that we have
encountered.

Papua New Guinea believes that any transfer of
the funding of United Nations activities in East Timor
to a special trust account for East Timor based on
voluntary contributions is tantamount to abandoning
the Territory. We believe that, at this special time,
when terrorism is uppermost in our minds, it is
imperative that the citizens of East Timor be
guaranteed the right to live in peace within secure
borders. That guarantee can be provided only by
maintaining the presence of United Nations
peacekeepers in that Territory.

Papua New Guinea therefore supports the view
that the United Nations should not unnecessarily scale
down its contribution to the development efforts of the
Government of East Timor following independence next
year. In this regard, we thank the Secretary-General for
his report contained in document S/2001/983.

There is no better comparison here than that of an
infant who is learning to walk. East Timor is on the
verge of graduating from being an infant, but the
international community must continue to walk beside
it for some years, until the country has reached full
maturity. It has held its elections for the constituent
Assembly. We are grateful that the elections were
peaceful and were conducted in a democratic and
transparent manner. East Timor still requires expertise
to run the Government as well as to provide advice when
needed. It requires expertise in the areas of law and order,
health, education, agriculture and infrastructure
development, among many others. Simply put, Papua
New Guinea is not yet fully satisfied that the
institutions of Government in East Timor have been
fully developed and staffed with appropriate personnel.

This fact is reflected in the report of the
Secretary-General, in which he states that:

"Much remains to be done to transform the
bureaucracy into a viable, sustainable national
administration run by East Timorese civil
servants, with strong policy, regulatory and
operational frameworks". (S/2001/983, para. 11)

He also rightly pointed out that the lowering of
the Government's service standards could be a source
of likely friction in future.

Papua New Guinea therefore supports the
recommendations contained in section IV of the
Secretary-General's report. We also agree with his
statement in paragraph 85 of the report that any plans
for a successor mission to UNTAET in East Timor
must contain "the core tasks that are crucial to
protecting the progress made to date".

We believe that the United Nations must continue
to address integral human development issues based on
a solid and assured foundation of human security. In
order to achieve this, it will be essential for the
international community to continue to fund all core
tasks of a successor mission to UNTAET. In our view,
therefore, it would be premature for the United Nations
to leave the country to its own devices after the
granting of independence next year.

