Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his presence with us today,
and Mr. Annabi for his very useful briefing.

The representative of France will make a
statement on behalf of the European Union. Of course
the Netherlands fully subscribes to that statement.

East Timor has come a long way since its popular
consultation one year ago and the rampage of violence
and senseless destruction that followed it. Like others
before me, I would like to express our gratitude and
admiration to Mr. Vieira de Mello and all the men and
women in the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and, indeed,
in the International Force in East Timor (INTERFET)
in an earlier phase. The vast majority of those
dedicated people, both United Nations and East
Timorese, remain anonymous, but the results of their
work will remain for others to build on.

East Timor seems to be on the right track.
However, a great deal of reconstruction and nation-
building still remains to be done. The active
involvement of the international community, including
that of the Security Council, remains indispensable. In
particular, we cannot put this great project in jeopardy
by too-early a withdrawal of hands-on international
involvement.

The challenge confronting East Timor is not only
social, economic and institutional in nature.
Unfortunately, as we learned today from Mr. Annabi's
briefing, the military-security situation remains as
precarious as ever, and it has indeed deteriorated. Well-
trained and well-equipped militia members infiltrate
from bases in West Timor, almost with impunity.
On 3 August the Security Council called for a military
assessment of the security situation and its implications
for the military component of UNTAET. I would be
grateful to Mr. Annabi for an indication of when the
Secretariat intends to organize that briefing for the
Council.

With regard to the refugee camps in West Timor,
we too are deeply concerned by the attack on three
workers from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Under such
circumstances it is difficult for UNHCR to carry out its
crucial tasks, including the vitally important one of
registering the refugees. I would like to ask Mr. Annabi
how the Secretariat interprets the statements by
Indonesian Foreign Minister Shihab that the refugee
camps in West Timor will soon be closed. How realistic
are such statements, in light of the continued activities
of the militias, who are both better equipped and better
organized than before and whose actions go virtually
unchecked?

Finally, the Netherlands expects Indonesia to
fulfil fully its obligations in prosecuting those
responsible for the violations of human rights
committed in East Timor. Unfortunately, new
legislation recently adopted by the Indonesian
parliament raises some uncomfortable uncertainties in
this regard. However, the fact that Prosecutor-General
Marzuki Darusman has drawn up a list of 33 persons
who will be indicted soon does give rise to some hope
that Indonesia will start early legal proceeding in these
cases.

