Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Israel occupies Arab land in Lebanon and
Palestine, yet no one at the international level has acted
to put an end to those occupations. The overwhelming
enthusiasm that some are expressing for the Security
Council to adopt resolutions under Chapter VII
dissipates when it comes to Israel, although the
occupation has been going on now for over half a
century. Israel is committing documented, systematic
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. But, paradoxically, no official in Israel has
ever been punished for that.

Today we have heard suggestions that certain
dossiers should be referred to the International Criminal
Court, but that desire disappears when it comes to Israel,
whose violations have clearly reached the level of war
crimes or crimes against humanity. Israel is implacably
pursuin its settlement activity, to which many have
referred today and which has been widely condemned.
The surface area of the settlements has risen by 182 per
cent. The number of settlements has gone up 189 per
cent. Paradoxically, there has been no international
response to deter Israel. Israel has been spared the sort
of military and economic sanctions that are imposed on
others, even though everyone is agreed that settlement
building is illegal and an obstacle to peace.

Israel is behaving in flagrant violation of
international law. The paradox is that Israel is
considered by some to be a racist, thuggish State when
it comes to international law. Israel has not respected
any of the resolutions adopted against it. It has enacted
more than 60 racist resolutions against the Palestinian
people since 1968.

Paradoxically, no genuine calls have been made
for the freeing of the Palestinian prisoners. Very few
have called for the Israeli detention camps to be opened
up to international observers or non-governmental
organizations, even though a great number of detainees
have lost their lives due to torture, medical negligence
or hunger strike, or have been killed in a premeditated
way.

Israel introduced nuclear weapons into the Middle
East, and in so doing precluded the establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in our region. But the paradox
is that none of the threats and sanctions imposed or
pressure exerted on certain States, particularly those
that have peaceful nuclear programmes in conformity
with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, have been applied to Israel, despite the danger
that Israel's weapons represent for the region and for
the world. These are the realities and the paradoxes that
some States with influence within the Organization
try to sweep under the rug and turn our attention from
because these realities are crystal clear.

How should we answer someone who might quite
rightly ask why we in the United Nations are failing on
the political, humanitarian and ethical fronts to meet
our responsibilities to deal with the Israeli occupation
of Palestinian territory and to put an end to these
flagrant violations by Israel? Is it possible or admissible
for certain States to impose their own biased agendas
on our Organization? Everyone has the right to know
openly whether this failure of our Organization is
desired by those influential States, or whether it is just
the result of a lack of power, collusion and weakness
on the part of States? Or should we consider the Israeli
occupation as something that transcends international
law and accountability because Israel enjoys the favour
ofa specific country? If that is the case, then let us call
things by their name; our Organization should not be
called the United Nations, but the organization of the
countries of major influence.

The United Nations and its Members must act. Since
it began 65 years ago, the Palestinian nightmare has not
sufficed to provoke the conscience of the international
community into adopting earnest measures that would
lead to a fair solution for the Palestinians and restore
their legitimate rights, rather than simply making
pointless and vain speeches before the Security Council
and other international forums. What can the United
Nations and its Member States say to the Syrian people
who remain under Israeli occupation after more than
45 years? What can the United Nations say to them when
they call into question the credibility and effectiveness
of the United Nations? It is the United Nations that has
been incapable oftaking real measures against Israel to
force it to implement relevant resolutions, in particular
resolution 497 (1981).

What can we say about the absence of necessary
international efforts to put an end to Israeli settlement-
building in the Golan? What can we say about the
inability of international human rights mechanisms to
put an end to Israeli humanitarian and human rights
violations? How can we respond when we see that there
is no international reaction?

The indiscriminant and racist policies and practices
of the Israeli regime continue. They continue to remove
people from the separation area. Israel is building a
separation wall in the occupied Golan. What can we
say about the shots fired towards Syrian territory? And
what of the licence that Israel and the United States
have granted themselves to explore for oil in the Golan?

These are all questions that I would put to members
and ask for responses, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations. Israel is assisting terrorist groups
in the separation wall area and ensuring that wounded
terrorists get to Israeli hospitals so that they can be
treated in Israel before they are brought back to Syrian
territory along the same line of separation. We must be
aware of the fact that the aid provided to these terrorist
groups in the area of separation is not simply a blatant
violation of international law but also endangers the
lives of United Nations personnel in the area.

On 6 March, terrorist groups kidnapped
21 peacekeepers who were working in the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force. The terrorists
were allowed to take the hostages to Jordan so that their
photos could be taken with the terrorists. Israel then
authorized the return of the terrorists to Syria.

As I have in other statements that I have made with
regard to the situation in the Middle East, I would like
to underscore the fact that it is dangerous to introduce
other subjects under this agenda item because that could
undermine the historic importance of this agenda item
and divert our debates from their primary objective of
considering ways to put an end to the Israeli occupation.
Therefore, I am not going to respond to the vindictive
allegations made against my country, Syria, by certain
delegations because I do not want to fall into the trap of
burying the real point of this agenda item.

However, we have a great deal to say to refute the
vindictive allegations made by States that support and
arm terrorists, sow fanaticism and destruction in Syria,
and work to ensure that all peaceful solutions to the crisis
will fail. I am referring to Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Turkey,
Israel and certain countries of the European Union,
some of which are members of the Council. All of them
are engaged in provoking an inter-Islamic conflict as a
substitute for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in order
to bury the Palestinian cause and distance themselves
from the mess of the two-State solution. In their clever
statements today, the representatives of that alliance of
States have confirmed our conviction that they seek by
every possible means to steer attention from the point
at hand - the situation in the Middle East - in order
to put the situation in my country, Syria, under the
spotlight.

The situation that has developed is a humanitarian
situation and they want to turn it into a political crisis
with a humanitarian angle. In that connection, I call on
the representatives of Saudi Arabia and Qatar to direct
the content and provocative nature of their statements
to the miserable living conditions endured by the
populations of their two countries. Those populations
are deprived of a constitution, a parliament, civil and
political liberties and any form of national opposition,
not even a formal one. Saudi and Qatari politicians
have spread Salafi, Wahhabi, Takfiri terrorism and
perverted the precepts of Islam, which is based on
tolerance. Those same politicians are today responsible
for shamefully sacrificing the lives of tens of thousands
of Muslim youth throughout the world under the pretext
of Jihad for the sake of petrodollars.
