Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Ambassador of Peru
and Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee for his
briefing. On behalf of France, I would like to take this
opportunity to wish him every success for the next two
years at the head of this important committee.
We had the opportunity in the Security Council last
week (see S/PV. 8178) to discuss the fact that, despite
its military defeat in Iraq and the Levant, Da'esh
continues to pose a serious threat to international peace
and security, as exemplified by the series of terrorist
attacks that continue to dominate the news. The list of
Security Council statements to the press is sad proof of
that reality. Several terrorist attacks have demonstrated
in the past how critical infrastructure, in particular, can
be a prime target for terrorists. This is an issue that
may sound technical, but in reality it is very Close to
the daily lives of all our fellow citizens. I would like to
make two main points.

First, I would like to recall that the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2341 (2017) exactly a year
ago was the first time that this threat had been
underscored at the international level. We welcome
the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
its Executive Directorate (CTED) to assist States in
the implementation of this important resolution and to
facilitate international cooperation in the field of critical
infrastructure protection. In particular, resolution
2341 (2017) highlighted two key messages. First, the
resolution underlines the importance of prevention
and preparedness with respect to potential threats, and
the need to identify early on the main challenges and
vulnerabilities in critical infrastructure protection, and
to develop a targeted strategy to be put in place in the
event of an attack. Secondly, it stresses the importance
of cooperation, whether it be inter-agency or inter- State,
in order to guarantee an appropriate level of protection,
which includes the exchange of information, knowledge
and experience. Due to the very nature of the activities
carried out by these critical infrastructures, Close
cooperation with the private sector is also essential.

My second comment relates to France's
arrangements in this area. The protection of the
population, together with guaranteeing the continuity
of the nation's essential functions, remains a strategic
priority for France. That is why, at the national level,
France is constantly adapting its system to protect
critical infrastructures as required by resolution
2341 (2017). Our safety system for activities of vital
importance, which was set up in 2006, now covers
12 sectors of activity, including transport, health and
communications, in particular, and now includes nearly
250 operators of vital importance in the public and
private sectors. It aims to strengthen the protection of
critical infrastructure both physically and in cyberspace.

France also continues to support regional initiatives
with its European partners. Given the interdependence
of the critical infrastructures of European countries,
their protection requires increased cooperation
between members of the European Union. This is why
France has made a major contribution to European
efforts to develop the Programme for European Critical
Infrastructure, which is a project also supported
by CTED. We also welcome the publication by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
with the support of CTED, of a practical guide on the
protection of non-nuclear energy infrastructure.

This debate on critical infrastructure is a very
concrete and operational illustration of the diversity
and complexity of the challenges we face. In the fight
against terrorism, which must be tackled on all fronts,
we have no other options than enhanced international
cooperation. France will naturally continue to play its
full part in these efforts.

