Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): Today's open
debate is taking place amid extremely complex regional
and international circumstances, in the light of the
uncertainty surrounding the future of several key issues
in the Middle East region and a number of successive
developments and events taking place in many countries
of the region, as well as the disregard of certain major
Powers for multilateral international legitimacy, which
represents the United Nations approach to addressing
issues in the Middle East, particularly that of the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories in Palestine, Syria
and Lebanon.

In that context, the League of Arab States has
intensified its activities at the highest level in order to
counter those illegal positions. The twenty-ninth Arab
League Summit, held in March 2018 in Dhahran, Saudi
Arabia - the so-called Jerusalem Summit - as well
as the thirtieth Arab League Summit held in Tunis in
March - the so-called Summit of Determination and
Solidarity - both adopted a number of resolutions
and declarations. They have underscored the
determination of Arab States to implement international
legitimacy in accordance with international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and a number of
resolutions and declarations of the Security Council
and General Assembly on many issues. Those issues
have been subjected to fierce attacks through unilateral
decisions that have blatantly violated the rules of
international legitimacy and multilateral rules of action
through the United Nations and the Security Council.

At the two Summits, the League of Arab States
underscored its determination to continue to implement
the key principles that were adopted in Madrid and
Oslo, as well as the Arab Peace Initiative, the principle
of land for peace and the two-State solution as the
basis for the establishment of a Palestinian State with
East Jerusalem as its capital. We also stressed at the
Summits that the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) will remain the sole legitimate representative
of the Palestinian people, under the leadership of
President Mahmoud Abbas, and that the main principles
of the peace process, together with relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions, constitute
a firm basis for achieving the desired settlement of
the Palestinian question through direct negotiations
between the two parties on the five final status issues,
which were agreed to in international multilateral
frameworks led by the Middle East Quartet.

At the same time, we reiterated at both Arab League
Summits our total opposition to and condemnation
of the unilateral decision of the United States
Administration to recognize Jerusalem as the capital
of the State of Israel. We also rejected its decisions to
end its funding of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, to
support Israel's suspension of fundamental transfers
to the Palestinian Authority and the closure of the
PLO office in Washington, D.C.,. We also condemn
the United States attempts to deprive Palestinians of
their inalienable rights, including their right to self-
determination, the right of return and compensation
for Palestinian refugees, and the just resolution of their
cause in accordance with General Assembly resolution
194 (III) of 1948. Moreover, we reject the intention
of the United States to support Israel's annexation of
illegal settlements established on occupied Palestinian
territories, in blatant violation of resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 497 (1981) and 2334 (2016).

Most importantly, the Arab League Summits
unanimously affirmed our rejection of any deal or peace
initiative that does not conform with the international
terms of reference to the Middle East peace process.
We reject the use of any political or financial pressure
exerted on the Palestinian people and their leadership
with the aim of imposing unjust solutions to the
Palestinian question that are incompatible with the
international terms of reference of the peace process.
We also reiterated our support for and endorsement of
the peace plan presented to the Council by President
Mahmoud Abbas of the State of Palestine on 20 February
2018 in an attempt to counter the clear United States
bias towards Israel (see S/PV.8183). The plan is based
on strengthening multilateral international frameworks
through the Security Council, and it has not yet received
the due attention of the Council.

The most recent Arab League Summit in Tunisia
also affirmed our rejection and condemnation of the
decision of the United States of America to recognize
the sovereignty of Israel over the occupied Syrian Arab
Golan. We consider that decision null and void, and we
believe that it constitutes a grave violation of the Charter
of the United Nations as well as Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolutions 242 (1967) and 497
(1981). We reiterate the full support of the League of
Arab States for the right of the Syrian Arab Republic to
restore its sovereignty over the occupied Golan, as well
as Lebanon's right to restore its sovereignty over the
Lebanese Shaba'a Farms, the Kfar Shuba hills and the
northern part of the village of Al-Ghajar.

The Foreign Ministers of Member States have been
given a mandate to use all political, diplomatic and
legal means to continue to confront the decisions of the
United States and intensify bilateral and multilateral
communication with the international community,
including the possibility of submitting a draft resolution
to the Security Council and seeking an advisory
opinion from the International Court of Justice stating
that the United States position is illegitimate, null and
void. The Group of Arab States in New York continues
its consultations with a view to implementing those
efforts in coordination with many States, international
and regional organizations, as well as those that have
expressed their rejection of the United States decisions
in accordance with their commitment to internationally
established positions, which is greatly appreciated by
the League of Arab States.

Having referred to the resolutions and declarations
of the past two Arab League Summits, I cannot
conclude without first expressing our regret on behalf
of the Arab League at the shift from dealing with the
Middle East issue within the formal international
multilateral framework of the United Nations and its
Security Council to parties outside the United Nations.
We now see that there are leaks, speculations, articles
and statements issued via social media platforms. There
have even been some press statements calling into
question the seriousness and effectiveness of the Arab
proposal contained in the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002.

The Arab demands are being ignored. They
constitute the basis of the peace process and its
objectives, including the settlement of the five
final status issues through direct negotiations
between the State of Israel and the State of Palestine
under international supervision that is neutral and
transparent. We call on the Security Council now more
than ever before to regain the initiative in dealing
with the important issue of the Middle East and
reaffirm the foundations of international legitimacy
within international multilateral frameworks in order
to strengthen the role of diplomacy for peace and
enhance the role of the United Nations. The League of
Arab States will continue to support the international
community represented by this Council until we
achieve our ultimate goal of a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace in the Middle East.

