Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting, and
we thank the Secretary-General for his briefing this
morning.

We also align ourselves with the statements made
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

The Israeli violations continue in the Palestinian
territories, including the ongoing unilateral actions
and settlement activity by Israel, the blockade imposed
on the Gaza Strip, the restriction of access to the holy
sites of Jerusalem, the Judaization of Jerusalem and
other Violations of United Nations resolutions and
international law. It is very concerning that that these
severe violations continue without any consideration
of their consequences: the escalation of tensions and
the destruction of the basis of a settlement of the Arab-
Israeli conflict.

The Security Council's obligations to achieve
peace in the Middle East require an end to the Israeli
occupation of all occupied Arab land, the attainment
of a peaceful, sustainable and lasting solution that is
based on the two-State solution, the establishment of
the independent State of Palestine based on the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living
side by side with Israel in peace and security, and in
accordance with Security Council resolutions, including
resolutions 242 (1968) and 338 (1973), the Quartet
road map and the Arab Peace Initiative, the return of
refugees and the restoration of all of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people. We call on the Security
Council to compel Israel to respect international
law and international humanitarian law and to reject
all illegal practices and policies of the occupying
Israeli authorities. We also call on the Council to put
in place measures to stop these practices, to provide
international protection to the Palestinian people, to
strive to make tangible progress in the peace process
and achieve security and stability for the peoples of the
region and to deprive the extremists of the excuses they
use to recruit extremists and spread radicalization.

The State of Qatar spares no effort to achieve
peace and stability in our region. We have used our
various capabilities to assist in the humanitarian aspect
to address the consequences suffered by the civilians
in Gaza. In fulfilling our humanitarian pledges, we
have thus far implemented reconstruction projects
for Gaza valued at $230 million, including 1,060
residential apartments in His Excellency Sheikh Hamid
Bin Khalifa Al Thani's city in Gaza, implementing
25 per cent of a 1,201 residential unit building project,
establishing a hospital for rehabilitation and protheses
and implementing 45 domestic roads projects.

The continued suffering of the Syrian civilians,
given the international community's inability to end the
suffering and stop the war crimes and crimes against
humanity that continue to be carried out by the Syrian
regime and associated militias and to implement United
Nations resolutions, the horrifying images transmitted
by humanitarian agencies of civilians fighting death
as a result of starvation policies and newborn babies
that have been deprived of the right to life, through the
use of indiscriminate barrel bombing, is all a disgrace
to humankind - humankind that has assumed the
obligation to learn from the past. The Security Council
demanded in resolution 2254 (2015) that all measures
be taken to protect the civilians in Syria. It also called
for unconditional and immediate access to the suffering
population in Syria, to release the detainees who have
been detained arbitrarily, to stop immediately all
attacks against civilians and civilian targets and to
fully implement all Security Council resolutions on
Syria. Unfortunately, none of those demands have
been implemented, which necessitates consideration of
additional measures based on paragraph 6 of resolution
2258 (2015).

The State of Qatar stresses the contents of resolution
2254 (2015), that the only lasting solution for the crisis
in Syria is through an inclusive Syrian political process
with Syrian leadership that fulfils the aspirations of the
people and fully implements the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex) through an inclusive transitional
authority with full executive powers. My country will
participate in the high-level Syria pledging conference
to be held in London next month. Qatar will contribute
to all international efforts to achieve peace and stability
in the Middle East and to achieve the aspirations of all
peoples of the region and will participate in all efforts
towards achieving these goals.

