Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for having called this meeting.
I thank Ms. Amina Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-
General; Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-
General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs; as well
as Ms. Jamila Afghani for their briefings. The briefings
follow their most recent visit to Afghanistan, where
they had important meetings. They have shared with us
their recommendations, which reflect the importance
of reaching agreements on very important issues in
Afghanistan, in particular a comprehensive, just and
sustainable peace process.

I join others in offering my condolences to the
Government and people of Afghanistan following the
terrorist attacks that happened yesterday in Kabul. We
condemn those attacks. We think they are reprehensible
and unjustifiable. We must bring the perpetrators of
those attacks to justice.

For more than 40 years, Afghanistan has been in an
unstable political and security situation. The Afghan
people suffer on a daily basis. The political authorities
in Afghanistan must make efforts to avoid partisan and
sectarian interests to provide the population with a safe
and dignified life.

For its part, the Security Council should intensify
its efforts to support the political process and to allow
for elections to be held in September, as planned and to
support the negotiations about a national reconciliation
that aim to make the political process in Afghanistan
a success.

We cannot talk about political reconciliation
without mentioning the essential role of Afghan
women. Indeed, women and mothers make up half
of society, and they are responsible for educating an
entire generation. Given the important role of women
in society, we must uphold their civil and political
rights. That is a prerequisite in all countries, including
Afghanistan, and the Government has taken measures to
improve gender equality in a number of different areas.
We join others who have spoken before us in calling
for women's participation in the political reconciliation
process in order to preserve the gains that have been
made in the past.

Kuwait firmly believes that there cannot be
sustainable peace and stability in Afghanistan and
within the region without negotiations at the diplomatic
level. Military solutions have never led to long-term,
sustainable peace. That is why we call on all parties
to participate constructively in the diplomatic efforts
to achieve peace and to preserve the interests of the
Afghan people. Although we understand that the path
to peace is strewn with difficulties, we know that the
starting point should be inclusive national reconciliation
in order to achieve the peace that is so desired. A
sustainable peace requires regional cooperation, given
the important role played by the countries of the region.
That is necessary to re-establish peace in Afghanistan.

We have taken note of the bilateral meetings held
between Afghanistan and other countries in the region
in an attempt to improve the situation in the country.
We welcome international efforts to facilitate political
reconciliation in Afghanistan, in particular those
of Mr. Zalmay Khalilzad, the United States Special
Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation. We are
delighted to see the positive developments in that regard
following the intra-Afghan negotiations in Doha a few
days ago, as well as the communique signed by the
United States of America and Afghanistan yesterday to
deal with the Afghan crisis.

In conclusion, we reiterate that diplomatic efforts
in Afghanistan should be accompanied by significant
investment in education. We need to prioritize education
in order to build a society. Many peoples have seen
their societies fall because of war and conflict and have
been able to catch up only after investing in education,
without distinction between men and women. There
is no alternative for a comprehensive development
approach that focuses on building the capacities of
individuals, enhancing Government capabilities,
building infrastructure and accelerating economic
growth. Addressing these diverse challenges is the
only way to eliminate the deep-rooted causes of this
conflict, which has lasted so long.

