The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of France.

At the outset, I warmly and once again thank the
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the
European Commission, Ms. Federica Mogherini, for
her important briefing, which highlighted the issues
surrounding the ever-closer cooperation between the
Security Council and the European Union (EU) in New
York and on the ground.

The European commitment to multilateralism is the
fruit of a history in which the European Union and the
United Nations both have their roots and their raison
d'etre. As the High Representative said most eloquently,
both organizations responded to the call of a generation
that experienced the two world conflicts - a call
that still resonates every day in this Chamber: never
again. No more military aggression against a sovereign
country; no more displacement and decimation of
entire peoples; no more civilian populations targeted
by bullets and bombs. The European Union and the
United Nations fundamentally share the same DNA and
are today linked by a strategic partnership at its full
strength. In that connection, I would like to emphasize
two points.

The first begins with the observation that the
European Union and the United Nations are no longer
limited to cooperation on a case-by-case basis; they
are complementary across the entire spectrum of
peace operations. Indeed, in accordance with the
priorities identified in the EU-United Nations Strategic
Partnership on Peace Operations and Crisis Management
for the years 2019 and 2020, the European Union and the
United Nations are working hand in hand for conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

As regards conflict prevention, the European Union
is leading the way. The EU recently established an
international contact group on Venezuela with the aim
of finding a political and peaceful solution to the crisis
there. In Europe, the High Representative is personally

engaged, with our full support, in facilitating the
dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia with a view to
reaching a comprehensive and definitive agreement on
the normalization of relations between those two States.
I could, of course, cite many other examples.

The European Union also works in support of United
Nations mediation. As the High Representative again
recalled, in the case of Syria the European Union has
pledged not to finance reconstruction until a credible
political solution, under United Nations auspices and
on the basis of all provisions of resolution 2254 (2015),
is in place.

In the field of peacekeeping operations, the States
members of the Union contribute at all levels. In terms
of budget, their combined contribution amounts to
32 per cent of the peacekeeping budget. The scale of
that contribution, which is by far the largest, deserves
to be better understood and better appreciated, in
particular at a time when some are reluctant to honour
their due commitments.

On the ground in Mali, Libya, the Central African
Republic, Somalia, Kosovo and the Middle East,
European civilian and military missions are deployed
under the Common Security and Defence Policy,
alongside peacekeeping operations or special political
missions. Some of these European missions now play a
central role in responding to threats to peace, such as
Operation Atalante, which combats piracy off the coast
of Somalia and provides protection for World Food
Programme ships. Those missions are also essential
in supporting security sector reform. I am thinking of
in particular - Ms. Mogherini mentioned them - the
European Union training missions in Mali and the
Central African Republic, which are complementary
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
Through its African Peace Facility, the European
Union also participates in the funding of African peace
and security operations, in particular, as was said, the
African Union Mission in Somalia and the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G5 Sahel).

In the area of peacebuilding, the European Union
consistently supports United Nations efforts through
projects that are where development and security
issues intersect, in full alignment with the Secretary-
General's priorities. It is even one of the European
Union's strengths or assets. For example, in Colombia,
the EU supports the reintegration of ex-combatants
alongside the United Nations verification mission. In
many countries, the European Union and its member
States are among the main international donors. That
trend is expected to continue to increase, since the EU
adopted a record budget of€l.6 billion for humanitarian
aid in 2019.

The exceptional nature of that partnership and the
successes seen over the past 20 years should collectively
encourage us to continue with the progress made on
the common priorities of the two organizations in the
context of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. That is my second point.

Progress must be made in particular on the women
and peace and security agenda, which is one of our
main priorities, and more generally on all issues related
to human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well
as international humanitarian law. As underlined in
the EU strategic approach to the women, peace and
security agenda, that is not a priority among others
but an approach that should permeate all initiatives
common to our two organizations, as my German
colleague clearly said earlier.
We also fully support the development of trilateral
cooperation among the European Union, the United
Nations and the African Union, as mentioned by the
High Representative at the beginning of the meeting.
That trilateral cooperation is expected to play a
fundamental role, particularly in peacekeeping. I am
thinking in particular of support for the scaling up and
sustainable and predictable funding of African peace
operations, which, in our view, are essential given
the opportunity for such African peace operations to
improve the effectiveness of peacekeeping. We would
also mention the G5 Sahel Joint Force, in which the
United Nations and the European Union play a key
role as part of the technical agreement on MINUSMA
operational and logistical support to the Joint Force.
That trilateral cooperation is also evident in the area
of migration. Since its establishment at the EU-African
Union (AU) summit in Abidjan in November 2017, the
EU-AU-United Nations task force has enabled more
than 37,000 migrants stranded in Libya to return to
their countries of origin.

The conflict-prevention tools available to us also
need to be strengthened. I am thinking in particular
of mediation, early warning systems, security sector
reform and the close coordination of political messages.

The European Union and the United Nations share
the same commitment to multilateralism not only as an
overall vision but also in their daily practices. Apart
from its role as a regional organization, that is one ofthe
elements or pillars of the current international order. On
the basis ofthat common vision of conflict management,
we, as members ofthe Security Council, have, I believe,
the duty to make the most of that close relationship and
Europe's commitment to strong multilateralism.

In conclusion, in view of the High Representative's
experience in mediation, I would like her opinion on
how the Security Council can effectively support
mediation processes in which the European Union
is engaged.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I again give the floor to High Representative
Ms. Federica Mogherini to respond to comments and
questions raised.

