Mr. Winid (Poland): Let me begin by congratulating
you, Mr. President, and your dedicated team on the
organization of today's debate on water, peace and
securityandonthe outstandingconceptnote (S/2016/969, annex) prepared by Senegal to guide our discussion.
We fully agree with your assessment that water is a
fundamental pillar of development and security policy
and of great relevance in national, regional and global
policymaking. Poland is impressed with the enormous
efforts of the Senegalese Government to facilitate
access to water for its citizens.

While Poland aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union, allow me to
make some additional points in my national capacity.

The President mentioned in his concept note
an interesting fact: that out of 263 international
watercourses, 158 still have no cooperation framework.
As a country actively engaged in various international
and regional mechanisms dedicated to water cooperation
and water resource management, Poland is ready to
share its experience and best practices in that area.

We are a member of the Council of the Baltic
Sea States - an overall political forum for regional
intergovernmental cooperation, made up of 11 countries
and the European Commission. The Council constitutes
an important platform for building trust, safety and
security in the Baltic Sea region and serves as a platform
for dialogue on a wide spectrum of areas - energy
efficiency, migration, border control and human
trafficking, to name a few. One of the conclusions of
Poland's presidency in that organization, completed
earlier this year, is that a prosperous, stable and secure
Baltic Sea region represents a crucial component of the
European security system.

We share the View expressed by some ofthe previous
speakers that a peaceful solution to conflicts arising
from competition between States over transboundary
water is of the utmost importance. Poland is a State
party to the main international treaties on watercourses,
including the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea. Since 2005, Professor Stanislaw Pawlak,
a Polish judge, has served in the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, which plays a major
role in the global architecture to prevent and resolve
water-related disputes.

Today's debate affords us an excellent opportunity
to highlight the fundamental nexus between security
and development, recognized also in various United
Nations initiatives related to water. As a member of
the United Nations Group of Friends of Oceans and
Seas, Poland has strongly supported the establishment
of Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 14, devoted
to the conservation, protection and sustainable use of
oceans, seas and marine resources. That Goal is crucial
for countries, including small island developing States,
with economies that are highly dependent on the use of
oceans and seas.

Let me also draw the Council's attention to the
10X20 Initiative on Marine Protected Areas, launched
earlier this year, which contributes specifically to
the accomplishment of target 5 of SDG 14, aiming to
conserve at least 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas
and biodiversity by the year 2020. Poland is one of the
Vice-Chairs of the Steering Committee of the 10X20
Initiative, along our friends from Italy - the Chair -
and the Bahamas, Kenya and Palau as Vice-Chairs.

Finally, we look forward to continuing the
discussion on water-related issues and possible
security implications of climate change within the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change. I have the honour of informing the Council
that, following the decision adopted in Marrakesh, the
twenty-fourth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change will
be held in Poland in 2018. The international community
has entrusted Poland with the very responsible task for
the fourth time, and we are very proud of that.

