I would also like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Plasschaert, for her briefing. She knows that she has the full support of France. I would like to touch briefly on five points. First of all, I would like to reaffirm France's support for Iraq, a country at the heart of the challenges of the Middle East. The Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France, Jean-Yves Le Drian, visited the country last month, and the Minister of the Armed Forces, Florence Parly, is going there to show this support today, at a time when there are many challenges, as the Special Representative has just reminded us. Iraqi Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi announced and launched a number of reforms to respond to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, strengthen the capacity of the Iraqi State, fight corruption and diversify the Iraqi economy. It is essential that these measures be effectively implemented. The Iraqi people have expressed clear and legitimate demands; it is crucial that they be heard. And the international community must mobilize to support the Iraqi authorities in this endeavour. The announcement of early parliamentary elections in June 2021 is a positive development. It is essential that all stakeholders mobilize to enable an inclusive, free and transparent ballot in which Iraqis participate in large numbers to choose their representatives. The full, active and effective participation of women in this election is also essential. The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq has a strong electoral assistance mandate. We hope that it will continue to carry out this crucial task in the coming months. We are watching closely the situation in Basrah and in the south of the country. It is essential that freedom to demonstrate be guaranteed throughout the country. It is also imperative that the alleged perpetrators of violence against demonstrators be brought to justice. Secondly, I want to reiterate France's commitment to respecting Iraq's sovereignty and territorial integrity. It is essential that the country remain free from regional tensions. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/792) mentions Turkish incursions into Iraq. France shares Iraq's serious concerns about this and calls for de-escalation. Thirdly, I would like to recall that the Da'esh threat has not disappeared, as we were able to see at Monday's briefing on the status of this threat. It is therefore essential that the action of the Global Coalition to Counter Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant alongside the Iraqi authorities continue and that its modes of action adapt to the evolving threat. I welcome the operations recently conducted by the Iraqi authorities to fight Da'esh. The support of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant for the fight against impunity must also help prevent a resurgence of terrorist violence. Fourthly, the humanitarian situation is a long-standing concern that the COVID-19 pandemic only reinforces. With 1.77 million vulnerable people in the country, it is unfortunate that restrictions on humanitarian access persist. France joins the Secretary-General's call for those restrictions to be lifted. Finally, I would like to say a word about the developments concerning missing Kuwaitis and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives. The health situation has not allowed us to make much progress on this issue, but we know that the Iraqi authorities are determined to move forward, and we will remain attentive to this matter.
