The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2010/346, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document 8/2010/296, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for the period from
1 January to 30 June 2010.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

The President (spoke in Spanish): There were
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1934 (2010).
In connection with the resolution just adopted on
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, I have been authorized
to make the following complementary statement on
behalf of the Security Council:

"As is known, the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (S/2010/296) states in paragraph
13 that 'the situation in the Middle East is tense
and is likely to remain so, unless and until a
comprehensive settlement covering all aspects of
the Middle East problem can be reached'. That
statement of the Secretary-General reflects the
view of the Security Council."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2010/l2.

As Mexico's presidency of the Security Council
draws to an end today, all that remains is for me to
express my gratitude for the cooperation I received
from all delegations in the course of the month. I hope
that we have achieved good results, given the very
complex agenda before the Council. While we were
able to take up some issues and come to some
conclusions, other matters remain pending for the
Security Council to follow up on and bring some
closure to.

Again, I am deeply grateful for the cooperation of
all delegations. I also wish to express my gratitude for
the cooperation of the Secretariat and the interpreters
who were with us in the course of our work throughout
the month.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.50 17.111.
10-42984

