Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): At the outset, I would like to
join previous speakers in congratulating Sweden and
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council this month and for organizing today's
important debate.

Before delivering my national statement, I wish
to align myself with the statements made on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

I would like to take this opportunity to express my
delegation's gratitude to Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres for outlining his vision on global conflict
prevention and sustaining peace. Cambodia fully
supports the Secretary-General's vision for making
2017 a year for peace, and we assure Secretary-General
Guterres of Cambodia's full cooperation in making that
vision a reality.
The international community remains committed
to the full implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, but the global security
situation remains worrisome. The first 10 days of the
new year have been marked by numerous terrorist
attacks across the globe. Those attacks undermine the
social and economic development that the Organization
has worked so hard to achieve.

Long-standing conflicts perpetuate violence,
thereby contributing to radical thought and action.
Conflict prevention is the prerequisite for sustainable
peace and development. In order to ensure sustained
peace, the global community must address the deep-
rooted causes of conflict, including the negative social,
political and economic conditions that contribute to the
cycle of violence. In that context, the United Nations
and its organs, including the Security Council, have a
vital role to play. The Charter of the United Nations
outlines the Organization's responsibility to promote
the pacific settlement of disputes, thereby bringing
about sustained peace, security and prosperity for the
world's populations.

Accordingly, the prevention of conflict must be at
the core of the work of the United Nations, meaning
that action to curtail disputes must be taken early
and decisively. My delegation believes that, for that
to be an effective strategy, greater political will must
be exercised by all parties. Nevertheless, conflict
prevention should not be viewed through a narrow lens,
where it is limited to the maintenance of international
peace and security through military means. On the
contrary, the promotion of socioeconomic development
and addressing climate change should be given the
highest priority by every organ of the United Nations.
Therefore, in order to provide the necessary political
leadership so as to be able to fully capitalize on the
opportunities for preventive action, comprehensive
and purposeful international cooperation must be
promoted. The Security Council must be open to
working with the greater United Nations membership,
while remaining politically accountable and transparent
in its engagement. The views of the General Assembly,
the most representative and democratic organ within
the United Nations system, must be fully considered by
the Security Council in its work, particularly as those
views concern issues of development and its link to the
conflict-prevention agenda.

The Royal Government of Cambodia believes that,
by focusing on such a broad view of conflict prevention,
greater political will, along with strong United Nations-
based leadership, can pave the way for a safer and more
prosperous world for all. My delegation reiterates the
importance of establishing a more effective working
relationship between the Security Council and the
Secretary-General, while taking full account of the
views expressed by the broader membership of the
United Nations. The role of the Secretary-General is
undeniably important in that context, and his reports
and other documents with his recommendations should
be based on clear, accurate and verifiable data, which
will help our understanding of issues and inform
our actions accordingly, thereby contributing to
sustained peace and development globally. Enhancing
the working relationship between the Council, the
Secretary-General and the General Assembly will
promote transparency in our work while keeping the
Organization accountable to its global constituency.

In conflict prevention it is important to reject the
use, or threat of use, of force in international relations;
that principle is stated in the Charter of the United
Nations. Member States must be fully respectful of the
Charter, including the principles of sovereignty, the
territorial integrity of States, self-determination and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States.

The Royal Government of Cambodia stands ready
to actively engage with all its partners on the issue of
conflict prevention with a view to promoting the global
agenda for sustainable development.

