Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
The urgent convening of this meeting bears witness to
the great importance of the question of the Middle
East, which is at the heart of the Security Council's
concerns.

The incident that occurred with respect to the
Libyan ship prevented from delivering humanitarian
aid to the Palestinian population raises once again the
question of the blockade of Gaza. However, it is only
one aspect of the complex situation, which requires the
problem of the Middle East to be considered with a
great deal of thought and, above all, a great sense of
responsibility.

Together with the other members of the Security
Council, we have always deplored the critical
humanitarian situation that prevails in Gaza. The
situation in general is of course of great concern, but it
is particularly difficult at the present moment. The
incident under consideration arises from the prevention
of the supply of food and medication to that
population, which is greatly in need of them. That is
why we again to urge the Israeli authorities to lift the
siege on Gaza, especially in order to facilitate the work
of humanitarian organizations.

The Security Council has always been concerned
by any form of obstruction imposed on humanitarian
access, whoever perpetrates that obstruction and
wherever it is carried out. That is why we believe that
it would have been better in this case to reconcile the
legitimate requirements of the Israeli State with the
need to assist a population stricken by unilateral
measures.

However, above all, the incident is another
reminder that the role of the Security Council, just like
that of the international community, is to persuade the
two parties - the Israeli Government and the
Palestinian Authority - to implement all the
commitments they have undertaken in the context of
the Road Map and the various recommendations to
which they have agreed in order to reach a
comprehensive and definitive settlement of the issue.
As is now acknowledged by all, that will necessitate
the existence of two neighbouring States living in
peace and full security.

In spite of this incident, we would still like to
welcome the relative calm of the situation overall. That
calm must be capitalized upon in order to build
confidence and maintain the spirit of Annapolis, which
would enable ongoing dialogue between Israel and
Palestine. In conclusion, we reiterate our appeal to all
the parties to show restraint in order to help in the
peaceful settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

