Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): On behalf of the members
of the Peacebuilding Commission, I am pleased to
present the report of the Commission on its seventh
session, as contained in document S/2014/67. The
report presents the progress made in taking forward
the recommendations of the 2010 review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture (8/2010/393, annex).
It is organized around the three main functions of the
Commission, namely, advocacy and sustained attention,
resource mobilization and forging coherence. Allow
me to highlight a number ofissues from the report that
deserve the particular attention of the Council.

First, the Commission continues to place particular
emphasis on ways to capitalize on the wealth of
experience and diverse capacities that its membership
can offer in support of peacebuilding objectives for the
countries on its agenda. That was a key conclusion of
the 2010 review. During the reporting period, additional
emphasis was placed on engaging members from the
region and subregion in support of the peacebuilding
process in Burundi, the Central African Republic and
Guinea-Bissau. That will continue to be a major priority
for the Commission.
Secondly, the Commission continues to recognize
that its membership structure should also shape the
nature and scope of its advisory role to the principal
organs of the United Nations. I am pleased to note
that, thanks to Rwanda's efforts and commitment
over the past year, the reporting period witnessed
significant progress in identifying practical modalities
for informal interaction between the Commission and
the Security Council. The evolving practice of aligning
the Commission's calendar of field visits with the
Council's periodic consideration of mission mandates
has proven to be particularly useful. At the same time,
there is room for further improvement. In View of the
Commission' s engagement in a variety ofpost-conflict
contexts, there is a particular need for greater clarity in
the Council with respect to the Commission's areas of
strength and limitations in each specific context. The
members of the Commission that are also members of
the Security Council can play a central role in ensuring
that the Council is able to draw more effectively on
the Commission's unique membership structure and
outreach.

Thirdly, through its engagement with Burundi,
the Central African Republic, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Liberia and Sierra Leone, the Commission is constantly
reminded that peacebuilding is a process fraught with
challenges that are typically context-specific. Our
engagement therefore takes various forms at different
stages of the peacebuilding efforts. I would like to
highlight the following points in relation to the three
functions of the Commission.

First, the Commission's country-specific engagement
over the past year has confirmed that its accompaniment
function depends first and foremost on the level of
commitment demonstrated by national interlocutors and
on the quality of the international response in support
of such commitment. The Commission therefore
continues to advocate for mutual accountability and
commitments between the countries on the agenda and
their main partners.

Secondly, while it will continue to prioritize its
resource mobilization function, the Commission has
repeatedly confirmed that it is not a viable fundraising
mechanism. Instead and as an intergovernmental body,
the Commission provides a platform for highlighting
the imperative for the timely deployment of targeted
resources, especially in crisis situations such as in
the Central African Republic and Guinea-Bissau, or
as countries approach critical milestones, such as
the elections that took place in Guinea last year and
in Guinea-Bissau this year. The enhanced synergy
with the Peacebuilding Fund has made these timely
interventions possible.

Thirdly, addressing the challenge of competing
agendas and the fragmentation of peacebuilding
activities remains a central objective ofthe Commission.
The Commission undertakes its function of forging
coherence by promoting greater focus on strategic
opportunities that must be seized and by pointing to
strategic gaps in response to peacebuilding priorities
in the countries on its agenda. The complementarity
between the roles of the Commission and the United
Nations senior leadership in the field is a key factor for
fostering the coherence of messages and actions. This
was increasingly manifest last year in the Commission's
engagement with Burundi, Guinea-Bissau and Sierra
Leone.

The transition from security and politically
focused United Nations missions to development-
oriented United Nations country teams highlights the
interlinkage between the Commission's three core
functions. In 2013, the Commission positioned itself to
support the Security Council's decision to draw down
and subsequently close the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone. The transition of
the United Nations presence to a United Nations country
team has ushered Sierra Leone into a new phase of its
transformation towards socioeconomic development.

The Council has also requested the Commission
to support the planned transition of the United Nations
Office in Burundi, where the dynamics and needs are
quite different from those that prevailed in Sierra Leone.
The Working Group on Lessons Learned decided to
dedicate its work in 2014 to identifying areas where
the Commission can effectively deploy the appropriate
combination of its three core functions in support of
transitions of Security Council-mandated missions.

Recognizing the important contribution of women
to peacebuilding efforts, the Commission approached
its thematic focus on economic revitalization and
national reconciliation during the reporting period
by considering the gender dimension of both themes.
A partnership with UN-Women has enabled the
Commission to explore the transformative role of
women in post-conflict societies. A high-level event
on women's economic empowerment for peacebuilding
was convened in September 2013 and was chaired by
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign and
European Affairs of Croatia. The event resulted in a
political declaration that affirmed the commitment
of the Commission's members to women's economic
empowerment for peacebuilding. A meeting of the
Working Group on Lessons Learned in December 2013
also reaffirmed the importance of gender mainstreaming
in the planning, priority setting, design and delivery of
national reconciliation processes.

The Commission convened it first-ever annual
substantive session on 23 June. The decision to convene
annual sessions was taken during the reporting period
withaviewtopotentiallystrengtheningtheCommission's
contribution to the development of intergovernmental
policy in areas that can improve outcomes for the
people in countries emerging from conflict. The first
annual session demonstrated the Commission's unique
power to convene Member States, United Nations
entities, international financial institutions, regional
development banks and civil society. It also confirmed
that the Commission is a unique platform for exploring
the multidimensional nature of peacebuilding and the
policy-related opportunities and challenges.

This year will mark the end of the second five-year
review cycle for the peacebuilding architecture. A
second comprehensive review by the General Assembly
and the Security Council will take place in 2015. The
Commission has initiated advance informal preparation
that is currently exploring the potential scope and
suggested terms of reference of the review. The outcome
of this informal preparation will be transmitted to the
General Assembly and the Security Council in the
context of the next annual report for consideration. I
wish to acknowledge the role of the Peacebuilding
Support Office and Assistant Secretary-General
Judy Cheng-Hopkins and her team in support of the
Commission's work and activities during the reporting
period. I can only highly praise their contributions.

In conclusion, I must emphasize that the past
year has witnessed a number of positive and worrying
developments that call for further intensified efforts
both to seize opportunities and to address threats to
sustaining peace. While we continue to face systemic
challenges, we must commit to facing these challenges
with the requisite resolve and determination. We are
approaching a crucial year in 2015, where we can
collectively help shape the future socioeconomic and
peacebuilding agenda of the United Nations. These
efforts must come together and must be mutually
reinforcing.

