Mr. Ilkin (Turkey): Although Turkey has already
aligned itself with the European Union statement, I still
would like to touch upon some issues that deserve
particular attention.

The recent Paris Conference marked the renewal
of our long-term commitment to Afghanistan while
firmly underscoring the priority areas designed to
ensure better and safer living standards for our Afghan
brothers and sisters. Much has indeed been achieved in
Afghanistan to date, yet more remains to be done. And
we all know that there is no quick fix for the mostly
structural problems stemming from the devastation of
the past.

The Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2008/434) makes it clear that if the Afghan people
are to continue reaping the benefits of achievements,
there needs to be a stronger United Nations presence in
the country and a closer partnership among the Afghan
Government, the United Nations, NATO and the rest of
the international community under Afghan ownership
and leadership. To enhance the sense of ownership, we
also need to make the Afghan people see the positive
developments which have already started to improve
their daily lives.

The successful implementation of the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy will pave
the way for attaining the goals set out in the
Afghanistan Compact. In that arduous task, the
international community must be ever more active,
resourceful and forthcoming in supporting the efforts
of the Afghan Government. We believe the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
has an important coordinating role to play in that
regard. We fully concur with the Secretary-General's
reflections on the priority areas and his
recommendations contained in the report. In that
context, I would like to place special emphasis on the
need to enhance the capabilities of UNAMA. The
international community's resolve and commitment
should also be fully reflected by structurally
reinforcing the mission in a rapid fashion.

The terms "security" and "prosperity" are
inseparable and complementary. In the case of
Afghanistan, the security situation might easily become
a stumbling block in our joint efforts to bring about a
bright future there. The recent upsurge in terrorist
activities has again shown us that, if not properly
checked, those subversive operations have the potential
to derail all our achievements in Afghanistan.

There is no doubt that the Afghan security forces
should be the ones in the forefront of the efforts to
combat terrorism. However, the complexity of the
threat necessitates a holistic and coordinated regional
approach, as the threat has unfortunately a strong
chance of spilling over into the wider region. We
strongly believe that our Afghan and Pakistani brothers
should further increase their collaboration to curb that
scourge.

Turkey's commitment to Afghanistan is a long-
standing one. Turkey has already made extensive and
concrete contributions to security and economic
development in Afghanistan. At the 12 June Paris
Conference, the Turkish Government allocated another
$100 million for economic development and
reconstruction, to be disbursed in the next three years.
That doubles our total commitment to $200 million.

Assisting the international efforts to build a
secure, stable and prosperous Afghanistan is one of the
high-ranking items on Turkey's foreign policy agenda.
We will certainly continue to support Afghanistan in
every way we can, through international mechanisms
and bilaterally.

