Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
asked to address the Council as the current holder of
the presidency of the European Union, which is very
concerned by the gravity of the situation in the Middle
East. We spare no effort in trying to contribute to
reducing the violence.

Last Monday, the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of
the European Union reiterated their demands very
clearly, as addressed to the parties: for the Palestine
Authority, the dismantling of the Islamic Jihad and
Hamas networks, including the arrest and prosecution
of all of the suspects and a public appeal for an end to
the armed intifada; and for the Israeli Government, the
withdrawal of its military forces, the end of
extrajudicial killings, the lifting of the blockade and all
restrictions imposed upon the Palestinian people and a
freeze of the settlements. The implementation of these
demands calls for committed action on the part of the
Palestine Authority and on the part of Israel.

The heads of States and Governments of the
European Union are at present meeting in Laeken, and
yesterday and today they have been discussing the
issue with which we are concerned. They will issue a
major statement in this regard in a few hours.

The extreme gravity of the situation compels each
of us to face our responsibility squarely. Putting an end
to violence is a must. Peace can be based only on the
reaffirmation and full recognition of the irrevocable
right of Israel to live in peace and security within
internationally recognized borders, and, on the other
hand, on the establishment of a viable, independent and
democratic Palestinian State and an end to the
occupation of Palestinian territories.

To eradicate terrorism and to build peace, Israel
needs a partner, and that partner can only be the
Palestine Authority and its elected President, Yasser
Arafat. Any attempts to weaken or discredit them are
contrary to peace and undermine any attempt to fight
terrorism. The Israeli Government has to put an end to
its military operations against the Palestinian people
and the Palestine Authority, and this also encompasses
the actions against the installations of the Palestine
Authority.

The European Union reiterates its call upon the
Palestine Authority to spare no efforts to prevent acts
of terrorism.

The forthwith implementation of the Tenet plan
for a ceasefire and the recommendations of the
Mitchell Committee remain the way to achieve a
resumption of political dialogue. The European Union
is convinced that the establishment of an impartial
monitoring mechanism would be of service to both
parties, and we are quite prepared to take an active part
in the establishment of such machinery.

The European Union also attaches great
importance to an economic recovery programme for
Palestine. That would be a way of encouraging peace.
The European Union will continue its efforts so that
two States - Palestine and Israel - will be able to
live side by side in peace and security.

