Ms. Macdonal Alvarez (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for me to
address you, Mr. President, and all members of the
Security Council on behalf of the Plurinational State
of Bolivia. We thank His Excellency Mr. Angelino
Alfano, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Italian Republic, for his briefing
on the situation in Europe in his capacity as
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

Bolivia welcomes the programme of the Italian
chairpersonship of the OSCE for 2018 and its intention
to promote an inclusive rapprochement that respects
cultural differences, as well as its desire to pay
particular attention to the fight against all forms of
racism, xenophobia, intolerance and discrimination,
including those based on religious beliefs, and to
strengthen the spirit of Helsinki and multilateralism.

To that end, we believe that it is important that any
conflict within States be resolved first and foremost
internally, with respect for the principle of sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity and with strict
adherence to the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. We understand that in order to do so,
preventive diplomacy, dialogue, consultations, good
offices, mediation and negotiations through subregional
and regional organizations can also be considered.
We believe that it is equally important to respect the
principle of no threat or use of force in the resolution of
conflicts. In that regard, we support Italy's proposal to
encourage the exchange of best practices and ongoing
dialogue among all parties in order to stabilize all
conflict in European States.

We highlight the ongoing role of the OSCE in
bolstering relations among its member States through
dialogue, especially when, despite divergences, it has
been able to promote important consensus in various
situation that have needed it. We commend its work in
the promotion of comprehensive security by addressing
transnational threats while focusing on terrorism
in order to prevent it and counter radicalization and
violent extremism. We agree that in order to succeed,
we must adopt a comprehensive approach that includes
protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms and
addressing the root causes of conflicts. We must also
prioritize education and promote the role of women
and children.

In that regard, we welcome the fact that Italy has
focused on mediation with regard to its economic
potential and that it combats intolerance and
discrimination and promotes pluralism and inclusion
in their stead. We encourage the spirit of Palermo in
facing these challenges, and we hope that its Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, and its Protocol against the Smuggling
of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, will be successfully implemented.

We hope that the channels of communication
between the United Nations and the OSCE through its
Liaison Office in Vienna will maintain and enhance
their collaboration for the sake of international peace
and security, and that they can achieve the goals they
have set for themselves in the context of the priorities of
that regional organization in a balanced and inclusive
manner - in the interest of international peace
and security.

