Mr. Biern Lian (Norway): The scenes of violence
and bloodshed in the Palestinian areas the last few days
have shocked and terrified us all, and it is clear that the
Middle East peace process is faced with one of its gravest
crises since 1993. The violence which has followed the
Israeli decision to reopen the old tunnel under the Temple
Mount in Jerusalem must also be seen against a background
of deep frustration and impatience among the Palestinians
at the lack of substantial and visible progress in the peace
process in recent months.

The Norwegian Government deeply regrets the tragic
loss of lives in the recent violence. It is now of the utmost
importance that a further escalation of the conflict be
avoided, and that both parties show great restraint and
avoid actions that could create further obstacles for a
continuation of the peace process.

The Norwegian Government urges both parties
immediately to come together at the highest level to
discuss how an escalation of the present crisis can be
avoided and how substantial discussions on the peace
process can be achieved without further delay. We, on our
side, have been in direct contact with the two parties to
convey this message, and we are prepared to assist the
parties in any way they consider appropriate. We are
encouraged by the fact that the two parties are in direct
contact with each other.

It remains of the utmost importance to start
substantial talks on the final-status issues and to reach
agreement on Israeli redeployment from Hebron, as stated
in the Interim Agreement. Norway is already present in
Hebron with close to 40 observers, and we urge the two
parties to take the necessary decisions for Israeli
redeployment to take place, so that other international
observers can be invited by the parties to join the
Norwegian advance party in Hebron.

The Israeli Government now has a special
responsibility to act to redress and reverse the situation
and to ensure that substantial progress can be made in the
implementation of existing agreements. We also urge the
Israeli Government to bring to an end the border closures
which could further aggravate the economic crisis in the
Palestinian areas. In view of the current crisis, the
Norwegian Government has decided to make an
extraordinary contribution of $2 million for budget
support to the Palestinian Ministry of Finance. That
amount is already being transferred, and as Chairman of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, Norway is also actively
coordinating fund-raising efforts to improve the
disbursement of development assistance to the Palestinian
Authority.

