Mr. Shiweva (Namibia): My delegation is
pleased to see you, Mr. President, at the helm of the
Security Council during this month. I join others in
congratulating you on your presidency and commend
you for inviting Member States to deliberate the very
important issue of the relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular the
African Union, in the maintenance of international
peace and security. This debate will offer us an
opportunity to exchange views and devise ways to best
enhance regional organizations and their capability to
address issues related to peace and security within their
respective regions, particularly in Africa.

My delegation would like to commend you,
Mr. President, for the concept paper with which you
have provided us in preparation for this debate. We
share many of the sentiments expressed in the concept
paper. In our View, it is a good basis for our
deliberations today.

The United Nations plays an important role in
legitimizing international action, including action taken
by and through regional organizations. The Secretary-
General's High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and
Change underscored that the ability of the Security
Council to become more proactive in preventing and
responding to threats will be strengthened by making
full and more productive use of Chapter VIII
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. During
the September 2005 World Summit, regional
organizations were identified as one of the contributors
to the overall efforts in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Namibia recognizes that there has been a surge in
demand for peacekeeping operations, particularly in
Africa. As we speak, there are over six peacekeeping
missions in Africa and this number is likely to increase
as new missions are likely to be launched.

With this understanding in mind, it makes sense
to deliberate on how the relationship between the
African Union and the United Nations could be
strengthened in order to enhance Africa's capability to
resolve these conflicts.
My delegation is fully aware that the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security lies with the Security Council.
Regional organizations like the African Union can play
a complementary role in support of the United Nations.
The United Nations can derive maximum benefit from
cooperating with regional organizations if the
capacities of such organizations are strengthened. At
the same time, their operational linkages should be
streamlined and formalized. These linkages could be
further augmented by developing common doctrine,
standards and procedures for the joint planning and
management of peacekeeping operations. Furthermore,
the establishment of a framework for making practical
cooperation operational through effective coordination
mechanisms and measures that would replace the
current ad hoc arrangements is essential.

To this end, my delegation welcomes the recent
signing of the United Nations-African Union Joint
Declaration, entitled "Enhancing United Nations-
African Union Cooperation: Framework for the Ten-
Year Capacity-Building Programme for the African
Union". In the same vein, we appreciate that a
multidisciplinary African Union peacekeeping support
team has been established within the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to serve as a coordination
point for all issues related to cooperation with the
African Union.

While capacity-building for the African Union is
undoubtedly crucial in ensuring effective conduct and
management of peacekeeping operations, it is
important that the provision of logistical and financial
resources to facilitate a rapid deployment capability is
seriously taken into consideration. That could be done
by establishing a mechanism that would make it
possible for African Union-led operations with the
consent of the United Nations to be funded by the
United Nations in a predictable manner. These
operations, despite their legitimacy, cannot simply be
left to the mercy of voluntary contributions by
development partners and donors. While these partners
and donors have done a tremendous job in financing
such operations, it is our conviction that the United
Nations should take over that responsibility which, to
our mind, falls within its purview.

The African Union and the subregional
organizations in Africa have often undertaken
peacekeeping operations with the consent of the United
Nations but without any assurance from the United

Nations that such missions would be transformed into
United Nations peacekeeping missions within a given
time frame. That tends to put a lot of pressure on such
organizations by forcing them to continue to run such
missions with limited logistical and financial
resources.

In order to alleviate this problem, it is critically
important for the United Nations and the African Union
to enter into an agreement that would clearly stipulate
that any peacekeeping operations led by the African
Union or other subregional organization, with the
consent of the United Nations, would be transformed
into a United Nations mission within a defined time
frame, preferably six months.

In conclusion, it is important to point out that,
given the multiplicity of stakeholders involved in
supporting African capacity-building, there is a need to
ensure that the African Union takes the lead in
effective coordination of such support to avoid
duplication.

