Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands) (spoke in French): First and foremost, allow me to thank the
briefers for their excellent statements, which give a
clear picture of the cooperation of the United Nations,
the African Union and the European Union with the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). Given the
current situation, such cooperation is critical.

Today I would like to address three points.
First, I will highlight concerns about the changing
security environment. Secondly, I will mention the
operationalization of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
Thirdly, I will focus on the link between security and
development in the Sahel.

First, with regard to the security situation, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands is concerned about reports
of increased cooperation among terrorist networks in
the Sahel. As a result, new regions are under threat,
particularly the north and east of Burkina Faso - and
even beyond the Sahel. In addition, the increase in
intercommunal violence has complicated the situation.
That is evident in central Mali, as the Council has
been informed several times this year. The evolving
threats calls for evolving responses. The emergence of
violent local conflicts requires deeper knowledge of
local dynamics, while the regional challenges require a
regional approach and regional cooperation. Therefore,
it is critical that the Council discuss today its support
for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.

That brings me to my second point i the
operationalization of the J ointForce. The results obtained
in recent months by the members of the G-5 Sahel are
admirable, especially since they had to overcome serious
problems, such as the attack on their headquarters in
Sevare. We commend the leadership of the Nigerian
presidency in that regard. The time has come to
intensify efforts towards the standing up of the Joint
Force. In particular, we advocate the operationalization
of its police component and its cooperation with
national anti-criminal networks. We welcome recent
progress in the implementation of the human rights
compliance framework. The prevention of human rights
violations requires constant attention and commitment,
and the members of the G-5 Sahel must fully take on
that responsibility. Bilateral and regional partners are
considering increasing their support for the Joint Force.
We reaffirm that it is not only resources that are needed.
Force-absorption capacity and the coordination of
support and requests are also factors to be considered.
It therefore remains critical to strengthen the capacity
of national armed forces.

On my third point, the link between security and
development, this week we held a discussion with
Mr. Sidikou, the Ambassadors of the G-5 countries
and interested Council members on preventing violent
extremism in the Sahel. I am pleased to see the
Ambassadors ofthe G-5 countries here today. It became
very clear during that meeting that all partners in the
Sahel are pursuing the same objective, namely, regional
peace and stability. The security efforts of the Joint
Force, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and other actors, including
European Union missions, will be insufficient. We
must invest more in conflict prevention. To prevent
violent extremism, we must attack the root causes of
the conflict, including climate change, which leads
to water scarcity and desertification and, as a result,
food insecurity and competition between farmers
and herders.

Persistent inequalities and discrimination against
particular regions or communities are also sources of
conflict. In addition, we must keep in mind the enabling
factors and triggers identified by the United Nations
Development Programme in its report entitled Journey
to Extremism in Africa, on the disproportionate use of
State violence.

Therefore, the success ofinitiatives in the Sahel will
depend on key elements, such as boosting the confidence
of local populations and ensuring accountability,
respect for human rights, close cooperation between the
Joint Force and strong national judicial systems, and the
complementarity of development and security efforts.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance
of the role of the G-5 Joint Force in making the Sahel
a more stable and secure region. That is precisely the
model of regional ownership that is needed for the
maintenance of international security and peace. The
G-S donors conference for development initiatives
scheduled for 16 December will be an important
milestone. In particular, investment is needed in fragile
border areas.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains a
committed partner of the countries of the Sahel in the
areas of security, diplomacy and development. As our
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Stef Blok, said during
his recent visit to the Niger, we intend to increase our
diplomatic presence and support for the region. As
international partners, we must adopt a firm and modest
attitude that respects the leadership and ownership of
the G-5 Sahel countries.

