Mr. Gebeyehu (Ethiopia): Let me congratulate
Mr. Anto'nio Guterres on his assumption ofhis duties as
the new Secretary-General. I would also like to express
appreciation to his predecessor, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for
his tireless efforts in leading the Organization over the
past decade. Mr. Ban will always be remembered for
his important contribution, inter alia, in facilitating
the adoption of the transformative 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the signing of the Paris
Climate Agreement. Both are indeed critical for
conflict prevention and sustaining peace, which are
objectives that our new Secretary-General has made
major priorities.

Madame President, we wish to congratulate you on
the major initiative you have taken and endorse your
proposal on the role of the Secretary-General.

The timing of today's high-level open debate cannot
be more appropriate in the light of the unprecedented
challenges facing the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security. The credibility of
the Organization, and particularly the Security Council,
is undoubtedly on the line because it has not risen to the
occasion to effectively and decisively respond to those
challenges. It is at this critical juncture that Secretary-
General Guterres is taking office, and his leadership
role will be absolutely imperative in bringing new
impetus to the search for solutions to the many conflict
and crisis situations around the world today.

The fact that he was appointed not only through a
process more transparent than those of the past but also
with the unanimous support of the Security Council and
the General Assembly, must make it possible for him
to proceed in carrying out his heavy responsibilities
with confidence. We are hopeful that, with his wisdom
and rich experience in leadership, both in his own
country and at the United Nations for much of the past
decade, he will be able to effectively guide the work of
the Organization.

However, we know full well that he can only
deliver the vision that he has laid out if he has the full
support and cooperation of all Member States. This
is all the more extremely critical at a time when the
United Nations is indeed needed more than at any time
in the past. It has never been clearer that the United
Nations, as the only universal organization we have,
has the indispensable role of addressing the many
global challenges of our time, including in the area of
peace and security.

That is why I would like to take this opportunity to
pledge Ethiopia's unwavering support and cooperation
to the Secretary-General in the effective discharge of
his heavy responsibilities. Ethiopia has indeed been
playing active role in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts in Africa. In this regard, we are
ready to work with the Secretary-General as he embarks
on his agenda for peace with a view to addressing some
ofthe difficult conflict and crisis situations bedevilling
our continent.

In View of the enormous peace and security
challenges we are facing today, conflict prevention
must be given high priority. The concept of sustaining
peace is also perfectly aligned with this important
priority, having brought a paradigm shift in the manner
in which we deal with peace and security issues. The
three major reviews on peace and security together
with the concurrent resolutions 2282 (2016) and 70/262,
adopted last year by the Council and the General
Assembly, respectively, have indeed placed prevention
and sustaining peace at the core of the United Nations
activities in the area of peace and security.

It is encouraging to note that Mr. Antenio Guterres
has made what he has called "diplomacy for peace" his
top priority, and we believe this is perfectly in line with
the conflict-prevention and sustaining peace agenda.
His firm and independent leadership on that matter,
based on the principles and purposes of the Charter
of the United Nations, will certainly go a long way
towards restoring the standing and credibility of
the Organization.

In that regard, the Secretary-General's active
engagement in preventive diplomacy, mediation and
peaceful resolution of disputes through the judicious
exercise ofhis good offices will be critical to addressing
some of the most difficult conflict situations.
Undoubtedly, his efforts need to be supported by putting
to use all available tools, including early warning
instruments and the application of rigorous analyses to
emerging crisis situations, which will help him draw the
attention of the Security Council, in line with Articles
33 and 99 of the Charter of the United Nations.

No matter what the Secretary-General may try to
do, his efforts will be in vain without the full backing of
the Security Council. That is why the need to enhance
the working relations between the Security Council and
the Secretary-General cannot be overemphasized. It is
self-evident that there is room for a lot of improvement
and we need to continue to be innovative if we are to
achieve the desired objective.

Addressing institutional fragmentation and ensure
coherence across the entire United Nations system
is also absolutely essential to ensuring that conflict
prevention and sustaining peace are placed at the
heart of the Organization's work and activities. In that
regard, we are encouraged by the Secretary-General's
strong commitment to pushing for the implementation
of the key recommendations of the three major
reviews on peace and security with a View to creating
a comprehensive, modern and effective operational
peace architecture.

The United Nations cannot address the myriad
international peace and security challenges alone, which
underlines the need to enhance strategic partnerships
with regional and subregional organizations across
the whole spectrum of conflict cycles, including
prevention, peacekeeping and special political missions,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. In that regard,
we appreciate the strong commitment expressed by
the Secretary-General to the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union. We sincerely
hope that he will contribute to its further enhancement,
building on the important momentum generated by
his predecessor. In that context, we also look forward
to his forthcoming visit to Addis Ababa towards the
end of this month to attend the twenty-eighth African
Union Summit.

Finally, we have no illusion that the coming period
will be smooth sailing for the Secretary-General. There
are no easy solutions to the complex peace and security
challenges of our time. However, we believe that he not
only has the right vision and strong leadership qualities,
but also the wisdom and experience to navigate this
difficult period and deliver results. Those qualities
have been exhibited today as well. I wish to conclude
my remarks by wishing him every success.

