Mr. Suan (Myanmar): We are deeply concerned by
the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22,
on the situation in Myanmar.

We thank those delegations that tried hard to
balance the text and reflect the reality. However, it
fails to give sufficient recognition to the Government
of Myanmar for its efforts to address the challenges
in Rakhine state. It also singles out a Member State
based on accusations and false evidence. We strongly
reject the use of self-designated nomenclature in the
statement, which will not help to resolve the issue. The
statement will not help our efforts to resolve the issue,
but rather lead to further polarization and escalation of
tensions among different religious communities in the
country and beyond. It exerts undue political pressure
on Myanmar.

Some elements of the statement infringe on the work
of the other organs of the United Nations. The same
issue is under consideration in the Third Committee of
the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council.
At this time, many delegations, including those in the
Security Council, are pointing to the need to avoid
duplication of work and to make stringent use of the
budget of the United Nations. Such duplication of work
is unwarranted.

I take this opportunity to apprise the Security
Council of the recent developments in Rakhine state. As
members are aware, the 25 August terrorist attacks and
ensuing terrorist actions committed by the so-called
Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army (ARSA) triggered
one of the most tragic situations in Rakhine state.
Innocent civilians from different communities had to
flee their homes and Villages out of fear. Thousands of
ethnic Rakhine, Hindu and small minority groups, such
as the Daing-net, Mro, Thet and Mramagyi, sought safe
places in southern Rakhine, whereas the majority of the
Muslim community took refuge on the Bangladesh side
for various reasons. We feel deeply for the suffering of
all the people who have been caught up in the conflict.

Recognizing the unfolding humanitarian tragedy,
the Government of Myanmar, in a spirit of good-
neighbourliness, has reached out to Bangladesh. There
has been exchange of visits at the ministerial level, most
recently in October. On 24 October, two memorandums
of understanding were also signed on the establishment
of border liaison offices and on security cooperation
and dialogue. We have been working closely with
Bangladesh on the voluntary, safe and dignified return
of displaced persons. We are currently working on the
arrangement for repatriation. Once we finalize the
arrangement, a joint working group will be set up and
the repatriation process will start immediately.

I would like to highlight some of the measures
taken by Myanmar towards solving the issues we face
in Rakhine state.

A ministerial-level committee has been set up and
started its work for the expeditious implementation of
the recommendations the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, led by Mr. Kofi Annan.

With regard to the current humanitarian situation
in Rakhine state, the Union Enterprise Mechanism
for Humanitarian Assistance, Resettlement and
Development in Rakhine has been launched and
begun its work. State Counsellor Daw Augn San Suu
Kyi visited the areas in northern Rakhine state on
2 November.

We are also working with the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations Coordinating Centre for
Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster Management
and the Red Cross Movement to provide humanitarian
assistance to people in need, in accordance with
humanitarian principles. Moreover, the World
Food Programme and the United Nations Food and
Agriculture Organization are already working on the
ground. We continue to maintain our cooperation with
the United Nations. We are engaging with high-ranking
officials from the Secretariat and United Nations funds,
programmes and agencies. The Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
recently visited Myanmar.

We are disappointed by the presidential statement's
failure to mention the attacks of 25 August as a terrorist
act. Everyone in the Chamber agrees with me that we
cannot condone terrorism in any form or manifestation.
I hope that the statement will not help to spread
terrorism in the world.

Allow me to draw the Council's attention to a
news article under the headline "Foreign Militants In
Rakhine". The article says:

"Scores of foreign militants - mostly Pakistanis
and Bangladeshis - are fighting besides rebels
of the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army (ARSA)
since radical groups across the Islamic world called
for 'a jihad against Burmese colonialism' in the
Arakans (Rakhine).

"Indian intelligence officials say they have
intercepted communication between some of the
Pakistani militants fighting for ARSA when they
called their principals and relatives in Pakistan.

"On the basis of the intercepts, the number of
Pakistani militants fighting in Rakhine has been
estimated around 30 to 40, but if such recruitment
is a continuous process, these numbers may go up."

Alhough we reject some elements contained in
the presidential statement, we are determined to find
a sustainable solution for the issue of Rakhine state.
We will continue to work with all stakeholders who are
interested in being part of the solution in our quest to
find a sustainable answer to the protracted and tragic
issue of Rakhine state. We are determined to work
with the international community, including the United
Nations and interested parties, towards sustainable
peace and development for all in Rakhine state.

