Mr. Caillaux (spoke in French): I should like to
thank the Government of the Philippines for having
invited CARE International to address the Security
Council today and for having organized this debate on
the role of civil society in post-conflict peace-building
following the numerous and sad conflicts that
characterize the present day. Such an initiative attests
to the strength of our Governments' commitment -
and that of the communitarian organizations based in
the Philippines, whose activities are well known - to
this topic.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to pay tribute to the trailblazers
in civil society and peace-building - the women's
groups and child rights advocates - to whom we may
credit a number of the Council's historic resolutions
mandating their protection and participation in
peacekeeping efforts. I congratulate the Council on that
body of law, and I urge members to ensure compliance
on the ground.

Two days ago, I returned from a mission to
Sudan, where I had visited villages exhausted by
decades of war but newly invigorated by the peace
talks that are resuming today in Kenya under the
formidable mediation of General Lazaro Sumbeiywo.
One truth struck me as I visited community after
community: for peace-building to be successful, we
must all pause and imagine the daily struggles and
aspirations of ordinary citizens seeking a life free from
conflict and violence. Most of these individuals cannot
read or afford a transistor radio, yet there is so much
they need to learn about the peace process. For these
post-conflict civilians, there will first be a need for
basic security, landmine clearance and the predictable
capacity to grow enough food, collect enough clean
water, have access to basic health services and care for
and educate their children. At the very same time, there
will be a need to restore trust with their neighbours and
participate in the creation of economic opportunities to
absorb all the returning unemployed. And finally, there
must be a systematic analysis of the conflict, mapping
the constellation of causes, protagonists and victims in
its terrible course.

When we speak about civil society, we include all
groups of civilians not affiliated with the State, with
the Government or with any armed faction. These
include councils of elders, women's groups, farmers'
associations and religious communities. Even amid the
ruins of failed States, these local organizations have a
profound stake in achieving the secure and rights-based
society necessary to rebuild and govern their country.
With the rise of internal armed conflicts and complex
emergencies, we increasingly work with societies
buffeted between armed conflicts and natural
calamities, resulting in geographical patchworks of
technical peace but actual insecurity.

The Council should be heartened by the
remarkable progress in peace-building that civil society
organizations have made in countries such as Sierra
Leone, Cote d'Ivoire, Burundi and Afghanistan, where
we work with myriad partners, including Governments,
international non-governmental organizations, local
civil society groups and, of course, United Nations
agencies. Our approach is to design programmes that
integrate basic activities with opportunities to engage
people from opposing groups and build experience in
preventing conflict through contact and
communication.

In C6te d'Ivoire, following the waves of killing
and retribution, we convened a meeting of the factions,
including rival Christian and Muslim groups, giving
them the responsibility to plan and manage the
reconstruction. By engaging in that economic
development process, those groups had many
opportunities for face-to-face conversations that helped
to cool the tensions from last year's violence.

In Sierra Leone - where peace is well under
way- we adapted an agricultural programme to
ensure food security for isolated communities, which
integrated conflict resolution, human rights education
and training in management skills.

Even in countries with long-running ethnic
conflicts, communities with varying levels of stability
can engage in positive peace-building activities. In Sri
Lanka, for example, hundreds of households headed by
women gathered for the first time to assert to local
authorities their rights and needs. Concurrently, village
committees in one region launched, in a one-day event,
the largest distribution of birth certificates that they
had ever achieved, reinforcing principles such as
freedom of movement and the right of access to
education and basic services.

The experience of civil society organizations in
countries ranging from Cambodia to Bosnia and on to
Afghanistan has shown that providing education -
however informal - in emergencies stabilizes the
community and protects children from the risk of being
exploited or recruited into armed forces. In
Afghanistan, under the Taliban and since, international
non-governmental organizations, UNICEF, local
organizations and village leaders promoted these goals
by quietly educating thousands of girls and boys in
village and home-based schools.

The Security Council and Member States face a
new call to action based on a central lesson of
peacekeeping and conflict-resolution efforts of the past
decade. Tragically, many peace efforts falter from the
outbreak of local conflicts. To prevent that from
undermining national peace agreements, peacekeeping
mandates must reach beyond their traditional focus, on
the national level, to the heart of local communities.

As the Secretary-General has highlighted in his
recent report on the protection of civilians
(S/2004/431), local communities are under fire,
literally, more than ever before, and the humanitarian
workers seeking to help them have been attacked in
greater numbers in places like the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Afghanistan, the Middle East and Darfur.

Rising to these challenges, what specific steps
can the Council take to empower civil society groups
that are committed to genuine peace-building?

First, the Security Council should demonstrate its
leadership in the form of a strong presidential
statement, expressing its commitment to engage civil
society representatives, including women and children,
in all phases of peace processes. That statement could
make the following recommendations: first,
incorporate references to the protection and the
participation of civil society into Council resolutions
and reports of the Secretary-General on specific
countries. Secondly, create "Arria-Plus" formulas for
civil society consultations, in accordance with the
Cardoso Panel's findings. They would offer greater
discussion and more regularity in scheduling.

A third recommendation could be to establish a
civil society forum for each peace process that would
formalize existing ad hoc consultative practices with
civil society sectors during peace processes. This
standing forum would provide expertise useful to
United Nations personnel and others supporting
negotiations, planning and implementation. Fourthly,
institute the Arria formula in the field, in accordance
with the Cardoso Panel's findings, to enable Security
Council missions to consult more systematically with
civil society experts in the field.

A fifth recommendation could be to institute a
community observer programme for expert-level
officers of Security Council member States, placing
them with an operational non-governmental
organization for one week in a country that they follow.
That would strengthen Security Council decisions by
providing first-hand exposure to the political and
cultural context and the real life struggle of civilians
rebuilding their lives. And sixthly, request the
Secretary-General to submit an action plan to the
Security Council, drafted with civil society
participation, containing detailed guidelines for
conducting comprehensive analysis of the origins, the
dynamics and the actors related to each conflict.

