Mr. Mekdad (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): We share
your strong condemnation of the acts of terror in
Turkey that have killed a number of innocent Turkish
civilians, in addition to the British Consul-General in
Istanbul. Allow me to express our grief and
condolences to Turkey, our neighbour, and its people,
as well as to the Government and people of the United
Kingdom.

I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting on the Great Lakes region. We also thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his
comprehensive and substantial statement this morning.
We are pleased to welcome Mr. Francisco Madeira,
Minister of the Presidency for Parliamentary and
Diplomatic Affairs of Mozambique, whose country is
the current President of the African Union. We are also
delighted to welcome Mr. Abdulkader Shareef, Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the United Republic of
Tanzania, which has been so generous in offering to
host the preparatory meeting of the conference in 2004.
We also welcome Italy as the current president of the
European Union. We also believe that the presence of
the Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for the Great Lakes Region, Mr.
Keli Walubita, confirms the concern that the African
Union has for the success of this important conference.
We welcome Mr. Ibrahima Fall, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, and we thank him for the efforts he has
made towards an excellent preparation of the
conference.

Syria supports all international, regional and
subregional efforts being made towards peace and
security in the Great Lakes region and in the African
continent in general. We also highly appreciate the
efforts being made by the neighbouring countries of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi
towards that objective. These efforts will be crowned
with the convening of an international conference on
the Great Lakes region.

My delegation has taken note of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2003/1099) and has understood
the special details regarding the convening of the
conference. We are cognizant of the difficulties that
must be surmounted in order for the conference to
succeed, at the national and the regional levels.

Syria encourages, all States concerned,
particularly those in the Great Lakes region, to
participate actively in all stages of the preparation of
the conference towards its success and the achievement
of its desired goals. We also add our voice in appealing
to donor countries to provide all possible material and
logistical help required for the convening of the
conference. We cannot fail to thank the African Union
and South Africa for their efforts and effective
participation, in addition to many other States that have
taken a constructive role: Angola, Mozambique,
Zambia, Zimbabwe, Gabon, the Congo, Namibia and
others. Syria stresses the importance of the
international community providing every possible
support to the process as a whole and to peace efforts
in the region. Those efforts have begun to crystallize,
as stated by the Secretary-General, whether in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi or
Rwanda.

We support the recommendation of the Secretary-
General to the core countries participating in the
conference to concentrate on the conference's priorities
and to set up specific policies, programmes, projects
and activities in the various sub-themes to be discussed
at the conference. This would lead the conference to
achieve peace, security, economic development and
regional integration. We believe that this would in turn
lead to an improvement of the humanitarian and social
situation of the peoples of the region and would allow
the peoples of the region to finally reap the fruits of
peace.

We believe that the presidential declaration
before us reflects our position and the desire of the
Council to see success for this international conference
on peace and security in the Great Lakes region. It also
reflects the need for successful preparation for the
conference. We are confident that the Security Council
will adopt this draft presidential statement at the end of
this debate, as a contribution by the Council to
collective international efforts towards peace, security
and development in the Great Lakes region of Africa.

