I express my delegation's appreciation for the convening of this meeting on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, which is even timelier in this global context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. This is one of the key issues that justify the existence of the Security Council and the United Nations: the protection of civilians and of their lives, their rights and their dignity. I would like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Peter Maurer, and the Nobel Peace Laureate and member of The Elders, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, for their presentations this morning. The year 2020 is the first year of the decade of action towards a world of peace in 2030. It is also the first year of the third decade since this topic was included on the Security Council's agenda in 1999. Only last year, we celebrated the seventieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions, and yet we have achieved little as an international community in these past 12 months, despite a robust normative framework. The Secretary-General's report (S/2020/366), which I appreciate, describes an extremely fragile and tragic situation, as well as huge gaps and challenges, including that of COVID-19. In the current context of the global health crisis, all Members of the Organization and all its entities, including in particular the Security Council, must rise to this existential challenge. To that end, it is essential to ensure the implementation of a global ceasefire. In that connection, the Security Council must adopt a resolution that brings this body into line with international efforts to combat the pandemic. That is key to facilitating access and corridors for the delivery of humanitarian assistance. We regret and condemn that women, children and internally displaced persons and refugees continue to be among the populations most affected. I also highlight in particular resolution 2475 (2019), which recognizes the disproportionate impact of armed conflict on persons with disabilities. In the context of this issue, it is imperative that the Council consider the disproportionate impact of violence and conflict on women, and promote and ensure the participation of women in conflict-prevention and peacebuilding processes, including in efforts for the protection of civilians. In just two months, it will be the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005) and the origins of today's Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, chaired by Canada. My delegation wishes to express its interest in joining that Group to support its work in this area. Ecuador rejects and condemns the continuing attacks against health-care infrastructure, including the destruction of hospitals, as well as the use of schools for military purposes and attacks against schools. At the First Committee of the General Assembly in October 2019, Ecuador supported the statement delivered by the representative of Ireland on behalf of a group of countries on explosives in populated areas (see A/C.1/74/PV.15), and we take this opportunity to reiterate our condemnation of the use of such weapons as well as our commitment to continue supporting the efforts of the United Nations, the International Committee of the Red Cross and civil society to promote the effective implementation of international humanitarian law and alleviate the impact and suffering caused by conflict . Among immediate steps to effectively strengthen the protection of the civilians, Ecuador has been supporting the development of an international political declaration on this issue that aims not only to strengthen but to guarantee the protection of civilians. We therefore support, as priorities, political and practical commitments intended to prevent and stop the use of explosives in populated areas. I also highlight here the commitment undertaken by Latin America and the Caribbean through the Santiago communique of December 2018 to protect civilians from the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. As a land of peace, Ecuador champions peaceful coexistence and the peaceful resolution of disputes, and rejects the use of weapons with indiscriminate effects prohibited by international humanitarian law. We are in favour of universal disarmament. We therefore also reject the use of lethal autonomous weapons. Autonomous weapons, in addition to lowering the threshold for triggering new conflicts, are incompatible with full compliance with international humanitarian law, which requires absolute human control. Responsibility and accountability are key. That is why in January Ecuador joined the Franco-Mexican initiative proposing suspending the use of the veto in cases of mass atrocities. In addition, in November 2018 we signed the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group's code of conduct regarding Security Council action against genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. We urge all the countries to join these efforts. I must not fail to mention the humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons. For any international framework for the protection of civilians to be comprehensive and adequate, it must encompass the total prohibition of nuclear weapons. The mere existence of these weapons threatens the existence of humankind. Not even the most sophisticated mechanism in the most developed country could contain or mitigate the devastating impact of nuclear weapons on the population; therefore, their existence undermines the protection of civilians. Finally, I reiterate the full support of the Government of Ecuador for the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire as the most effective way to protect civilians and as a first step towards lasting peace.
