Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, allow me to commend you, Mr. President, for your
concept note (S/2016/416, annex) and for your initiative
to convene this open debate focused on countering
the narratives and ideologies of terrorist groups. I
also express my gratitude for the briefings by Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson, Mr. Mohi El-Din Afifi
and Mr. Steven Crown.

Every act of terrorism is criminal and unjustifiable,

regardless of the motivation behind it, where and when
it takes place or who commits it. Terrorism is a difficult
phenomenon to define given its multifaceted character
and the myriad reasons behind it, which could be of a
political, ideological, philosophical, religious, ethnic,
racial or any other nature. My delegation believes
that linking or conflating terrorism with any religion,
nationality or civilization should be rejected. Religious
extremism is not unique to Islam, and neither is - or
ever has been -the violent extremism that leads to
terrorism. Regrettably, the terrorist groups that are
at the focus of our attention today - such as Da'esh,
Al-Qaida, Boko Haram and associated groups -justify
their actions on the basis of a distorted interpretation of
the precepts of the Islamic religion.

Several strategies have been mentioned for breaking
the cycle of radicalization that aim to destroy the
message or the messenger. We understand that some are
complementary of one another. While destroying the
messenger leads us to a short-term solution, destroying
the message will lead to the long-term solution that
combating this scourge requires today. An effective
strategy for combating violent extremism and terrorism
should not be limited to punitive measures alone, but
adopt a preventive approach that makes it possible to
identify and put an early stop to nascent radicalization
efforts.

Carrying on this fight requires taking into account
the underlying causes that contribute to the emergence
of extremist groups and terrorist groups and developing
encompassing strategies to address the various
problems. At the same time, we must appropriately use
international cooperation while helping those in most
need. As members of the international community,
there are various avenues we can take to address many
of the root causes that serve as breeding grounds for
the emergence of violent extremists with terrorist
inclinations.

It is urgent that we halt the spread of the extremist
ideology that serves as a precursor of terrorist groups.
Above and beyond the essential primary responsibility
of each State in exercising its sovereign powers, we have
a collective responsibility to act effectively and with
robustness. We owe it to the victims of terrorist attacks
and their families - victims from the international
community whom we mourn irrespective of religion or
nationality. We therefore commend the recent holding
of the Geneva Conference on Preventing Violent
Extremism and welcome the Secretary-General's Plan
of Action on the subject.

In that context and against the backdrop of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
without duplication of effort, we think it is important
to create a space to address the issue of narratives,

which Egypt very aptly placed at the heart of today's
debate. Although we agree on the need to step up global
efforts against terrorism, the proliferation of initiatives
by various actors do not seem conducive to promising
outcomes. Instead, it could serve to confuse, fragment
and weaken the global effort and take us away from
the common goal. It is therefore key to coordinate
the different ongoing initiatives, such as the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the Secretary-General's
Action Plan and the efforts being made in the Alliance
of Civilizations. Religious leaders will play an essential
role in correcting the false statements of those promoting
violent extremism. All religions include a message
about going beyond being an individual and doing what
is right. We need to suppress calls encouraging people
to achieve supremacy over others through Violence.

In combating terrorism we walk a fine line
between eliminating this scourge and protecting and
bolstering our fundamental freedoms and our values
of tolerance and solidarity. We must be very careful
not to violate human rights. No effort in the context of
combating terrorism must lead to limiting the freedom
of expression, the freedom of religion and the freedom
of the press or stigmatizing political opponents. Every
well knows how terrorists effectively use information
platforms and social networks to disseminate their
hateful messages. But in one way or another, we should
take more responsibility for the platforms and networks
that terrorists' use for their own advancement,
because if they are used properly, they are ideal for
good communication.

Access to the political sphere must not be cut
off. Pushing out and eliminating radicals only
creates a breeding ground for extremist ideologies.
It fuels resentment, which often mixes with other
basic ingredients, namely, poverty, inequality,
unemployment, a lack of opportunities and censorship,
all of which fuel radical discourse. It is preferable to
allow radicals to act in the political sphere, so as to
be able to openly confront their discourses and ideas.
That is the best way to reveal their weaknesses and
inconsistencies. When we prohibit their involvement,
we see a resurgence of extremist violence and terrorism.
There have been recent examples of that.

We need to study and understand the ideologies of
extremist Violence and the rhetoric that extremists use.
We must develop counternarratives that can dampen
the allure of those ideologies. Terrorist groups, such as
Da'esh, Al-Qaida and Boko Haram, use religion as a
pretext to justify the unjustifiable through a narrative
that twists the intrinsic value of faith. We cannot
remain idle in the face of their messages of hate and
destruction. Those ideologues of hatred, many of
whom are intellectually well trained but come from
places where progress has been lacking, end up only
ostracizing people and impoverishing the societies that
they dominate and claim to be defending.

We must establish a genuine global communication
strategy that is efficient and able to counter the
ideologies used by the violent extremist leaders. We
have to develop messages that offer better life-options
and that are not discriminatory with regard to the
religion that they practice. The progress of the world
and human beings is not determined only by religion.
We must assign it the place and importance that it
deserves as an intimate and personal belief, but it must
not be turned into a barrier for social development.

We must encourage the teaching of tolerance
in educational curricula and promote messages that
foster tolerance and respect for differences, harmony
and peaceful coexistence among nations, cultures and
religions. For that reason, we welcome the participation
of everybody in today's timely open debate.

