Mr. Pascoe: Last September, the Security
Council met under the leadership of the President of
the Republic of Burkina Faso for a high-level debate
on mediation (see S/PV.5979). During that debate, the
Security Council identified many of the key issues and
challenges facing the international community in
resolving disputes peacefully. In its presidential
statement (S/PRST/2008/36), the Council invited the
Secretary-General to provide a report on

"mediation and its support activities, which takes
into account experiences of the United Nations
and other key actors, and makes recommendations
for enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations
mediation".

The report before members responds to that and
benefited from a broad consultation process. In
addition to internal consultations, the report drew on
the experiences and views of Security Council
members, individual Member States, all those acting as
mediators, regional and subregional organizations, and
non-governmental organizations. It attempts to
synthesize many years of United Nations experience in
mediating conflict both between and within States.

The report provides an opportunity to take stock
of efforts under way in the Secretariat, under the lead
of the Department of Political Affairs (DPA), to bolster
and professionalize the mediation capabilities of the
United Nations. The Secretary-General has called for a
more proactive use of preventive diplomacy by the
United Nations, and our ability to support and carry out
mediation is central to that vision. The release of the
report also coincides with critically important efforts
by Member States and the Secretariat to examine the
present and the future of United Nations peacekeeping.

These issues are, of course, closely related. A
United Nations that is more effective in the practice of
mediation will be more adept both at heading off
conflicts before they become full-blown crises and at
bringing such crises to a peaceful and lasting end
before it is necessary to resort to peacekeeping.
Effective mediation can help us to arrive at sound
agreements that can be successfully implemented, and
09-30825
then assist the facilitation and dialogue needed
throughout the later phases of the effort.

Mediation must continue as a central part of the
process of peacekeeping and peacebuilding. For
example, the head of the United Nations peacebuilding
mission in Sierra Leone, Michael von der Schulenburg,
has been busy in recent weeks encouraging dialogue to
defuse the most recent political tensions there. We
might also witness the efforts of Special Representative
Doss in the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and former
President Obasanjo to bring peace to the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Strengthening
mediation capacity is also an important objective to
keep in mind, therefore, as we strive collectively at the
United Nations to do a better job in the area of
peacebuilding.

I would like to turn to some of our key initiatives
and recent efforts in the mediation field. These are part
of a conscious effort to reshape the Department of
Political Affairs into a more action- and field-oriented
operation that can move more quickly and at an earlier
stage to help prevent conflicts from spreading and to
deliver faster and more reliable support to peace
processes. As directed by the Secretary-General, we are
working to put in place the expertise, financial
resources, partnerships and knowledge base to attain
those objectives. We deeply appreciate the support we
have received from members of the Council and other
Member States for those efforts.

The political support and financial resources that
Member States have provided through the regular
budget and voluntary contributions have enabled us to
strengthen our regional divisions and to establish the
Mediation Support Unit (MSU). The Unit has been
further complemented with a standby team of
mediation experts able to deploy to negotiations around
the world on short notice and to provide advice and
assistance to mediators on such themes as peace
process design, security arrangements, power-sharing,
wealth-sharing, natural resources management and
constitution-making.

In the past year, DPA has provided mediation
support to more than 20 peace processes, with the
MSU exerting a multiplier effect on those efforts. We
have striven to take a flexible and innovative approach
to peacemaking. We have made our technical advisory
services available to United Nations envoys and
09-30825

representatives, of course, but also to Member States,
regional organizations and others that may be leading a
mediation effort. We also try to provide high-quality
technical support in a timely manner. Experts can now
be dispatched to a mediation scene in days, not weeks.
Those innovations are already making a difference in
our ability to provide real support to peace processes.
Let me provide some concrete examples.

In Somalia, Special Representative Ould
Abdallah has spearheaded a mediation effort that many
observers see as the most promising effort in years
aimed at bringing about political reconciliation in that
country. We provided close support to those efforts in
working with the parties to develop the 26 October
2008 Djibouti Agreement.

If I might digress for a moment, I would like to
mention to Council members and to others in the
audience that, on Thursday, 23 April, we are holding a
donors conference in Brussels to follow through on
resolution 1863 (2009) on support for Somalia. As
Council members know, the conference aims to raise
funds for the Somali security forces and for the African
Union Mission in Somalia. I hope members will urge
their Governments to attend at a high level and to
provide generous support.

In the Central African Republic, our political
mission on the ground played a key role in carrying out
an all-inclusive national political dialogue. DPA's
training to the preparatory committee contributed to the
success of that dialogue.

In Cyprus, we deployed facilitators to the
technical working groups during the preparatory phase
of the talks and continue to work closely with
Alexander Downer, Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General, including technical support on power-sharing
and property issues.

In Nepal, we continue to support Karin Landgren,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, with
mediation and facilitation assistance in the
implementation phases of the peace agreement.

In Iraq, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General De Mistura is leading an increasingly visible
role in fostering political reconciliation, supported
from New York by a variety of expertise on issues
relating to the disputed internal boundaries, Kirkuk,
water-sharing and the constitution.
3

We also have supported missions led by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in Darfur,
Kosovo and the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
work either to reach peace agreements or to move
through the incredibly difficult task of implementing
peace accords. It is important to note that United
Nations political mediation efforts are being carried out
not only in classic peacemaking situations, such as in
Cyprus or the Western Sahara, but also through the
day-to-day work of the political missions in the field.
These missions spend much of their time trying to
broker dialogues and to use preventive diplomacy to
put out the fires that arise.

Our services have also been put at the disposal of
regional organizations that are in the lead of political
processes. In Kenya, for example, where former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan led the effort, our team
assisted him in preparing the mediation effort and on
elections, security and constitutional issues. Since
September 2008, in the Comoros we have been
supporting African Union efforts on an inter-Comorian
dialogue.

We have also found that a regional presence can
be an effective way to mediate disputes. Through the
United Nations Office for West Africa, we have been
able to work with the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union on
such issues as Mauritania and Guinea, without the
deployment of a stand-alone mission. Most recently,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Djinnit has undertaken a preventive mission to Togo to
consult with authorities there on recent developments
in the country. That is part of our ongoing work with
ECOWAS and regional leaders to prevent conflicts in
the region.

Our Central Asian office in Ashgabat is leading
an effort to help the five countries resolve tensions
over water issues, among other issues of regional
concern. A key role is being played by a specialist on
natural resource management from the MSU standby
team. The effectiveness of these regional efforts has
encouraged our suggestion to establish a regional
presence in the Central African region, as requested by
members of the African Group.

It is important that our ability to move quickly to
mediate disputes has been improved by the
establishment of a small mediation start-up budget,

funded by donors. DPA's modest travel budget cannot
sustain the emergency dispatch of crisis prevention
teams. We were able to deploy and sustain a small team
in Madagascar to mediate the current crisis in the
country; send envoys such as Assistant Secretary-
General Menkerios to support regional efforts on
Zimbabwe; or get former President Obasanjo's mission
to the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo up
and running in the midst of the fighting with those
extrabudgetary funds. Advance planning and ready
resources are key to effective early mediation when
trouble develops.

The kinds of mediation activities I have described
today are now routinely expected by our envoys and
representatives. Our Department has traditionally
worked hard to meet these demands. However, the
creation of the Mediation Support Unit and its standby
team of mediation experts has given a tremendous
boost to those efforts by providing readily available,
in-house mediation expertise. Presently, most of our
funding comes from the generosity of donors, which
continues to be of critical importance.

Our challenges in the mediation of conflicts are
shared by the entire international community and it is
the responsibility of all of us to act in concert to solve
them. To do this, it is essential that we have
partnerships with Member States, regional
organizations and non-governmental organizations.

Regional organizations are often best placed to
take the lead in mediation efforts, and some have a
wealth of mediation expertise in their own right. Where
requested, we have assisted in their mediation efforts
and in strengthening the mediation capacity of regional
organizations. In Africa, we have benefited from the
cooperation of the African Union, ECOWAS and the
Southern African Development Community (SADC) in
mediation efforts in Darfur, Zimbabwe, Kenya,
Madagascar, Guinea, Burundi and other areas.

I would like in particular to recognize the
outstanding efforts in extraordinarily difficult
circumstances of Djibril Bassole, Joint African Union/
United Nations Chief Mediator for Darfur, We also
continue working closely with SADC, the African
Union and the Economic Community of Central
African States to build mediation capacity.
As one sign of our strong partnership with the
African Union, a couple of days ago we concluded a
joint assessment of our cooperation in two cases:
Darfur and Kenya. That was a very productive meeting
and we are planning to follow up on our work together
on Somalia.

In Europe, we have made significant strides in
enhancing our mediation partnership with the European
Union (EU), including the Commission. We welcome
the recent discussions in the EU on developing its own
mediation capacity. We look forward to working with
all relevant regional actors, sharing expertise and
lessons learned, developing joint training
opportunities, and working together on the
establishment of a geographically diverse roster of
mediation experts.

We certainly recognize that many areas require
improvement. Mediation requires skill and knowledge,
but it can be a complex operation with its own
logistics, staffing and technical requirements. If envoys
are to succeed, they need more than just their
individual talents and experience. We are making a
systematic effort to support them in the planning and
management of peace processes.

Working with other parts of the United Nations
system, Member States, regional organizations and
non-governmental organizations, we are putting a
system in place that will include five levels of support
for envoys: mediation planning, which would include
assessment of requirements and mobilizing to meet
them; the development of a small pool of operational-
level on-call mediators to manage the day-to-day
functions of a mediation effort; the standby team of
mediation experts, which will continue for the next
year; the development of a small but reliable roster of
internal and external experts; and establishing a small
team of geographically diverse experienced senior
envoys to provide mediation advice.

We will also combine this specialized response
capability with a rigorous training curriculum for our
regional specialists. All political officers should have
basic training on aspects of mediation. United Nations
mediation capacities, its lessons learned and tools are
not proprietary information; they are available to all
who need them. Working together, we should promote
an understanding among Member States that United
Nations mediation, including good offices, facilitation
and dialogue, is a service offered by the Secretary-
General at all phases of a conflict. All Member States
should be comfortable requesting and utilizing this
service when required. We need to combine our
capacity-building with confidence-building, that is,
confidence that United Nations mediation is an
impartial and effective tool for conflict resolution.
Reticence to involve outside actors has at times
translated into lost opportunities by Member States to
make use of what the United Nations has to offer. We
are here to help, but only if we allowed to do so.

The report makes it clear that the United Nations
does not have a monopoly on mediation. This also
applies to the accumulation of knowledge and best
practices on mediation. We have provided leadership in
developing a Web-based repository of information on
mediation, called the United Nations Peacemaker, but
we will need to work closely with our partners to
consolidate and disseminate this knowledge. This
online support tool for international peacemaking
professionals has over 800 documents, with more than
300 peace agreements, and 15 operational guidance
notes, with another 22 in development. United Nations
Peacemaker was developed on a limited budget and
will now need to be more properly maintained and
upgraded.

To be successful in our collective mediation
effort, we need to be constantly learning new lessons
and applying them. For this reason, we have put in
place a debriefing programme for senior envoys, which
allows us to capture the experiences that they have had.
We are also working on a peace agreement evaluation
project, which will look at factors in peace processes
and agreements that contribute to the sustainability of
peace. We are considering other innovative
programmes to take stock of lessons learned from
successful mediations and mediators. Again, I want to
note that these initiatives would not have been possible
without the support of Member State donors, and we
deeply appreciate their generosity.

In conclusion, I want to say that we have very
clearly heard the call of the Security Council and the
instruction of the Secretary-General to develop a more
rigorous and effective approach to mediation.
Mediation is a Charter activity of the United Nations
and must be carried out with the highest degree of
professionalism, transparency and preparation to
promote peace and security. We are deeply grateful for
the Council's support to date and hope to continue to
earn it in the future.
