Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The transformation processes that have
agitated the Middle East and North Africa reflect the
understandable aspirations of the peoples of those
countries, which deserve our support, for a better life,
increased opportunities for self-expression, participation
in political life and greater economic and social benefits.
Those processes are still far from over, and it is difficult
to make clear predictions about their prospects, since
sometimes they are accompanied by painful
civilizational, ethnic, religious, economic and political
rifts that create problems in terms of regional security.

The goal for the international community is to
help ensure that those transformations do more good
than harm to the Arab world. The priority is to ensure
that the changes are peaceful and democratic and that
fundamental freedoms, human rights and the rights of
ethnic and religious minorities, including, of course,
the rights of Christians, are respected. We follow with
empathy the process of democratic State-building in
Egypt, Tunisia and Morocco; the efforts of the
Government of Yemen to stabilize the situation in
combating terrorism; and the efforts of the transitional
Government of Libya to restore normal life to the
country, prepare for elections and disarm insurgent
groups. We are providing valued humanitarian
assistance and stand ready to help in economic
recovery. For all members of the Council, the
international dimension of the continued Arab Spring is
of primary interest.

We believe that we can already draw some
conclusions. First of all, whatever goals might be set in
any given situation, they cannot be achieved by
misleading the international community or
manipulating Security Council decisions. Otherwise,
the credibility of the Council is diminished and trust
among its members eroded, which undermines the
ability of the Council to take decisions in the future.

Secondly, those organizations or countries that
take it upon themselves to implement Security Council
mandates must give a full account of their actions to
the Council. That also applies to NATO, which, as all
members know, offered to secure a no-fly zone in
Libya, but in reality engaged in massive bombings. It is
sad that there has as yet been no investigation
following up information about civilian casualties
caused by those bombings. We believe that the
Secretary-General should bring clarity to the matter by
invoking the 2008 Joint Declaration on United
Nations/NATO Secretariat Cooperation.

Thirdly, interference from the outside using brute
military force increases the threat of the illicit spread
of arms, thus jeopardizing the stability of the region.
We will need to take serious decisions regarding the
situation in Syria. It remains a cause for grave concern
to Russia and the entire international community.
Making hasty demands for regime change, imposing
unilateral sanctions designed to trigger economic
difficulties and social tensions in the country, inducing
the opposition to continue its confrontation with
authorities instead of promoting dialogue, and calling

for support of armed confrontation and even for foreign
military intervention are all risky recipes for
geopolitical engineering that can only result in the
spread of conflict.

There is no doubt whatsoever that the Syrian
authorities bear a huge share of responsibility for the
current situation. But one should not ignore the fact
that for a long time now they have been fighting not
unarmed men, but combat units, including the so-called
Free Syrian Army and extremist groups, including
Al-Qaida, which have recently committed a series of
murderous terrorist acts. If our absolute priority and
sincere wish is to immediately put an end to the
violence and provide humanitarian assistance to the
civilian population, then at this stage we should not be
talking about who started the conflict, but rather
discuss realistic and feasible approaches that would
allow us to achieve a ceasefire as a priority.

From the outset our approach has been clear and
consistent, aimed at finding an early solution to the
Syrian crisis without violence, through Syrian-led
inclusive political dialogue and the implementation of
long-due reforms. The following five principles of
settlement that Russia and the League of Arab States
agreed upon on 10 March are based on that same spirit:
first, the end of violence on the part of all sides;
secondly, an impartial monitoring mechanism; thirdly,
no outside interference; fourthly, unimpeded access for
humanitarian assistance to all Syrians; and, fifthly,
strong support for Kofi Annan's mission aimed at
launching political dialogue between the Government
and all opposition groups, as mandated by the terms of
reference endorsed by the Secretary-General and the
Arab League. On that basis, we are prepared to agree to
a Security Council resolution, as we were ready to do
last autumn when our draft resolution was put forth.
Sadly, it was not supported by all Security Council
members.

The Arab Spring should in no way be used as a
pretext to diminish attention to the Palestinian issue.
We are convinced that the potential for conflict in the
Middle East and North Africa will remain high until a
comprehensive settlement is achieved in the Middle
East within the existing international legal framework.
This is a truly historic obligation for the international
community and the Security Council.
Unfortunately, the trends we have been
witnessing lately delay rather than hasten this prospect,

both in political terms - when the settlement
parameters that have been repeatedly endorsed by the
Security Council, the Quartet and the parties
themselves are called into question - and in practical
terms too, when the settlement activity of Israel in the
West Bank is literally shrinking the area available for
the necessary agreements.

A particular concern is the violation of the
ceasefire following the resurgence in strikes between
Israel and the Gaza Strip, in which civilians are
suffering on both sides. Under those circumstances, the
international community must step up its efforts. That
applies above all to the Quartet, which, as we discussed
with our colleagues before the start of today's meeting,
should start working in a focused manner and on a
regular basis to create an environment conducive to
continuing direct Israeli-Palestinian contacts aimed at
full-fledged negotiations. We all welcome the initiative
of Jordan, which held a series of very useful meetings
between the Israelis and the Palestinians in Amman
this January, and we want that initiative to be
continued.

Russia also confirms our proposal for closer
cooperation between the Quartet and the relevant
structures of the League of Arab States. We are
confident that the Arab Peace Initiative remains
relevant and that its comprehensive implementation
will ensure the creation of a Palestinian State,
guarantee the security of Israel and establish peace and
stability throughout the Middle East. Russia is
prepared to engage in close cooperation with all
responsible members of the international community in
order to attain those goals.

