Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
Government deplores that diplomatic efforts aimed at
achieving and implementing Security Council
resolutions on the disarmament of Iraq were
prematurely and arbitrarily aborted, and that a
sovereign member of this Organization has become
subject to an outright invasion. We believe that there
was no justification for departing from the diplomatic
path; neither is there anything that could possibly
justify the invasion of Iraq.

The unilateral war against Iraq does not meet any
standard of international legitimacy. It is not waged in
self-defence against any prior armed attack. Nor, even
by any stretch of imagination, could Iraq, after 12 years
of comprehensive sanctions, be considered an
imminent threat against the national security of the
belligerent Powers.

It is also evident that the war was in no way
authorized by the Security Council. Quite to the
contrary, the latest round of diplomacy in the Council
clearly demonstrated that the clear majority of the
members, including the majority of the permanent five,
were either steadfastly against or clearly unwilling to
support the draft resolution that would have authorized
war.

By the same token, the implementation of
Security Council resolutions cannot be advanced as a
justification to resort to war. It is true that 12 years
have elapsed since the Security Council set out the
obligations of the Iraqi Government with respect to
disarmament. And it is equally true that Iraqi officials
had yet to clarify a number of relevant outstanding
issues. But it was for the Council to make that
determination and decide on the proper course of
action. In fact, the Council and the international
community, on whose behalf it operates, implicitly or
explicitly objected to mandating any Power to
selectively enforce Security Council resolutions. Nor
can it be argued that the United States and its allies
drew legitimacy from the fact that they were the
victims of Iraqi weapons of mass destruction. If any
thing, the United States was a major culprit behind
Iraq's acquisition and unhindered use of these weapons
in the 19805.

That is why this war has received almost
universal condemnation. Moreover, the stated goal of
regime change in Iraq runs flagrantly counter to the
norms and principles of international law; and so does
the concept of arbitrary pre-emptive strike, which
openly negates the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations. Democracy is not something that can
be taken to societies by tanks and helicopter gunships.
The Iraqi people may resent their Government but, as
they have shown in the past several days, they do not
accept their liberation through foreign occupation. The
world, the people in our region and the Iraqis have not
forgotten that those who now want to impose
democracy on Iraq at gunpoint have had a well-known
record of supporting and sustaining dictatorship there
and elsewhere.

The blind support provided to Israel - which has
not only flouted the decisions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly for decades but, in fact, has
a record of repression and murder that is second to
none - is yet another instructive case of the
seriousness of claims calling for the enforcement of
Council resolutions, liberation and democracy.

The grave consequences of this war on regional
and global stability have already been underlined by
various speakers and by my delegation on previous
occasions. In addition, my country, which shares long
borders with Iraq and is dangerously close to the
theatre of hostilities, has not only received refugees but
in fact rockets and missiles from both sides of the
hostilities, some of which have landed in population
centres. I must register here my Government's
strongest protests and underline the imperative of
taking remedial and preventive measures by the
belligerents.

United Nations Member States have frequently
warned that the undermining of international law will
sooner or later come back to haunt the very authors of
such practices. The parading of prisoners of war before
television cameras is in fact in contravention of the
relevant Geneva Convention. Iraq and the United States
have both violated the Convention, and should stop
their violations. This instance clearly shows that all
countries, be they big or small, benefit from the
principles of international law. Undoubtedly, the
provisions of international law should be promoted and
enforced in their entirety. Selectivity is not only
unacceptable, but is in fact dangerously impractical.

My Government is concerned over the extensive
aerial bombardment and artillery shelling that is
resulting in the death and suffering of Iraqi civilians
and in the deteriorating situation in Iraqi population
centres. All indications suggest that a humanitarian
crisis looms ahead. The humanitarian situation in
Basra, which is indicative of what may soon happen
throughout Iraq, is an especially grave cause for
concern. My Government has made preparations to
assist Iraqi civilians, in cooperation with multilateral
institutions. However, under the Fourth Geneva
Convention, it is clear that the countries that have
resorted to war have to shoulder the full burden of
meeting the humanitarian and protection requirements
of Iraqi civilians, and must be accountable for the
welfare and the safety of the people.

At the same time, it is imperative that the future
well-being and the immediate humanitarian
requirements of the Iraqi people not be decided
unilaterally outside the framework of the United
Nations. We concur with the Secretary-General that the
guiding principles in the work of the Council and the
Organization on this issue should be respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, national unity and
political independence of Iraq, as well as the
inalienable right of the Iraqi people to self-
determination and to sovereignty over their natural
resources.

While we need to tackle the unfolding
humanitarian crisis in Iraq, it is not acceptable that the
Security Council, which has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
should fail to consider the conflict itself, which is the
cause of the humanitarian and political catastrophe that
is unfolding in our neighbourhood. Thus, the Council
has an obligation to address forthwith the breach of
peace that is unfolding in Iraq. The international
community expects this Council to live up to its
obligations and call for an immediate ceasefire and the
withdrawal of foreign troops from Iraq.

