Mr. Kolby (Norway): I thank you, Mr. President, for
this timely initiative.

Norway remains firmly committed to peace and
development in Africa, and we welcome this opportunity to
discuss suggestions and ideas for improving the
effectiveness of the United Nations in its partnership with
the African continent. We believe that it is important, first,
to build a comprehensive approach to conflicts in Africa
and, secondly, to develop effective cooperation with African
institutions. By a comprehensive approach, we are thinking
of the capacity of the United Nations to prevent conflicts,
to apply a set of measures attuned to the various stages of
a conflict, and to support post-conflict measures.

On the question of the prevention of conflict, we all
agree that there is a need now to move from a culture of
reaction to a culture of prevention, as the Secretary-General
has put it. We must strengthen the capacity of the United
Nations to conduct preventive diplomacy. In that
connection, my Government would appeal to other donor
countries to support the Trust Fund for Preventive Action.

Effective programmes for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants are of crucial
importance in establishing comprehensive peace operations.
It is a fact that the presence of a large number of small
arms and light weapons can be a major destabilizing factor,
can undermine the security of war-affected populations,
and can threaten the safety of international peacekeepers
and humanitarian personnel. The international community
should provide the necessary resources for such
programmes to address such challenges effectively.

Poverty, underdevelopment and violent conflict are
closely linked. A significant challenge for the United
Nations as a whole is to ensure that the measures decided
upon by the Security Council work in tandem with other
efforts, such as those of United Nations funds,
programmes and specialized agencies, as well as those of
the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the
regional banks.

The Organization of African Unity (OAU),
representing all African countries, has a particularly
important role to play in promoting peace and stability in
Africa. Close collaboration among the OAU, the United
Nations and national Governments is needed to resolve
conflicts on the African continent. While we believe that
the United Nations is the organization best suited to lead
and coordinate complex multi-functional peace operations,
it will often need to draw on regional and subregional
organizations when military forces are called for. It is
therefore important to strengthen regional capacity for
participation in peace operations. Norway is contributing
to that end.

Furthermore, the United Nations should work closely
with regional organizations in order to establish common
principles for training personnel and units intended for
participation in peace operations. In our view, it is
important also to establish common organizational
structures for interaction between the United Nations and
the regional organizations in question, and to improve
effective multi-functional planning and coordination. In
order to realize those important aims, those Member
countries with greater financial resources and extensive
experience in peace operations should provide funding
and personnel to establish a self-sustaining peacekeeping
capacity within the regional security organizations.

In conclusion, let me mention that today a number
of suggestions have been put forward on how to improve
the effectiveness of the United Nations in its partnership
with Africa. My delegation would like to emphasize,
however, that, in order for such ideas to be implemented,
sufficient resources are needed. We therefore call on the
international community to increase its support to the
United Nations and to African regional and subregional

 

organizations in order to strengthen their capacity to meet
the security and development concerns of Africa.

