Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me start by
condemning the horrific attack on peacekeepers
and host-country troops in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo yesterday and by offering my sincere
condolences to Tanzania and to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is truly shocking that peacekeepers are
targeted in that way. Our thoughts are with the families
and the friends of the victims and with the injured, to
whom we wish a speedy recovery.

We are here today to discuss the humanitarian and
security crises in Mali and the Sahel region, which
continue to be of deep concern to us and have been
discussed by the Security Council many times in the
past. Conflict continues to blight the lives of citizens
in Mali and the Sahel, and terrorist organizations,
including those benefiting from transnational organized
cirme, persist in their threats to peace and security in
the region.

In June, in resolution 2359 (2017), we welcomed
the deployment of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) throughout the territories of
its contributing countries. We applaud the rapid and
effective progress that has been made to make that
Force a reality, which members saw for themselves
on the ground earlier this year, while recognizing the
important role that international support can play in
strengthening the Force to its full capacity.

In Mali, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
is doing dangerous and important work and faces
pressing challenges. But where conflict and terrorism
seek to divide us, it is right that we all work together
and support each other where we can. That is why we
voted in favour of resolution 2391 (2017). It sets out a
clear framework for the support of the international
community to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, through
MINUSMA, and a clear mechanism for international
donations to support that important work. We welcome
the pledges already made by international donors, as
well as the role of the European Union in ensuring the
effective distribution of that support. We are looking
at where we can best lend our support as a matter
of priority.

We urge the G-5 Sahel States to seize the
opportunity presented by those offers of support
in order to get the Joint Force up to full capacity as
quickly as possible. We also strongly encourage those
States to take advantage of the technical expertise
available to them, which would positively contribute
to their work on implementing a robust human rights
compliance framework.

We commend the Secretariat, under the leadership
of Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed, for its
efforts to bring coherence and an overarching strategy
to the overlapping work of the various development
agencies on the ground. Any progress in security will
be sustained only if backed by the delivery of services
to populations.

Finally, we call on all our Malian friends and
partners to redouble their efforts to implement the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which
is an imperative step in the pursuit of lasting peace and
security in the Sahel.

