Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First,
I would like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of New Zealand. We are also grateful for the briefing
by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Personal Representative of
the Secretary-General.

The status quo must be overturned. Reactivating
the negotiations is an unavoidable challenge, and the
Council has a responsibility to contribute. It is urgent
that we reopen the doors to dialogue, and we believe
that the Council can create the conditions for that by
promoting effective negotiations that can help the
parties to arrive at a peaceful solution. That effort will
require a collective commitment that can create bonds
of trust and eliminate cycles of violence.

We are concerned about the actions and decisions
of certain actors that could suggest a retreat and hinder
the resumption of negotiations. We note with concern
the policy of expanding settlements, since a peace
process is not viable while that policy of occupying
territory continues. It is also imperative to end the
economic blockade of the Gaza Strip.

The two-State solution is the only alternative that
offers guarantees to both parties. A negotiating process
is not sustainable if it does not recognize Palestine's
desire to exercise its right to self-determination or
provide Israel with the safeguards it needs to ensure
its existence. In accordance with our commitment to
inclusive and democratic dialogue, we will support
initiatives that can pave the way for a peace process
based on defined parameters and within a specified
time frame.

With regard to Lebanon, we acknowledge the
efforts the Lebanese authorities have made to host
Syrian refugees, fight terrorism and strengthen State
institutions. We hope the country's political leaders
will end the current situation of the vacant presidency.

With regard to Syria, we condemn the persistent
flouting of international humanitarian law and the
violations and abuses of human rights committed by all
parties to the conflict, and we reiterate the importance
of accountability. Chile supports the Secretary-
General's calls for ensuring humanitarian access,
which will enable assistance to reach, in particular,
people in areas that are hard to access. Those efforts
require the cooperation of all parties involved, which is
vital if conditions are to be created that will allow the
Syrian people to live in dignity and peace. However,
we realize that only a political solution can end the
humanitarian and security crisis in Syria, and we are
therefore eagerly awaiting the report that Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura will present to the Security Council
in the next few days.

