Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to most sincerely thank the French delegation
for having requested the convening of this urgent
meeting in the wake of incidents of slavery in Libya.
I would also like to thank the Italian presidency for
having convened the meeting. Allow me also to thank
today's briefers, Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, and Mr. William
Lacy Swing, Director General of the International
Organization for Migration, for their very detailed and
elucidating briefings.

Let us recall that, a few months ago, the respective
organizations did indeed sound the alarm following the
adoption ofresolution 2331 (2016), in which the Security
Council condemned in the strongest terms all acts of
human trafficking in areas plagued by armed conflict
and defined measures to be taken to address them. Just
last week, we held an open debate on trafficking in
persons in conflict situations (see S/PV.8111) and the
threat it poses to international peace and security. At
that time, the Council reaffirmed its commitment to the
fight against this scourge by adopting resolution 2388
(2017). During the debate, many voices were raised not
only to condemn the disastrous and inhumane situation
of migrants in Libya, victims of trafficking and all
other kinds of abuse and violations, but also to call for
action to put an end to it.
With that and the current crisis in mind, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, while
waiting to provide more structural responses, decided,
inter alia, on the following actions: to refer the matter
to the African Commission on Human and Peoples'
Rights so as to accelerate investigations and relevant
legal processes, to strengthen efforts with African
Union partners in that regard and to recommend the
repatriation of those who wish to work with African
Union member States. In addition, it should be noted
that the issue will figure on the agenda of the African
Union Summit to be held in January 2018 and of the
European Union-African Union Summit to be held this
week in Abidjan.

In our West African subregion, the Economic
Community of West African States also condemned
those acts and invited the Libyan Government and the
international community to take urgent steps to find and
prosecute those guilty of that crime against humanity.

For its part, the Government of the Republic
of Senegal cares deeply about the plight of Libyan
migrants. It has mobilized itself and, since the
beginning of 2017, has repatriated 2,499 of its nationals
present in Libya. In a recently published statement, the
Government indicated that it

"[v]igorously denounces in the strongest terms
trafficking in persons, which constitutes a grave
offense to the conscience of humankind".

I would like to take this opportunity for my
delegation to welcome the decision of the Libyan
Government of National Accord to open an investigation
into those findings, and invite all Member States to
provide support to that end.

My delegation considers it imperative, both in
Libya and where armed conflict rages, to resolutely
fight against all forms of human trafficking. For, in
addition to constituting a grave violation of human
rights and international humanitarian law, they
exacerbate instability and contribute to the existence
of terrorist groups, armed groups and transnational
organized crime.

In particular, focus mustbe placed on accountability,
the need to investigate the acts committed and identify
and persecute the perpetrators. When national judicial
systems are unable to do so because of instability
resulting from conflict, we believe that international
justice should be able to independently stand in as a
substitute. Hence frank, comprehensive and robust
international and regional cooperation must be part
of a framework of a concerted and comprehensive
approach, especially with regard to identification,
protection, assistance and the exchange of information.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to stress
again that only when Libya consolidates a strong and
stable statehood with unified institutions can it ensure
effective control over all of its territory. The issue
must therefore be addressed by a political solution to
the Libyan crisis and, more generally, by adopting a
comprehensive and concerted approach to promote
development and regular migration, based on respect
for human rights.

That dimension of the crisis gives deeper meaning
to the Secretary-General's appeal to States here in the
Council for regular and safer migration routes in order
to protect those who flee persecution, which leads me
to insist on our obligation to address the root causes
of conflicts and crises, among which are instability
and poverty. In that spirit, my delegation also supports
the idea of a draft presidential statement to enable the
Council to speak in a singular, strong and clear voice
about the plight of migrants in Libya.

