Mr. Grey-Johnson (Gambia): I congratulate you,
Sir, for convening this important meeting, to allow us
share our ideas with you on what the Security Council,
the Economic and Social Council and the ad hoc
Working Group might do severally and collectively, to
more effectively address the problems of peace,
security and development in Africa. They are the real
challenges that face the continent and the ones on
which we feel the United Nations must concentrate if it
is to be of meaningful service to African countries. We
must also recognize that the problems of peace and
security and the problems of development are in fact
two sides of the very same coin. That is why we are
gratified that the Economic and Social Council and the
Security Council have decided to come together to
address themjointly. We also know that it is mainly for
that reason that it has been decided to set up the United
Nations Office for West Africa under the dynamic
leadership of Ibrahima Fall, whom we wish well as he
takes up his duties in Dakar.

At this very moment, there is jubilation in Sierra
Leone for the smooth conduct of presidential and
parliamentary elections, signalling a full transition
from conflict to peace and democracy. We extend our
congratulations to the Government and people of Sierra
Leone. The Security Council also deserves our
commendation for the role it played in stabilizing the
situation and in getting the warring factions to choose
the political rather than the military route in the pursuit
of their objectives. We also congratulate the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, as well as the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
and its dynamic leadership, for staying focused on the
ground, despite the adverse odds and many challenges
that they faced, and for prosecuting their mandate to a
successful outcome in record time - a not-too-
common occurrence in United Nations peacekeeping.

I should very quickly like to raise a number of
issues that might cut across some of the areas proposed
for consideration at this meeting.

Let me start with the situation in the Mano River
Union. There is a need for the United Nations
perspective on the Mano River question to be
broadened in order to realistically address the problem.
Accordingly, not only should the offices of the two
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General in
Monrovia and in Freetown be rationalized, but also
moves should be made to incorporate the Guinean
dimensions of the problem into present programmes.
Perhaps the time has come for there to be one
Representative office for the Mano River Union. An
expanded mandate for UNAMSIL along those lines
might best meet that need.

On a related matter, I should like to address the
issue of mercenaries in West Africa. A large number of
mercenaries from all over the subregion have been
involved in the conflicts in West Africa. They
participated very actively in Sierra Leone and Guinea
and are now back in Liberia. There is a need for the
United Nations to formally recognize the existence of
this group of actors in the various conflicts, with a
View to designing and implementing appropriate
programmes to address them as an important factor in
our search for a durable peace in the subregion. At
present nothing is being done to demobilize them, as
was the case with the combatants in Sierra Leone. In
fact, we have evidence to show that when the situation
calmed down in Sierra Leone many of the mercenaries
fighting with the RUF moved over into Liberia to join
the various militias in the fighting that picked up
recently in that country. When this conflict does come
to an end, is it not likely that this army of mercenaries
will move over to another country in the subregion to
ply its trade? My Government has been drawing
attention to this problem for a long time now and
would sincerely wish that something be done without
any further delay to address it.

We firmly believe that the United Nations,
perhaps along with ECOWAS, must take up this issue
seriously. It must first begin by finding out who these
people are, how many of them there are, where they
came from, who recruited them and for what purpose.
Then the United Nations should proceed to design
appropriate interventions to have them effectively
demobilized and eventually fully reintegrated into their
various communities. These interventions should
include a more concerted effort to deny them and the
militias they fight for access to the arms that keep them
in business. In this regard, arms manufacturers and
exporters in the West should be held more to account
and be made to be more selective, more judgmental and
more responsive in their arms and ammunition
transactions with African buyers.

The time has come for United Nations
peacekeeping to be more proactive so as to prevent
conflicts before they flare up. At present the United
Nations appears more equipped to react to conflict
situations, much like closing the doors after the horses
have left the stables. The case of Guinea a couple of
years ago amply demonstrates this shortcoming.
Although everyone knew for many months before it
happened that Guinea was poised to fall victim to rebel
attack, there were no perceptible efforts on the part of
the United Nations to prevent that from happening. The
current situation in Madagascar, and the Security
Council's reaction to it, is another good case in point.
At present, there are many countries throughout Africa
that are displaying all the signs of a flare-up. The
United Nations must strengthen its ability to keep a
close watch on those countries and to intervene in
order to reduce, and eventually, diffuse the existing
tensions.

As part of its peacekeeping activities, the United
Nations should seek to encourage and support
initiatives by individual Member States to prevent or
resolve conflicts. It is true that the United Nations
supported the intervention of ECOWAS in Liberia and
Sierra Leone. It should strengthen its partnership with
that intergovernmental organization, as well as with
others, such as the Community of Sahel-Saharan
States, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and so on. It should show solidarity with
them and increase their confidence and capacity to
handle conflict in their respective areas.

Equally, bilateral initiatives taken by certain
States to address conflict situations in their
neighbourhood deserve to be supported in concrete
ways. For example, my country's peace programmes
for Guinea-Bissau and for Cassamance in southern
Senegal could be significantly bolstered, given the
many resource constraints that we face, if systematic
material and financial support of the United Nations
were more forthcoming.

Post-conflict support has been something of an
enigma for the United Nations. It would appear that in
many cases, we seem to be in a hurry to move out, once
there are signs that the conflict may be coming to an
end. The Central African Republic some years ago is a
good case in point. I know that there are those who
would be in a hurry to begin pulling the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) out of Sierra
Leone, now that a smooth transition from conflict to
democracy has been made in that country. That would
be a grave error. Post-conflict Governments must be
assisted with confidence-building measures, as well as
with the requisite deterrents, to ensure that the situation
does not slide back into chaos. Peacekeeping mandates
should, therefore, not cease with the cessation of
hostilities. Rather, they should be sustained well into
peacetime and be adjusted as necessary to fit the
prevailing circumstances and needs for sustainability in
each country.

Finally, post-conflict interventions must include
strong capacity-building programmes. Typically,
countries emerging from conflict are left with
significantly weakened capacities. Institutions are
destroyed and human resources are decimated. Perhaps
the greatest damage done to a country in conflict is the
erosion of its skills base through the brain drain - the
flight of skilled people. Whereas physical
infrastructure can be rebuilt in a relatively short period
of time, replacing lost skills requires a lot of time. The
absence of that vital input very often stalls recovery
and frustrates development. Perhaps the Economic and
Social Council should come up with innovative
measures to replace the large pool of skilled manpower
lost to African countries, not only as a result of
conflict, but also as a consequence of the adverse
economic conditions prevailing in many parts of the
continent. Technical cooperation among developing
countries may be one way to address the need. Another
would be a focused programme of assisted voluntary
return to bring back the many professionals and highly
skilled people who have left the African continent and
now live in the West.

These were the few points I wanted to contribute
to this discussion.

