Mr. Sun (Republic of Korea): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. Minister, for presiding over this
important open debate on East Timor. I would also like
to express my appreciation to Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello for his cogent briefings every few months. My
special welcome goes to Mr. Mari Alkatiri, Chief
Minister of the Second Transitional Government of
East Timor.

It is encouraging to hear that the independence
process has been carried out smoothly during this
critical year for East Timor. The historic elections for
the Constituent Assembly were conducted in a
peaceful, free and fair manner. The new Council of
Ministers, whose head is with us today, is managing
governmental affairs on its own, under the guidance of
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET). We are also satisfied to note that
each time we receive the Secretary-General's report
more progress has been achieved in the fields of
economic and social development.

When it comes to the refugee problem, which in
our view is of the foremost importance among
innumerable issues to be addressed in East Timor, it is
highly encouraging to hear that refugee returns began
to increase considerably after the August elections, and
the largest number of returns per month was realized in
October, as Mr. Vieira de Mello explained this
morning. We are concerned, however, that a large
number of refugees still remain in Indonesia.

Furthermore, the Secretary-General has assessed
in his report that hard-line militias will continue to
pose a potential threat to East Timor even after
independence. This security threat will be one of the
factors determining the size and duration of the future
presence of peacekeeping forces. Therefore, we
encourage all the related efforts between the United
Nations and the Indonesian government, including the
Memorandum of Understanding, which is currently
being negotiated. We hope that this thorny issue will be
thoroughly resolved as soon as possible.

The peacekeeping operation in East Timor was a
truly daunting task for the United Nations when
UNTAET was established just two years ago as a
multifaceted and highly complex mission. We have
come a long way and have achieved a great deal,
making East Timor one of the greatest success stories
in the history of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. To ensure that this success is not fleeting
and that our substantial investment is not squandered,
we have already agreed on the need for a reduced but
substantial international presence in East Timor after
independence.

Under these circumstances, restructuring the
mission in East Timor is a very difficult task that
requires delicacy and a sense of balance. Continuing
increases in the whole peacekeeping budget and
upcoming challenges to be tackled by the United
Nations may be restrictive factors. From the point of
view of management, it will not be easy to accurately
judge the appropriate size of the mission, while
everyone acknowledges the importance of an exit
strategy during and after peacekeeping operations.

In this regard, my delegation appreciates the
complicated and laborious work done by the Secretariat
and UNTAET in consultation with the East Timorese
people and other international actors. We are also
highly appreciative of the close consultations
maintained by the Secretariat with troop-contributing
countries during the past months.

We fully support the proposed size and scope of
the military, police and civilian components during the
transition to the successor mission, in light of the
justifications for each area, as detailed in the report.
We also support the restructured form of the successor
mission during the beginning phase of independence,
as it will be essential to ensure the security and
viability of the newly independent State.

Regarding the future downsizing of the post-
UNTAET mission after independence, we note that the
Secretary-General will continue to assess the situation,
as stated in paragraph 61 of his report. We expect in
that regard that at an appropriate time next year the
Secretary-General will provide us with viable
recommendations on the further downsizing of the
mission, based on developments on the ground.

Now, we are eagerly looking forward to the
establishment of a new State, although its official
declaration will come some months later than initially
expected. To ensure the long-term stability and
sustainability of an independent East Timor, the
continued support of other bilateral and multilateral
actors is required. In that regard, we highly appreciate
the efforts of the Indonesian Government in such areas
as the political, military, humanitarian and human
rights spheres, especially since the inauguration of
President Megawati Soekarnoputri.

Hoping that the international community will
render greater attention and cooperation to the
fledgling State, let me conclude by expressing my
Government's continued commitment to East Timor.
