Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): I thank you, Madam, for
organizing this open debate. I thank the Secretary-
General for his statement and Under-Secretary-General
Holmes and High Commissioner Pillay for their
briefings. We further thank Mr. Holmes for his
dedicated service and wish him the very best in his
future endeavours.

Uganda reiterates the importance it attaches to
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We are
concerned that civilians still account for the vast
majority of casualties during situations of armed
conflict. The briefings we have listened to today
indicate that there have been improvements in some
areas of the protection of civilians agenda. However,
there remains a lot of room for improvement. We
welcome the Security Council's efforts to strengthen
peacekeeping mandates in the area of protection of
civilians, as evidenced in the recently renewed mandate
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan in this regard.

In Somalia, the Al-Shabaab and Hizbul Islam
groups, which are opposed to the peace process, have
continued to carry out indiscriminate attacks on
civilians and humanitarian workers. They use civilians
as human shields in markets and similar environments.
The African Union Mission in Somalia, consistent with
its mandate, has supported the Transitional Federal
Government, offered greater protection to civilians,
and supported the peace process.

It is important to continue efforts towards more
effective engagement with non-State actors and armed
groups with regard to their obligations under
international law. However, it is important for all
concerned to take into account specific conditions on
the ground, including risk assessments.

We are convinced that combating impunity and
ensuring accountability for crimes and violations of
human rights are fundamental prerequisites for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. When
potential perpetrators know that they will be brought to
account for their crimes, this serves as a deterrent.
Uganda as a State party to the Rome Statute is
committed to fighting impunity and ensuring justice for
the victims.

At the recently concluded first Review
Conference of the Parties to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court held in Kampala from
31 May to 11 June, States parties reiterated their
determination to put an end to impunity for
perpetrators of the most heinous crimes of international
concern. It was significant that they emphasized that
justice is a fundamental building block of sustainable
peace. They also declared their commitment to
continuing to strengthen efforts to promote victims'
rights, including their participation in judicial
proceedings and claims for reparations.

It is important for all parties to armed conflict to
emphasize the dignity of civilians by acknowledging
losses that result from lawful combat operations. In
this regard, there is a need to make meaningful amends
to affected individuals and communities, such as
financial assistance and funding for humanitarian aid
programmes. We encourage Member States to embrace
the concept of making amends, not because there is any
legal obligation to do so, but simply in the interest of
mitigating suffering.

Uganda calls for a more comprehensive
international legal framework for the promotion and
strengthening of measures to prevent, mitigate and
eliminate the root causes of internal displacement. The
African Union made significant progress in this regard
by adopting the Convention for the Protection and
Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa at
a summit held on 23 October 2009 in Kampala. The
international community should devote more time and
resources to addressing the needs of refugees, returnees
and internally displaced persons.

There is a need for greater recognition of the
needs of persons with disabilities as a vulnerable group
arising out of the indiscriminate use of landmines and
explosive remnants of war. We call upon all
subregional, regional and civil society organizations
and Member States to support the victims and to
undertake initiatives leading to the clearance of
ordnance and the sensitization of civilian populations.

In conclusion, the primary responsibility of
protection of civilians lies with national authorities, but
regional organizations and, ultimately, the international
community, have an important role to play. We believe
that this debate will draw attention to some of the
issues that require greater focus.

