Mr. Ladsous (France) (interpretation from French):
The large-scale offensive launched on 4 August by the
Government of the Republic of Croatia in Krajina was
condemned by France in unequivocal terms. While Sector
North and Sector South, where this offensive unfolded, are
indeed parts of the territory of the Republic of Croatia, the
Serb population in these regions do have rights, rights
recognized by the international community, which prohibit
any such military operation from being regarded as
legitimate. Recognition of Croatia by the European Union
was, I would remind the Council, made expressly
contingent on recognition by that State of the rights of the
Serb minority.

The resolutions of the Security Council make it
incumbent upon the Croatian authorities to turn to
negotiation to bring about reintegration within the Republic
of the territories in question. By putting an end to
discussions started in Geneva with the Serb party in Croatia
and deliberately choosing the military option to restore their
authority in those sectors, the Zagreb authorities took a
totally unacceptable decision, a decision contrary to their
international obligations.

The European Union took a clear stand along those
lines. The resolution the Council has just adopted also
restates this explicitly and demands full compliance with
all Council resolutions, including resolution 994 (1995).

France stands in full solidarity with that demand.
The Croatian Government must immediately halt any and
all military activity in the Krajina sectors and refrain from
all military action in Eastern Slavonia. But its obligations
do not stop there. It must also come back to the
negotiating table and strive in good faith to reach, with
the Serb party in Croatia, an agreement guaranteeing the
rights of all the communities. Without such a negotiated
settlement, no viable solution could possibly be
considered as established.

The resolution we have just adopted seems to us
timely and fitting for three further reasons.

First, it places very special emphasis on respect for
the rights of civilians. The very large number of people
who have fled Croatian soil and headed towards areas of
Bosnia and Herzegovina or of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia clearly demonstrates the scope of the human
trauma triggered by the Croatian Government's offensive.
The Serb populations must be free to move about and, in
particular, those who have fled must be able to come
back in satisfactory conditions of safety and security to
their region of origin. Monitoring by humanitarian
organizations to ensure respect for these rights seems
essential to us, just as is access by representatives of the
Red Cross to the soldiers of the Serb forces who have
been taken prisoner. The text adopted stresses these
points.

Secondly, the resolution embodies a very forceful
condemnation of the behaviour of Croatian Government
forces towards United Nations forces. During the events
of the end of last week, personnel responsible for peace-
keeping were attacked, and some of them were killed. In
this connection, my Government extends its condolences
to the Governments of the Czech Republic and Denmark.
Certain particularly reprehensible acts, such as forcing the
blue helmets to move forward in advance of the forces
involved in an offensive, were noted. Those responsible
for such violations of the laws of war will have to be
brought to trial. In this connection I must point out that
my delegation is very concerned at the persistent
obstacles placed in the way of the free movement of the
rapid reaction force. A French artillery unit still continues
to be hemmed in by such obstacles. There is absolutely
no justification for this and it is totally unacceptable,

 

because it prevents the effective deployment of the rapid
reaction force - an essential component of the United
Nations presence in the region.

Finally, the resolution we have just adopted very
clearly warns that hostilities should not be pursued in the
direction of Sector East, because this would raise by yet
another notch the escalation and the risk of generalization
of the conflict.

The Croatian Government has chosen not to take into
account the repeated warnings the Security Council has
addressed to it. Our resolution tells it that the international
community and our Council do not absolve it of that
choice.

