Mr. Pleuger (Germany): First of all, I should like
to thank Mr. Kalomoh, Mr. Malloch Brown and
Ms. McAskie for their briefings initiating today's
debate. I present my remarks in anticipation of a more
comprehensive statement to be made later by the
representative of Ireland on behalf of the European
Union. We fully endorse that statement.

Germany welcomes Chile's initiative to hold this
open debate on the role of the United Nations in post-
conflict national reconciliation. The fact that you are
presiding, Madam President, demonstrates the
importance that you attach to this subject.

After the debate held in September 2003 on the
role of the United Nations in promoting justice and the
rule of law, today's debate will again highlight the wish
of the Council - and indeed of the entire United
Nations membership - to ensure that peacekeeping
and peace-building efforts can be sustainable. In the
Council's debate on justice and the rule of law,
Mr. Guehenno clearly expressed what is at stake. He
said:

u

if the international community limits its
response to post-conflict situations to the creation
of traditional criminal justice mechanisms such as

courts, focused on delivering retribution and
meting out punishment, then it will fail to
respond to many of the expectations that victims
and 'victim societies' have concerning
mechanisms of post-conflict justice, in particular
reparation, a full accounting of what happened
and national reconciliation." (S/PV.4835, p. 5)

Patrick Burgess, former Legal Counsel of the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation in
Timor-Leste, described the challenge in even more
evocative terms:

"Punishment of those most responsible is
not the complete picture. Populations in post-
conflict situations are faced with the real and
present danger that the dry grass of past anger
and resentment will burst into flame again and,
fanned by the winds of poverty, frustration and
joblessness, soon become an uncontrollable fire.
Punishment will help to heal past wounds and
provide some consolation to victims, but focus
also needs to be maintained on the damaged
relationships between individuals at a grass-roots
level. Not only punitive justice but also
restorative justice is required to mend these
relationships."

These two quotations, we feel, quite rightly make
the point that justice and reconciliation - or punitive
and restorative justice - ultimately serve the same
purpose: to heal the wounds of a conflict-torn society,
first, by acknowledging and establishing accountability
for the wounds that have been inflicted on victims;
secondly, by creating a just and inclusive social and
political order that offers guarantees for the peaceful
resolution of future conflicts and against the recurrence
of past conflicts and social injustices; and thirdly, by
restoring a sense of common purpose among a hitherto
divided population.

The United Nations has broad experience in
addressing each of these areas, ranging from the
establishment of justice and reconciliation mechanisms
to assistance in building democratic institutions and the
promotion of a common development perspective
based on greater participation and shared benefits.
Specific activities to achieve these goals include
programmes as diverse as the creation of tribunals and
truth and reconciliation commissions, assistance in
organizing and holding free and fair elections,
assistance in drawing up a new, integrative
constitution, joint demilitarization and demining, as
well as the complete range of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes for ex-
combatants of former civil war enemies, and the
mobilization of international financial and technical
assistance for post-conflict economic and social
reconstruction plans.

In declaring its readiness to host a Bonn II
conference on Afghanistan, Germany follows that same
holistic approach to national reconciliation. Indeed, the
purpose of the conference, in line with suggestions by
Special Representative Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, would be
to promote throughout the international community
efforts that lay the foundation for further reconciliation
in a more peaceful and more prosperous Afghanistan.

A real challenge for the United Nations will be
the ability to deliver its expertise and its assistance in a
coherent, coordinated and effective manner. In the
interest of quality and cost-effectiveness, consideration
may be given to the establishment of a Secretariat unit
that has the necessary conceptual and operational
know-how in the area of promoting national
reconciliation in post-conflict situations and that can
coordinate the various actors engaged in that field
throughout the United Nations system. In the Council's
ministerial meeting on justice and the rule of law, held
on 24 September 2003, Germany suggested the
establishment of a rule-of-law task force in the
Secretariat. Given the close relationship between issues
of justice and reconciliation, I suggest that they be
dealt with jointly by such a task force.

A starting point in addressing post-conflict
reconciliation issues must be that no post-conflict
situation is equal to another and that there are no one-
size-fits-all solutions. But, on the other hand, the
opposite is also true: the wheel does not need to be
reinvented on every occasion, and there are certainly a
few standard parameters and model procedures that can
usefully be defined and applied.

Among those standard parameters, let me
mention three that are of particular importance. First,
experiences in Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste have
made it quite clear that the way in which courts and
reconciliation mechanisms interact with and
complement one another should be well-defined. In
that regard, it is important to ensure that both
mechanisms, taken together, cover the whole spectrum
of injustices committed during a conflict, without
leaving an impunity gap. Closing the impunity gap has
been high on the international agenda, and
reconciliation mechanisms, if properly combined with
judicial mechanisms, can play an important role in that
regard.

Secondly, those bearing the greatest responsibility
for war crimes, genocide, crimes against humanity and
other serious violations of human rights and
humanitarian law must not escape punishment.
Secretary-General Kofi Annan was right in reminding
the Council in his statement during the debate on
justice and the rule of law that there are international
standards to be adhered to. The International Criminal
Court was created precisely for the purpose of ensuring
criminal accountability for these crimes should national
jurisdictions fail to do so.

Thirdly, it should be recalled that judicial and
non-judicial mechanisms need local acceptance and
legitimacy. Before such mechanisms are established,
interested segments of a victimized society should be
consulted. Once the mechanisms are operating, they
need to be engaged in ongoing outreach efforts. We
applaud the thorough outreach activities undertaken in
Sierra Leone, and we hope that such activities can
avoid the recurrence of situations in which a defendant
finds an audience for his twisted claim that he is the
victim and the judges are the villains. Against that
backdrop, it is an important challenge for all of us to
ensure that transitional justice mechanisms in Iraq will
meet with broad popular support.

The last point leads me to my final observation.
None of the goals contained in the paramount goal of
reconciliation - neither justice nor reconciliation nor
development - can be achieved without the firm
political will of local decision-makers. Where such
political will is weak or non-existent, it may be one of
the most delicate and challenging tasks for the United
Nations to inspire among local policy-makers and
conflict-torn populations the confidence necessary to
make the policy choices that hold the promise of a just
and more prosperous future. Indeed, the United Nations
has a unique legitimacy to do so.

