Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): The delegation of
Kazakhstan voted in favour of resolution 2401 (2018),
on the cessation of hostilities in Syria. I express
my gratitude to the co-penholders - Sweden and
Kuwait - for their determined efforts to find common
ground among the Security Council members. I also
thank the members of the Council for their constructive
approach towards the resolution, which has many
significant provisions.

The position of Kazakhstan is very consistent - that
stability in the Middle East can be achieved by reducing
violence for peaceful means and avoiding the emergence
of new tensions. In the past few days, Heads of State
and Government from around the world have called on
the Syrian Government to observe human rights and on
both sides to exercise restraint. Simultaneously, external
incitement that fuels tension should stop immediately
so that it does not endanger regional security.

We see a Security Council united today in
demanding that all parties cease hostilities without
delay. We now expect all countries that exercise
influence on the ground and conduct military campaigns
against international terrorist groups in Syria to
interact and find common ground for fighting terrorism
jointly, while taking practical steps to implement the
resolution. Kazakhstan calls on all forces that support
an early settlement of the Syrian conflict, including the
Government of Syria and the armed opposition, to fully
comply with the ceasefire regime and the resolution.

All the parties must ensure safe and unhindered
access for humanitarian assistance to reach the affected
areas, as well as the evacuation of people in need of
medical assistance. The Foreign Minister ofKazakhstan
hopes that his colleagues - the Foreign Ministers of
the guarantor States of the Astana process - will take
additional constructive steps to strictly implement the
ceasefire agreements and support the de-escalation
zones in Syria, at the meeting scheduled to take place
in the capital of Kazakhstan in mid-March or earlier, if
need be.
These were difficult, but successful, deliberations.
We should all work collectively to find a peaceful
solution. The unity shown today in the Security Council
should continue, since we have yet a lot to accomplish
in Syria and elsewhere.

