Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Australia for organizing this first-ever
specific briefing in the Security Council on an issue
to which Argentina attaches particular importance
as the leading regional contributor of political
observers to United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Furthermore, we thank the Police Commissioners from
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan, the United
Nations Mission in Liberia and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic for their briefings to the
Council. We highlight the courage and dedication with
which they carry out their complex tasks in difficult
environments and with scarce resouorces. And we urge
that this type ofmeeting be repeated regularly in future.

The role of United Nations police has gained
increasing importance in recent years, along with
the evolution of multidimensional peacekeeping
operations and the increasing use of special political
missions. In both such missions, the police personnel
of the Organization is currently carrying out essential
functions aimed at rebuilding security institutions,
promoting and protecting human rights and
consolidating democracy and the rule of law in host
States.

My country has supported the evolution of those
tasks, having established, in 1992, the first regional
training centre for officers involved in peacekeeping
missions, the Training Centre for Police Peace
Operations. Our security forces have had a constant
presence in peacekeeping operations since 1991. Today,
Argentina is a member of the Group of Friends of United
Nations Police and the Group of Friends of Security
Sector Reform. We also organized one of four regional
workshops held in the course of the development of the
Strategic Guidance Framework for International Police
Peacekeeping, an inclusive process that included due
consultation with Member States.

Argentina also participated constructively in the
negotiations on resolution 2185 (2014), the Council's
first-ever resolution on the subject. I should like briefly
highlight some specific issues with regard to this
important resolution.

First, we believe that the resolution adequately
describes the significant development and increasing
significance of the role of police components in
peacekeeping missions. It also emphasizes the need for
close coordination with the States concerned and with
the other elements of missions in their various tasks,
especially those related to the promotion and protection
of human rights, strengthening rule-of-law institutions,
the rule of law, the reform of the security and justice
sectors and fighting transnational crime, among others.

The resolution also stresses the important role
of the police component of the United Nations in
protecting civilians, in particular populations under
threat of physical violence, including all forms of
gender-based and sexual violence, in areas where
peacekeeping operations are deployed, all the while
recognizing that the protection of civilians is a primary
responsibility of the host country. In that regard, while
the respective wording addresses the essential on this
issue, we would have preferred that there be more more
emphasis in the operational paragraphs as to the role
that police components could have in protecting against
violations of human rights, in particular against women
and children.

In addition, we welcome the fact that the resolution
reaffirms the role that police components could have
in facilitating the participation and inclusion of women
in conflict resolution and peacebuilding, as well as the
need to increase the number of women police deployed
in peacekeeping missions and the coordination between
police and advisers on the protection of women and
children.

Argentina highlights the provisions of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, as well
as all the subsequent resolutions. We reiterate the need
for the full, equal and effective participation of women
in all stages of peace processes, given their vital role

in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacebuilding.

We agree with the text of the resolution as to
the need for deployed personnel to possess the skills
and abilities necessary to perform their functions, in
particular in the context of peacekeepinng missions
with complex and multidimensional mandates.
Peacekeeping missions increasingly rely on the ability
to deploy high-level specialized personnel, including
in particular specialized police and civilian personnel
such as experts in the rule of law and security-sector
reform. In that regard, we note the important role of
technical cooperation and in strengthening South-
South cooperation.

We agree with the other members of thd Council
about the special importance of this first resolution
on police components in peacekeeping and special
political missions, which we supported and voted in
favour of. There is, however, one aspect in particular
that prevented us from becoming a sponsore. That
aspect is related to the lack of specific mention in the
text of the resolution to the mandate of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34), as
wet out in paragraph 20 of the Commmittee's report
(A/68/19). That mandate has been standardized by
virtue of it having been repeated over the years without
being questioned by its members. In accordance with
that traditional and widely recognized mandate, it is
understood that the C-34 is the only forum of the United
Nations that has been entrusted with carrying out a
comprehensive review of the issue of peacekeeping
operations in all its aspects, including measures to
improve the capacity of the Organization to carry
out such operations. That implies that the Secretary-
General, in the development and implementation of
standards, guidelines and procedures for improving
peacekeeping activities of the maintenance of peace,
including the police components, must take full account
of that mandate. Therefore, Argentian, which is part
of the C-34 Bureau, does not understand or share the
reluctance on the part of some members of the Council
to include an explicit reference to the Committee's
mandate in such a broad and comprehensive resolution
as the one we adopted today.

Above and beyond those comments, I would like, in
conclusion, to welcome the resolution. We members of
the Council worked hard on it over the past few days in
the hope that the consensus text would help us to make
further progress on this important issue.

