Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): The report of
the Secretary-General (S/2007/759) is before the
Council and is self-explanatory. My briefing today will
therefore focus on the major challenges and
impediments which we continue to face in our ongoing
effort to deploy the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), including in
particular the grave deterioration of the security
situation which has taken place since we last briefed
the Council on 13 December last year. I will
supplement the presentation on UNAMID with a brief
update on the activities of Special Envoys Jan Eliasson
and Salim Salim.

I am pleased to report that since the last briefing,
transfer of authority from the African Union Mission in
Sudan (AMIS) to UNAMID took place on
31 December 2007 in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1769 (2007). The event was marked
by a small ceremony in El Fasher, which was attended
by the leadership and personnel of UNAMID, the
leadership of UNMIS and a Government delegation led
by the Governor of North Darfur.

During the ceremony, the African Union and
United Nations flags were raised side by side, and a
symbolic number of personnel exchanged their green
AMIS berets for the blue beret of UNAMID. Those
symbolic acts underscored the partnership linking the
08-20356
African Union and the United Nations in Darfur and
signalled the new level of responsibility which the
United Nations and the Security Council now bear for
the success of the peacekeeping effort in that troubled
place.

In this spirit, I have to report to the Council that a
number of the outstanding issues which have been
undermining our efforts to deploy UNAMID have not
yet been resolved. Many of these are directly dependent
on the outcome of discussions with the Government,
including final confirmation of the composition of the
force, the finalization of the status-of-forces agreement
(SOFA), the provision of land for the mission,
clearance to function 24 hours per day, and also an
unequivocal agreement on the accoutrements for
military and police personnel of UNAMID.

During the briefing on 13 December, following
the meeting with the Sudanese officials that took place
in Lisbon on the margins of the European Union-Africa
Summit, we reported to the Council that the
Government of the Sudan had agreed to hold follow-up
meetings with UNAMID leadership in Khartoum in
order to resolve all outstanding issues. While a number
of such meetings have taken place, they have not yet
yielded the required results.

As the Council is aware, for more than three
months now we have been engaged in discussions with
the Government on the composition of the UNAMID
military component. While the Government has
expressed its objections to the deployment of units
from Thailand and Nepal, as well as a combined
Nordic engineering unit, no formal or written position
on those troop contributors has been forthcoming.
However, I can now report to the Council that the
Government has verbally rejected the Nordic unit. The
loss of this engineering capability will have serious
consequences for the speed of our deployment and also
for the ability of UNAMID to carry out the small-scale
infrastructure rehabilitation, for instance improving air
strips, which would have facilitated deployment and
would also have been of direct benefit to all those who
live in Darfur. We are now assessing how best to fill
this very regrettable gap.

(spoke in English)

Let me take this opportunity to thank the Nordic
countries, which have worked very hard and have spent
money to prepare this contribution. We are keen to
explore opportunities to deploy this engineering unit in
08-20356
another peace operation, where it could make a very
useful and important contribution.

With regard to the status of forces agreement, the
Government had agreed that they would be ready to
begin consultations on 13 December. However, to date
no interlocutor has been made available to take forward
those discussions. It is important that this critical legal
arrangement be finalized as soon as possible, and that
the result be a credible text, which will enable the
mission to fulfil its challenging function. Our latest
report from Khartoum is that negotiations will begin on
Saturday. It will be important to move quickly in order
to make for the lost time. To help accelerate this work,
we will be strengthening our SOFA negotiation team
through the deployment of Assistant Secretary-General
Hocine Medili, who has been appointed UNAMID
Deputy Joint Special Representative for Operations and
Management. Mr. Medili will give particular attention
to working with the Government to finalize the status
of forces agreement.

On the matter of 24-hour operations, and night
flights in particular, the Government has made
clearance for those flights contingent upon the United
Nations upgrading of national airport facilities. While
we are ready to provide assistance in that regard,
airport rehabilitation is a time-consuming undertaking
and not an operational requirement for UNAMID to be
able to fly at night. The AU-United Nations Mission is
now established as per the mandate given to it by the
Security Council and must be able to operate freely 24
hours per day.

With respect to land, we have not yet been able to
finalize the agreement with the Government on a
suitable piece of land in El Geneina.

As I indicated earlier, the Government is also
reopening the issue of UNAMID accoutrements. In the
hours before the transfer-of-authority ceremony,
Government officials informed Joint Special
Representative Adada and Force Commander Agwai
that it would not agree to the re-hatting of the AMIS
personnel. Nevertheless, we proceeded with the re
hatting, in keeping with the agreement reached with the
AU on the question of accoutrements and on the basis
of our understanding that the Government had accepted
the blue beret during the Security Council's Visit to
Khartoum on 17 June 2006, when they accepted the
Hybrid Operation without conditions. As Council
members are aware, the Government accepted the
3
deployment of a hybrid force, which means one force
with a single identity. Retaining the green beret for
African troops and the blue beret for non-Africans,
which has been the Government's suggestion, would
effectively establish two distinct forces with separate
identities. It would also undermine the unity of the
force and is contrary to the fundamental principles of
the United Nations.

While rapid progress is required on those issues,
it is also important to point out that the Government
has released communications equipment that was
impounded in NyaIa and is also permitting UNAMID
to use the El Obeid logistics hub as a staging area. We
hope that those developments will help to create
momentum that will lead to a resolution of the more
significant blockages, which I have just described.

The Government takes the position that the
outstanding issues I have listed are technical and
should be resolved on that basis. We fully agree, and
we believe that there is no good reason that those
issues should persist ad infinitum, especially in the
light of the adverse impact they are having on the
deployment of the mission and the implementation of
its mandate.

While high-level consultations between the
Secretariat and Government officials will continue on
these issues, a final resolution will come through a
discussion of practicalities in Khartoum and on the
ground in Darfur. To that end, Mr. Adada and his senior
staff have made themselves available, without
condition, to work with Government counterparts. In
an effort to resolve these issues, consultations are
ongoing with the Government of the Sudan. The
Secretary-General spoke by telephone with President
Al-Bashir over the weekend. This will be followed by
technical discussions before the two of them meet at
the African Union Summit. We will continue to do our
best to handle these issues with the Government of the
Sudan. But obviously, with each passing week, we face
the prospect of further delay in fully establishing the
mission.

As indicated in our last briefing to the Council on
UNAMID, at the moment the mission is effectively a
re-hatted AMIS, with few additional troops or police
having arrived in the mission area since the transfer of
authority, on 31 December. While the advance party of
the Chinese engineering company and the formed
police unit from Bangladesh are currently in theatre,
the great majority of the military and police
components of the mission are made up of units and
personnel that had served with AMIS, including the
two additional battalions from Nigeria and Rwanda,
which arrived in November. In total, there are currently
just over 9,000 uniformed personnel in UNAMID.

We are doing our utmost to ensure that the new
UNAMID units deploy to Darfur as swiftly as possible.
Nevertheless, it is clear that those deployments must
move more quickly if we are to have a material impact
on the situation in the first half of this year. The recce
Visits by troop-contributing countries to Darfur, as well
as the usual memorandum of understanding
negotiations and the submission of lists of all personnel
and equipment to be deployed to the theatre, are not
moving fast enough.

In addition, as we go through routine
memorandum of understanding negotiations with troop
contributors, some have begun to set conditions for
their participation that will prevent us from accepting
their contributions. These include proposals to limit
operations to day-time hours and to restrict movements
to those in the immediate Vicinity of UNAMID military
bases. If we were to accept those conditions, the
mission would lose the capacity to implement its
mandate in any credible manner.

With respect to forthcoming deployments, we
expect to have the advance parties of the Egyptian and
Ethiopian infantry battalions in Darfur by the end of
February, pending the resolution of some outstanding
issues, and the remainder of the Chinese engineering
unit by March. Most of the enabling units are expected
to deploy before June 2008. Five remaining battalions
are scheduled to deploy in the latter half of the year.

Our deployment challenges continue to be
compounded by the shortfalls that we are facing in a
number of critical areas. Since our last briefing to the
Council, we have not received offers for the essential
transportation and aviation assets. Those missing
units- one heavy and one medium transport unit,
three military utility aviation units, namely 18
helicopters, and one light tactical helicopter unit,
namely 6 helicopters - will enable UNAMID to move
personnel and resources over large areas with the speed
required to respond to crises. They will also allow for
the rapid resupply of units based in insecure locations.
We are already feeling the constraints of those gaps in
requirements, as we are now forced to resupply our
08-20356
troops by road. That is time-consuming and will
become prohibitively difficult, if not impossible,
during much of the rainy season. I regret to inform the
Council that we are now faced with an additional
shortfall of one multi-role logistics unit, after a troop-
contributing country providing that unit withdrew its
offer, and one aerial reconnaissance unit, following the
technical determination that the unit pledged did not
meet requirements.

In order to address these continued gaps in the
force, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) convened a meeting with troop-contributing
countries on 27 December, during which we
highlighted the missing units and requested Member
States to provide the required assets. During that
meeting, the United Kingdom offered to convene a
meeting to focus on the generation of the missing units.
We very much welcome that and any other initiative
that Council members or other Member States would
be willing to undertake in that regard. In the meantime,
the Secretary-General and the Secretariat continue to
pursue all options to fill this critical gap. In that regard,
we are in discussions with Ukraine to explore the
possibility of transferring tactical helicopters from
another mission. We are also exploring proposals from
the Russian Federation that would involve providing
the airframes to other troop-contributing countries.

Even as we apply ourselves fully to accelerating
deployment and filling gaps in the force, we are also
seeing a dramatic deterioration in the security situation
in Darfur. Clashes and retaliatory attacks between the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM) in West Darfur have also led to a
number of civilian casualties and the relocation of 283
humanitarian staff from several locations in the state.
On 29 December, the Justice and Equality Movement
launched an attack on the local police station and
Sudanese Armed Forces base in Seleia, a town north of
El Geneina. While there are differing reports regarding
the intensity of the conflict and casualties incurred, it
was confirmed that the JEM. ultimately took control of
the town. Four days later, on 2 January, the JEM. seized
the Government-controlled towns of Sirba and Abu
Suruj, which are also located north of Seleia. Both in
the press and in discussions between JEM. leader Khalil
Ibrahim and United Nations officials in the field,
Mr. Ibrahim has repeatedly threatened to attack El
Geneina, the state capital. The Secretary-General
08-20356
strongly condemned JEM's acts of aggression and
bellicose posture.

Following the JEM. attack on Seleia, authorities
from the Government of the Sudan's military
intelligence surrounded the accommodations of Major
General Bashir, the JEM. representative to the ceasefire
commission in El Fasher. The Government personnel
were encountered by the AMIS protection force, which
was guarding the premises according to AMIS
established practice of providing protection to
movement representatives to the ceasefire commission.
Despite the efforts of senior AMIS and United Nations
leadership to persuade the commanding military
intelligence officer to halt the operation, Major General
Bashir, along with five other JEM. representatives, was
arrested and taken into custody. Military intelligence
authorities justified the arrest of the JEM
representative by alleging that he was behind the attack
in Seleia earlier that day. This is a worrying
development and jeopardizes the integrity of those
mechanisms that have been established to bring a
cessation to the ongoing hostilities in Darfur.

The security situation in Darfur has also taken a
serious turn for the worse due to hostilities involving
Chadian elements. Media reports, as well as those
received from UNAMID, indicate that the Government
of Chad may have engaged Chadian rebels in Sudanese
territory on a number of occasions. There were also
widespread media reports suggesting that the Chadian
air force may have bombed locations in the south of
West Darfur, where Chadian rebels were believed to
have congregated. We are also aware that the Sudanese
Permanent Representative sent a letter to the Security
Council on 28 December protesting what it referred to
as "Chadian attacks against the Sudan", specifically
citing air assaults from the Chadian air force on two
separate occasions. Recent press reports also quote
President Deby as confirming his intention to pursue
Chadian rebels inside Sudanese territory.

This is an extremely worrying development in
light of the potential for those engagements to escalate
and assume international, cross-border dimensions.
That would have a devastating impact on refugees and
displaced persons on both sides of the border, and
would inevitably make more complex the international
community's current efforts to deploy peacekeeping
operations in both countries.
5
The violence in West Darfur presents a
fundamental challenge to UNAMID, which is a
peacekeeping force not designed to deploy or function
in a war zone. That scenario took an unforeseen and
deeply disturbing turn on 7 January, when a UNAMID
supply convoy of more than 20 clearly marked white
vehicles moving at low speed came under fire from
Sudanese Armed Forces at approximately 10 pm. as
they moved from Um Baru to Tine in West Darfur. The
convoy, whose movements had been confirmed with
the Government and rebel movements in advance, and
which was comprised mostly of large trucks which
were carrying rations for UNAMID personnel in West
Darfur, came under sustained fire from light weapons
and rocket-propelled grenades for 10 to 12 minutes. A
civilian Sudanese driver suffered seven gunshot
wounds during the incident. In that instance, UNAMID
troops elected not to return fire and took up a defensive
position.

After the attack, the UNAMID Deputy Force
Commander was telephoned by the Sudanese Armed
Forces area commander with responsibility for the area
where the incident took place. The area commander
confirmed that it was a Sudanese Armed Forces unit
which had fired upon the convoy. After the incident,
the convoy managed to reach Tine close to midnight
and the injured driver is receiving treatment at the Tine
team site.

I met yesterday with the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan to the United Nations,
who confirmed his Government's commitment to
ensuring the safety and security of UNAMID personnel
and also, more broadly, to the full implementation of
resolution 1769 (2007). He also confirmed that the
Government would be launching an investigation into
the incident and that the United Nations would
participate. We welcome those initiatives. The Viability
of the Mission depends on ensuring that this never
happens again.

Finally, I would like to provide a brief update on
the ongoing efforts of the Special Envoys, Messrs.
Eliasson and Salim, who will be travelling to the Sudan
this week for further consultations with the
Government and the movements. Following from the
unification efforts which took place in Juba and Darfur
over the last few weeks, five principal movement
clusters have now emerged: Sudan Liberation Army
(SLA)-Unity, SLA-Abdul Shafie, United Resistance
Front, JEM-Khalil Ibrahim and SLA-Abdul Wahid.

Some of those movements are currently discussing the
establishment of a common platform and negotiating
team, as well as undergoing internal reorganization and
deliberations on leadership structures.

The Special Envoys' trip will provide an
opportunity to assess the progress of the current
unification efforts, as well as the readiness of the
movements to participate in an Arusha-style meeting,
which would aim to assist the movements in finalizing
their unification efforts so as to enable the start of
substantive talks.

The recent upsurge in fighting in Eastern Chad
and West Darfur and the mobilization of JEM. and
Sudanese forces around El Geneina are a cause for
great concern, however. They send an extremely
negative signal with regard to the prospects for a
political settlement to the Darfur crisis. For the
substantive negotiations to begin, it would also be
important that the Government of National Unity agree
on a common negotiating team and come well-prepared
to the talks.

In conclusion and returning to UNAMID, we will
continue to build on the modest momentum created by
the transfer of authority. At the same time, we must
move forward with a realistic understanding of the
situation we face. War, with cross-border dimensions,
is ongoing. Five months after the adoption of
resolution 1769 (2007), we do not yet have guarantees
or agreements from the Government on basic technical
issues. And finally, the Mission itself will not have the
personnel or assets in place to implement its mandate
for many months, even in the best-case scenario.

I appeal to this Council and to all the international
community to help on those and all other remaining
problems, including the necessary specialized
capabilities and equipment, in the political process.
That is our collective responsibility. Without decisive
progress on each of those three issues, we will indeed
face dire consequences for the international efforts to
help the Sudanese bring peace and stability to Darfur.

