Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): On several occasions during its current
membership of the Security Council, the delegation of
Costa Rica has expressed its firm conviction that the
logical and viable solution to the constant crises that have
arisen in the context of the relationship between the

 

United Nations and Iraq lies in the full implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions.

Time and again, whenever the Iraqi authorities have
pushed that relationship to the limit, Costa Rica has stressed
that Iraq must comply with the disarmament obligations
imposed on it by those resolutions, as an indispensable
condition for the lifting of the sanctions imposed.

That unswerving position on the part of my delegation
is based on the fact that we have repeatedly noted a
persistent course of action on the part of the Government of
Iraq to avoid full compliance with those obligations,
through excuses and evasions designed to secure new rules
of the game that could diminish its responsibilities under
those Council resolutions.

The decision taken by the Government of Iraq on 31
October to cease cooperation with the United Nations
Special Commission, together with its continued restrictions
on the work of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
are a further example of that dangerous course of action
and give us good reason to doubt the Iraqi authorities'
willingness to comply.

This new challenge by Iraq to the authority of the
Security Council not only disregards the obligations that it
entered into with the international community, but also calls
into question the willingness and readiness that it expressed
in the Memorandum of Understanding that it signed with
the Secretary-General on 23 February this year.

That Memorandum established ample scope for
political dialogue, which has now been ignored by Iraq for
the sole purpose of securing further concessions in the
process of implementing Council resolution 687 (1991).
That is why the delegation of Costa Rica cannot accept or
consider valid the attempt to justify Iraq's decision on the
basis of a failure to understand because of an alleged lack
of clarity in the letter that the President of the Security
Council addressed to the Secretary-General on 30 October.

Costa Rica hopes that Iraq will proceed to comply
with its international disarmament obligations, honour its
word as given in the Memorandum of Understanding of 23
February and resume cooperation with the Special
Commission and the International Atomic Energy Agency
without conditions.

Costa Rica also hopes that the Government of Iraq
will demonstrate clearly and unequivocally to the
international community its willingness to resolve the
current situation and to take firm steps that will enable
the Council promptly to embark on the comprehensive
review.

In this connection, I should like to take the
opportunity to reaffirm my delegation's support for the
valuable and tireless efforts that the Secretary-General has
made and is still making and to urge him to continue his
work in the hope that dialogue and negotiation will make
it possible to achieve a political solution to the current
crisis.

For all of those reasons, Costa Rica sponsored and,
of course, will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us.

