Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish to thank the Dominican Republic for presiding over
and convening this important Security Council debate
on addressing the impacts of climate-related disasters
on international peace and security. We appreciate
and are grateful for the presence of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic, Mr. Miguel
Vargas Maldonado, at this debate. We also thank the
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme, Mr. Achim Steiner; the Under-Secretary-
General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo; and scientists Mr. Pavel Kabat
and Ms. Lindsay Getschel, for their briefings.

This debate could not be more timely, as it is
being held following the adoption by the international
community of the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change work programme, which establishes the rules
and guidelines for the implementation of the Paris
Agreement, in Katowice on 16 December, as part of the
twenty-fourth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
However, the November report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change describes new challenges
and warns us that attaining the goal of limiting global
warming to 15°C above pre-industrial levels will
require a drastic reduction in global greenhouse gases,
as well as far-reaching and in-depth adaptation policies.

The environment is changing faster than our
efforts to understand and protect it. Alarm bells are
still ringing; the time for hesitation is over. The threat
of climate change will define this century and those
to come and requires a profound multilateral effort. It
is a serious, urgent and growing threat that we cannot
continue to ignore or downplay.

We must work together to improve our understanding
of the security implications of natural disasters that are
related to climate change and devise strategies to assess
and mitigate the risks of such disasters. It is therefore
essential to develop analytical skills within the United
Nations system that allow us to swiftly evaluate the
possible climate change-related threats to international
security, while providing the Security Council with
useful information on those threats and helping States
develop and implement action plans for tackling
them appropriately.

In that regard, through the Chilean International
Cooperation Agency for Development, our country
has implemented innovative cooperation mechanisms
for building capacity to reduce the risk of disasters at
the regional level. We highlight the success achieved
through the Kizuna Project, with the Government of
Japan, which seeks to train thousands of professionals
in Latin America and the Caribbean to manage
emergencies and disasters.

We welcome the initiative of Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres to host the 2019 climate summit to be
held on 23 September. In that regard, I wish to declare
the firm and decisive commitment of the Government
of Chile to collaborate in the global efforts aimed at
addressing the devastating effects of climate change.
For that reason, my country will host and preside over
the twenty-fifth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(COP25) in January 2020. Indeed, that fills us with
pride, but at the same time represents a huge challenge
for our country, which is compelling us to work hard to
ensure the success of that important event that will unite
the international community. We are undertaking that
role based on Chile's commitment to multilateralism,
and in particular with the conviction that climate
change is a collective task that must be addressed by all
members of the international community.

In conclusion, we firmly believe that COP25
should mark a milestone in the drive towards greater
climate action. It is important that countries take
that opportunity to announce concrete steps towards
heightened levels of ambition in the global response to
climate change.

