Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We are
very pleased to have you with us for today's discussion,
Madam President. We would also like to thank
Commissioner Chergui and Special Representative
Zewde for their briefings, and to congratulate
Ms. Zewde on her new appointment. We look forward
to working with her.

As the Council has recognized, the African Union
(AU) is a critical partner for the United Nations. We
are pleased to see greater collaboration, more regular
exchanges of information and consultations and
coordinated action aimed at effectively preventing,
resolving and managing Africa's complex tasks related
to peace and security. Africa is a continent of promise
as well as enduring challenges. Progress towards open
markets and free trade has spurred economic growth
there, and today Africa is home to five of the world's
10 fastest-growing economies. By 2030 Africa will
represent almost a quarter of the world's workforce and
consumers. By 2050 its population is expected to double
to 2 billion people, a majority of whom will be under 18,
making Africa the world's youngest continent. Almost
70 per cent of Africans today are under 25 years old.

The success or failure of African Governments in
meeting the aspirations of their peoples, particularly
their young people, will affect peace and security
issues across the continent. Meeting those aspirations
will depend on their ability to continue to develop
institutions that are accountable and responsive to
citizens, promoting the rule of law and ensuring
political stability. The African Union plays a leading
role, and its partnership with the United Nations is a
critical component in advancing our shared objectives
of stability and prosperity in Africa.

The United States appreciates the Secretary-
General's recognition that the focus of joint efforts
between the United Nations and the AU must be on
facilitating sustainable political solutions, which
requires addressing the root causes of conflict. We
applaud the efforts to develop linkages with financial
institutions such as the World Bank and the African
Development Bank. They are essential to bringing
to bear the resources necessary to help address the
root causes of conflict in Africa. We also welcome
the African Union's efforts to increase financial self-
reliance, including through the AU Peace Fund, and
to meet the commitment made by the Assembly of the
African Union in January 2015 to funding 25 per cent
of the cost of its peace and security operations. We
especially look forward to working with AU member
States to identify non-trade mechanisms for greater
self-financing that are transparent and compliant with
their international obligations and commitments.

What the United States will not do is consider
additional financial support through the United
Nations for any future AU-led operations authorized
by the Security Council under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, until benchmarks
for financial transparency, conduct and discipline
and human rights are demonstrably implemented
across AU peace organizations and operations. To
do otherwise, or to act prematurely, would be to risk
jeopardizing the legitimacy and credibility of United
Nations peacekeeping. However, we do recognize the
progress that the AU has made towards developing
compliance frameworks for international humanitarian
law and human rights, and for conduct and discipline,
particularly the policies on conduct and discipline and
on the prevention of and response to sexual exploitation
and abuse, as well as the training standards for the
integrated protection of civilians. We urge the United
Nations and the AU to continue to prioritize the
development and implementation of standards in order
to achieve greater transparency and accountability in
AU peace support operations.

As the Council is aware, earlier this year
the General Assembly's Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations called on the Secretariat
to develop a comprehensive performance policy that
details performance standards and mechanisms for
accountability. We would be interested to hear our
briefers' thoughts on how the AU can better support
and draw from that policy as it develops its own
performance and accountability mechanisms.

Lastly, we are confident that this important
relationship is headed in the right direction. We share
the vision of a stable, prosperous and secure Africa,
and applaud the many efforts to pursue continued and
increased collaboration between the United Nations and
the African Union in order to achieve our shared goals.

