Mr. Khiari (Tunisia): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your initiative to convene
today's important and thought-provoking open debate
on reaffirming our strong commitment to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. My
delegation also appreciates your insights into the theme,
as reflected in the concept note (S/2015/87, annex). I
would also like to thank His Excellency the Secretary-
General for his briefing and vision on our topic.

Today's debate is taking place as we prepare to
celebrate the seventieth anniversary of the founding of
the United Nations. The theme of our meeting clearly
reflects our aspirations and accomplishments, and
should be understood broadly. It provides an opportunity
to look back at past achievements and explore ways of
strengthening and improving the effectiveness of the
United Nations, so as to enable it to fulfil its mandate to
preserve peace and security among States and promote
human development. In approaching the subject, we
should bear in mind that the nature and scope of the
United Nations have expanded greatly since 1945.

Since its inception, the United Nations has proved to
be a cornerstone of the international peace and security
architecture. It has faced many international crises and
challenges. It has developed on the basis of its Charter,
an international treaty that is concise compared to
many others, consisting as it does of fewer than 10,000
words. Its provisions and expressions, carefully selected
by the drafters to be of a fairly general nature, have
contributed to the emergence of a spirit of compromise
that has survived to our own times and has reinforced
the multilateral work of the United Nations, laying the
ground for the Charter's dynamic and evolutionary
interpretation in the light of changing circumstances
and our evolving peace and security situation.

One of the most significant issues to be considered
from this perspective is terrorism. While the Charter
makes no reference to it, the vast array of normative
work that has been done to produce multilateral
anti-terrorism conventions clearly demonstrates that
the Charter was ahead of its time, paving the way for a
broad and concerted interpretation of its provisions by
Member States. To date, the United Nations has played
a significant role in promoting new norms and ensuring
the progressive development of international law,
thereby creating the conditions necessary to address
such global challenges. Despite that, long-unresolved
issues, such as the question of Palestine, show clearly
that if we are to achieve peace and justice, aggression
and usurpation of land must be stopped and colonial
rule banished from our world.
A major breakthrough in the strengthening of the
Charter's foundations has been the drastic change that
has occurred in the interpretation of the term "threat to
peace". While in the era immediately after the Second
World War it was strictly confined to threats of war
between States, it has now been firmly established
within the United Nations that threats to peace can
also be the result of terrorist acts, the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, a lack of good
governance, transnational organized crime, climate
change, the spread of pandemics, poverty and so forth.
Such challenges represent a far wider array of concerns
than the issues that were debated in San Francisco.

From being based on a system of collective security
devised to deal with State aggression, the United
Nations has adapted to the new realities on the ground
by broadening the scope of its action to promote human
security and sustainable peace and development.
Indeed, promoting international peace, preventing
and resolving conflicts and pursuing new norms of
global justice are closely linked to the attainment of
sustainable development. The demands placed on the
United Nations are also more complex. Addressing
those interlinked challenges requires joint collective
efforts, for no country can resolve them on its own.
Our challenge today is to devise more inclusive forms
of global governance by reaffirming our commitment
to respect for international law and strict adherence to
the principles and objectives enshrined in the United
Nations Charter. My country, Tunisia, has always called
for those principles to be accepted as the cornerstone of
relations between nations, and we have built and shaped
our foreign policy on those parameters.

Promoting the lofty ideals of the Charter implies
that decision-making bodies must reflect the world's
new realities. The Security Council is a case in point.
We believe that reforming the Council can strengthen
international law as a prerequisite for peace, security
and development, and will further consolidate the
Council's position as a central component of effective
global governance that can promote concerted efforts
to address today's challenges.

