The President: I would like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Croatia, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Simonovic'
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the final
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Police Support Group (S/ 1998/ 1004).

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the final report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations police
support group (S/1998/1004), and in particular his
description of the successful conclusion of the police
support group mandate and the smooth transition of
responsibilities to the police monitoring programme of
the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). The Council recalls the commitment
of the Government of Croatia to ensure that OSCE
police monitors will have the same access to police
stations, documents and police operations, including
investigations and checkpoints, as that accorded to the
United Nations police support group.

"While the overall security situation in the
Danube region remains satisfactory and police
performance has improved notably and the
Government of Croatia has taken steps to ensure that
this continues, a worrying trend of ethnically
motivated incidents persists in the region. The
Security Council remains deeply concerned at the
continuing departures of Serb residents, resulting to
a considerable extent from these incidents. In this
context, the Council is mindful of the importance of
economic revitalization and reconstruction in
creating an environment for sustained returns. The
Council calls upon the Government of Croatia to
make every effort to enhance public confidence in
the police force and to recommit itself fully to the
process of reconciliation between ethnic groups.

"The Security Council also calls upon the
Government of Croatia to address the perceived lack
of security which is contributing to continuing
departures of Serbs from the region, and to remedy
a number of problems which are preventing the full
implementation of the 'Programme for the Return
and Accommodation of Displaced Persons, Refugees
and Exiled Persons' (S/ 1998/589). While noting that
in his previous report (8/1998/887), the Secretary-
General recognized progress in the implementation
of this Programme, the Council calls upon the
Government of Croatia promptly and fully to address
all unresolved issues, which include restitution of
property to Croatian citizens of Serb ethnicity,
harmonization of legislation with the provisions of
the return programme to enable non-discriminatory
implementation, effective functioning of all housing
commissions, equal access to reconstruction funding,
restoration of rights to socially owned apartments,
access to information, removal of impediments to
the acquisition of documents needed for returnee
status and benefits, and implementation of the law
on convalidation.

"The Security Council expresses particular
concern about the Joint Council of Municipalities,
which represents all Serb ethnic communities in the
region and which is described by the Secretary-
General as being on the brink of collapse. The
Council reiterates the continuing obligations of the
Government of Croatia under the Basic Agreement
as well as under international conventions and other
agreements, and, in this context, stresses the
importance of full implementation of the Programme
for the Establishment of Trust, Accelerated Return

 

and Normalization of Living Conditions in the War-
affected Regions of the Republic of Croatia
(S/1997/772).

"The Security Council expresses its full support
for the OSCE, which has now assumed the role of the
United Nations support group, and looks forward to
being kept informed, whenever necessary, of relevant
developments in the Danube region of Croatia.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
appreciation to all the men and women who
participated in the United Nations peacekeeping
operations in the Danube region of Croatia. Their
dedication and perseverance made a significant
contribution to regional peace."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1998/32.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 6 pm.

