Mr. Sorreta (Philippines): A copy of my remarks
has been distributed, and I would like to deliver a
shortened version of those remarks.

Terrorism continues to make its presence felt
throughout the world. In its many forms and
manifestations, it threatens the peace and stability of
nations, endangers the lives of our peoples, impedes
national, regional and global growth and development,
and more insidiously, it breaks apart the precious bonds
between peoples, fostering deep-seated anger, fear,
suspicion and intolerance.

All nations share the responsibility of preventing,
neutralizing and combating the threat of terrorism. The
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is
an important step forward in harnessing our collective
experience and expertise as we strive to rid the world
of the threat of terrorism.

We laud the recent workshop held in Bali,
Indonesia, organized by the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, and we fully support its
outcome. We would like to emphasize the point that, if
counter-terrorism strategies are to be effective, they
must be comprehensive and encompass a combination
of hard and soft approaches, including the use of
interfaith dialogue, as both instrument and objective, in
countering terrorism.

In order to draw nations and peoples closer
together in understanding and respect, the Philippines
is working closely with Pakistan and other partners
again this year on a draft resolution on interreligious
and intercultural dialogue and cooperation for peace,
which we hope will garner increased support.

As we strive towards further strengthening our
capacities to combat terrorism through increased
cooperation in intelligence information sharing, we
wish to draw cautious attention to the issuance of
travel advisories, especially those that relate to
possible terrorist attacks. While the Philippines
recognizes the responsibility of States to protect their
citizens, we believe that Governments must exercise
due care and diligence in issuing travel advisories.
Advisories affect not only travelling citizens but also
the lifeline and economy of a country that is the subject
of a travel advisory. Governments must clearly
distinguish between threats posed by ordinary criminal
elements and those posed by terrorists, which are two
very distinct categories. When a travel advisory does
not distinguish between the two, it does a disservice to
the country issuing it and the country that is subject to
it.

Our work is far from done. We must remain
steadfast. Only with our sustained commitment and
cooperation and a balanced approach can we break
terrorism's backbone and win this battle together.

