Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes today's quarterly debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, and thanks Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his excellent briefing.

My delegation remains concerned about the
deterioration of the security situation in the Middle
East, where the Israeli-Palestinian conflict continues to
capture the attention of the international community,
following the new outbreak of violence in the Gaza
Strip and southern Israel, which has claimed many
lives. Cote d'Ivoire deplores the upsurge in violence,
which threatens the lives of Israelis and Palestinians,
exacerbates the humanitarian situation on the Gaza
Strip and, above all, reduces the prospects for a political
settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian crisis.

Given the situation, my country calls on all parties
to exercise restraint and welcomes the mediation
efforts of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov. It also encourages
the Egyptian Government to pursue its initiatives
with a view to achieving a lasting ceasefire between
Israelis and Palestinians. Furthermore, my delegation
remains concerned about the catastrophic humanitarian
situation in Gaza, which has been gravely affected
by the ongoing blockade and marked by youth

unemployment and various water shortages and power
outages. It therefore calls for the easing of the blockade
on the Gaza Strip, including a lifting of restrictions on
fuel imports needed to ensure the proper functioning of
hospitals and basic social services.

My delegation also encourages Hamas and
the Palestinian Authority to continue dialogue, in
accordance with the reconciliation agreement signed
by Hamas and Fatah in Cairo on 12 October 2017,
with a view to enabling the effective return of the
Palestinian Authority to Gaza and humanitarian issues
to be properly addressed. Cote d'Ivoire would like to
reaffirm its principled position in favour of a negotiated
political settlement to the conflict, based on a two-State
solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by side
in peace and security, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

In addition to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the
Middle East also continues to face a series of security
challenges, such as the crises in Syria and Yemen
and the Iranian nuclear issue. With regard to Syria,
my delegation remains concerned about the fragile
humanitarian situation and the deadlocked political
process. On the humanitarian front, Cote d'Ivoire calls
on the parties to the conflict to respect international
humanitarian law in order to allow safe, sustainable and
unhindered access for humanitarian aid to populations
in distress. It welcomes the resumption of humanitarian
assistance, in particular the decision by France and
the Russian Federation to deliver humanitarian aid in
eastern Ghouta.

On the political front, my country reiterates the
urgent need for the resumption of a credible and inclusive
political process on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015)
in order to restore stability and adopt a sustainable
approach to addressing the effects of the humanitarian
crisis in Syria. In that regard, my delegation welcomes
the various initiatives aimed at relaunching the process
of intra-Syrian dialogue and, within the framework of
the Geneva process, encourages Mr. Staffan De Mistura,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
to take the steps necessary to establish a committee
tasked with drafting the new Syrian constitution, as
decided at the Sochi meeting in Russia. It welcomes
consultations held on 18 and 19 June in Geneva with
the Special Envoy and representatives of the guarantor
States of the Astana process, aimed at establishing the
constitutional committee.
With regard to the crisis in Yemen, Cote d'Ivoire
is deeply concerned about the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation, which the United Nations
describes as the worst humanitarian crisis in the world.
It reiterates its principled position that there is no
alternative to a political solution to the conflict. My
delegation therefore calls on all parties to exercise
restraint, to put an end to hostilities and to engage
significantly on the road to achieving a political
settlement to the crisis in order to overcome the political
impasse in Yemen.

My delegation also welcomes the ongoing efforts
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen to renew dialogue among the belligerents in
the framework of a political settlement to the conflict
in Yemen. Cote d'lvoire calls on the international
community to support the Special Envoy's efforts to
bring the parties to make the compromises necessary
for a sustainable way out of the crisis and to create the
conditions for better humanitarian assistance to people
in distress.

With regard to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action, my delegation believes that the Iranian nuclear
agreement is a strong guarantee for the implementation
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and encourages all stakeholders to resolve
their differences through negotiations within the
Joint Commission stipulated in annex IV of the Plan
of Action.

To conclude, Cote d'Ivoire calls on all parties
involved in the crises in the Middle East to exercise
restraint and favour dialogue as a means of resolving
their differences in a sustainable way in order to create
an environment conducive to peace and security in the
region and in the world.

