Mr. Meza-Cuadra Velasquez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I should like to commend the initiative of
the presidency of the Security Council to convene this
debate on the situation in Haiti. I am also pleased to
welcome the presence of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore. I
am grateful to her for her briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Haiti (S/2014/617).

My delegation associates itself with the statement
by the delegation of Uruguay on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti, especially with regard to recognition
of the important work accomplished the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
We believe that the presence of MINUSTAH in
Haiti continues to be essential to provide the Haitian
authorities the security and support needed to facilitate
the process of democratic consolidation in the country.

Peru is committed to achieving and consolidating
security, stability and sustainable development and
to strengthening institutions in Haiti. That is why my
country has actively participated in MINUSTAH since
2004, with a military contingent comprised of 372
soldiers, including female staff in the field as well as
military officers among Mission headquarters staff.

According to the report of the Secretary-General,
the situation in Haiti has not changed substantially since
last March. We see that mainly in the political aspect,
an area in which we lament the lack of concrete progress
in holding the long-delayed legislative, municipal and
local elections. We are concerned that the elections will
not be held as scheduled on 26 October, as this further
delay could lead to a climate of political instability and
lack of governance in Haiti. My delegation therefore
reiterates its call to all Haitian political forces to achieve
the necessary agreements to allow the holding of the
elections, which represent an important milestone in
the process of democratic consolidation in Haiti, which
also includes the presidential elections scheduled for
2015 and an orderly handover 2016.

While the security situation in Haiti remains stable
thanks to the crucial work of MINUSTAH, there has
been an increase in protests, mostly caused by political
tensions, socioeconomic problems and a lack of basic
services. That serves to remind us that the cooperation
of the United Nations system with Haiti should be
comprehensive.

While I reiterate our appreciation for the work of
the military component of MINUSTAH in ensuring
stability and security in Haiti, I also wish to reiterate
our support for the MINUSTAH consolidation plan for
the period 2013 to 2016, by which it was established
that decisions on the future of the Mission would be
taken on the basis of the conditions on the ground - an
approach that has been incorporated in the report of the
Secretary-General. Although my delegation welcomes
the progress made by Haiti in implementing the
five-year development plan for the Haitian National
Police, the report of the Secretary-General notes that
the institution does not yet have the capacity needed to
maintain public order and the safety of its population
throughout the country's entire territory. It must
therefore rely on MINUSTAH's support.

In that regard, we believe that accelerating the
process of reducing the number of MINUSTAH
uniformed personnel could pose a risk in the
consolidation of internal security and to the stability
and sustainability of the democratic process in Haiti.
For Peru, a possible reduction in the military component
should be done gradually and responsibly in order to
ensure the sustainability of the progress made.

My delegation is aware of the growing challenges
facing the Organization in its efforts to maintain
international peace and security. However, we believe
that when the time comes to renew the mandate of a
peacekeeping mission, those needs should not take
precedence over the situation on the ground.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that the
important achievements of MINUSTAH to date
should not lead to the false impression that the task is
completed, or even close to it. Experience has taught
us the serious consequences suffered in the past when
the Organization decided to withdraw its presence from
the ground before it should have. My country therefore
hopes that MINUSTAH will be able to conclude the
positive work it has been doing in Haiti successfully
and without undue haste.

