Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): My delegation thanks
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her informative briefing and
the professional work of her able team.

Despite the willingness ofand some actions between
the key parties aimed at eliminating all remaining
ambiguities, we are still not able to see tangible
progress on outstanding issues. My delegation believes
that the Council should focus more on the following
three factors. First is assistance and support to enhance
cooperation and collaboration between the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
the Syrian Government. It would help to move forward
effectively on the resolution of all disputes concerning
the initial declaration by the latter. The second factor
concerns facilitating the effective investigation of all
reported chemical weapons incidents in Syria. Every
month, we hear only that the investigations with regard
to Douma and other incidents are continuing. We do
not see how the procedures are being carried out or
what the problems and obstacles being faced are and
how they are being addressed and solved. The third
element is the existence of impunity and the absence
of preventive measures, which are further stumbling
blocks that prevent us from effectively countering the
continued threats of the use of chemical weapons. My
country is firmly convinced that the Council must be
united in tirelessly seeking a comprehensive solution
to the issues of attribution and prosecution without
transferring such prerogatives to other structures.

With regard to the decision of the fourth special
session of the Conference of the States Parties,
Kazakhstan advocates that the possible new functions
of the OPCW, as well as the possibilities of expanding
its mandate, should be considered and implemented
with the participation and support of all States parties
to the Chemical Weapons Convention.

To conclude, we hope that the Security Council
will retain its leading role and special prerogative in
resolving all such issues without transferring them to
other structures. To do so would be to subject the issues
to further risks of politicization and polarization.

Finally, Kazakhstan calls for the much-needed
constructive and patient consultations and the tireless
search for mutually acceptable solutions for the benefit
of the people of Syria.

