Ms. Zwede: I am honoured to introduce the
twenty-second report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic (S/2010/295),
my first report since the creation of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic (BINUCA), in January of this year. Allow me
to take this opportunity to thank members of the
Council for their continued support of the peace
process in the Central African Republic.

During my last briefing to the Council, on
15 December 2009, it was highlighted that to achieve
peace and stability in the Central African Republic, the
parties to the peace process needed to show
commitment and political will. I also suggested that
concerted international support and assistance were
required to support the peace process and to avoid a
return to violence. I also requested the support of
Council members to complete the integration process. I
wish to update members of the Council on
developments and the progress achieved in the past six
months.

The Central African Republic process has reached
a critical stage in which the successful holding of
elections and the completion of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) operations
will determine the fate of the peacebuilding process.
Those two major events are among the key
recommendations of the inclusive political dialogue
and are regarded as critical to lasting stabilization of
the Central African Republic.

On 29 April, President Francois Bozize' convened
a meeting of national stakeholders and international
10-42534
partners to find a solution to the tensions around the
organization of the elections. The meeting resulted in
the postponement of the polls. Subsequently, the
National Assembly amended the Constitution to allow
the President and the legislature to remain in their
functions beyond the expiry dates of their tenures on
10 June and 3 June, respectively. Despite uncertainties
about what would happen after the expiration of the
five-year presidential mandate, the 11 June threshold
passed off peacefully and without incident.

After consultations with national political
stakeholders, including leaders of political parties and
politico-military movements, and with the technical
support of national and international experts, the
Independent Electoral Commission shared a draft
electoral time frame with the main international
partners at a meeting of the Steering Committee on
Elections held on 14 June. The dates set for the first
and second rounds of elections are 24 October and
19 December, respectively. The draft also opted for a
general electoral census instead of a revision of the
2005 voter lists.

The successful organization of the presidential
and parliamentary elections hinges on the Electoral
Commission's capacity to carry out its duties within
the time frame established by the electoral calendar
and the funds available. During the 14 June meeting,
the Independent Electoral Commission also disclosed
that the budget estimates for the electoral process had
been revised upwards and now stood at $19,315,000
for the organization of the polls and at approximately
$1,540,000 for computerizing the voter rolls, bringing
the total budget for the entire process to $20,855,000.

Taking into account the contribution pledged by
the European Union and African Union, as well as the
$1.5 million provided by the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF), the revised budget reflects a funding gap of
about $7.5 million. The Independent Electoral
Commission requested the urgent provision of
$3.5 million to enable it to conduct the electoral census
operations from 14 to 28 July, which is crucial to the
implementation of the draft electoral timetable.

The international community has responded
swiftly to the call of the Government of the Central
African Republic for assistance in the electoral
process. In this context, an electoral needs assessment
mission was undertaken by the Department of Political
Affairs in October. Mindful of the centrality of national
10-42534
leadership and ownership of the electoral process, the
United Nations, together with all international partners,
has been following up on the recommendations of the
needs assessment mission and will continue to provide
technical advice and support.

Eighteen months after the establishment of the
DDR Steering Committee, the demobilization and
disarmament operations continue to be beset by
numerous challenges. It is nevertheless worth noting
the successful completion of the second phase of the
DDR sensitization and information campaign in the
North of the country, including the establishment of
local DDR committees and the deployment of military
observers by the Economic Community of Central
African States in some north-western and central areas.
Also worth noting is the adoption at the DDR Steering
Committee's 24 June meeting of the terms of reference
for the campaign to launch the process of verification
of the lists of former combatants in the North-West and
North-East of the country, as well as the road map of
DDR activities for the period between June and
September.

However, much more needs to be done in order to
expedite the process. The disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of the estimated 8,000 former
combatants are an essential condition for the success of
the peace and national reconciliation processes and the
creation of a climate of security conducive to the
Central African Republic's long-term social and
economic development.

Meanwhile, the security situation is being
aggravated by the continuing attacks of the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) on the civilian population in
the Republic's south-eastern provinces. The activities
of the LRA have resulted in significant displacement of
the population in the Haut-Mbomou and Mbomou
prefectures. We are working closely with the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan and the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad to
monitor these activities. But there is a need for a more
coordinated regional approach to mitigate this serious
threat to regional peace and security. In this regard, I
welcome the legislation enacted by the United States
Congress on the issue of the LRA, as well as the recent
inter-mission meeting held in Entebbe, Uganda. Such
initiatives are important contributions to the effort to

devise a regional strategy to deal with the LRA
menace.

The prevailing insecurity continues to contribute
to the deterioration of the human rights situation, with
abuses against vulnerable groups such as refugees and
internally displaced persons, and with women and
children being notable targets and Victims of
widespread human rights abuses, such as rape and
other sexual and gender-based violence. The human
rights situation is also characterized by numerous cases
of alleged violations, particularly the prolonged pretrial
detention of individuals held with and without charges,
cases of unlawful arrest and detention, and the ill-
treatment of detainees.

While the main focus of the Central African
Republic's political process has understandably been
on the elections and DDR, it is important that we not
overlook the need to fully implement the other
recommendations of the inclusive political dialogue.
The Dialogue Follow-up Committee recently carried
out a three-week campaign in various parts of the
country to sensitize local populations and assess
progress in implementing the dialogue
recommendations. Following that mission, the
Committee issued a report that, as well as highlighting
the shortcomings in the implementation of the DDR
and electoral processes, painted a gloomy portrait of
the implementation status of the dialogue's other
recommendations. In this regard, the Committee
deplored what it perceived as a lack of political will on
the part of the stakeholders.

Despite the difficulties of the prevailing political
and security situation, we have continued to implement
the 12 priority projects under the PBF's allocation of
$10 million and have articulated projects for the
implementation of its second tranche. The
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has also continued
to work with all national stakeholders, including the
Government and civil society, on the implementation
of the strategic framework for peacebuilding. In that
regard, the Chair of the Commission's country-specific
configuration on the Central African Republic and
Belgium's Permanent Representative to the United
Nations, Ambassador Jan Grauls, visited Bangui from
9 to 12 June for discussions with national authorities,
civil society and international partners on the PBC's
engagement in the Republic. 1 would like to take this
opportunity to commend Mr. Grauls' tireless efforts
and the work of the PBC's country-specific
configuration under his chairmanship.

With regard to the implementation of an
integrated United Nations approach in the Central
African Republic, in accordance with the relevant
decisions of the Security Council, BINUCA and the
country team held a joint retreat on 6 May to articulate
a common United Nations vision and a timetable for
preparing an integrated strategic framework to guide
the peacebuilding activities of the United Nations as a
whole in the Central African Republic. This strategy
will be finalized by September and its implementation
will be monitored through the strategic policy
coordination group, which, under my leadership, brings
together the heads of all United Nations entities in the
country. The group will also ensure that United Nations
system's activities are fully aligned with and contribute
to the realization of national objectives, as articulated
in the poverty reduction strategy paper, as well other
documents, such as the strategic framework for
peacebuilding adopted with the Peacebuilding
Commission.

The overall political, security and
socio-economic situation in the Central African
Republic remains precarious and fraught with
challenges and pitfalls. Preparations for the holding of
elections and the implementation of DDR have
experienced mixed fortunes. The international
community should remain committed to providing firm
political and financial support to the Central African
Republic to address the pressing challenges in the
implementation of all the recommendations of the
inclusive political dialogue. Above all, adequate
funding needs to be provided to the Government of the
Central African Republic in order to enable it to
complete the electoral and DDR processes.

I am deeply concerned by the deteriorating
humanitarian situation and will welcome international
efforts geared towards enhanced humanitarian
assistance to refugees, internally displaced persons and
other vulnerable groups.

