Mr. Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Sir, for organizing today's debate. It is a pleasure
working under your leadership.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and the African Union High Representative for Mali
and Sahel for their briefings, and like those before me,
to express our condolences to all those stricken by the
heinous terrorist attack today that took the lives of more
than 120 young students in Peshawar, Pakistan. Brazil
extends its full solidarity to the Government and the
people of Pakistan at this time of deep sorrow and pain.

The convergence of purposes and actions among
regional and international actors can only strengthen
multilateral efforts to achieve peace. The history of the
relationship between the United Nations and the African
Union provides us with a number of lessons, which this
debate can help to assess. Being institutionally ever
more advanced and increasingly tested by a range of
challenges, the African Union has not only experiences
to share, but also solutions to provide. The Security
Council does well in being open to dialogue and mutual
learning with the African Union. Lessons should be
learned from the relapses into conflict in Libya, the
Central African Republic and South Sudan, as well as
from the initiatives to promote the stabilization of the
Great Lakes region and much of West Africa, even in
the face of the Ebola epidemic.

Mindful of the differences among the challenges
faced by the two regions, South America, my own
region, like Africa, is also seeking to build an
institutional architecture to consolidate peace and
enhance cooperation, under the auspices of the Union
of South American Nations and the South American
Defence Council.

Brazil is a strong believer in African ownership in
dealing with African issues. We praise the stabilization
efforts now put in place by the African Union with the
support of subregional organizations in the African
continent. The United Nations and the African Union
have collaborated in Darfur, Mali, Somalia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Cote d'Ivoire,
as well as in efforts to alleviate the impact of Ebola
in West Africa and to combat the threat posed by the
Lord's Resistance Army. We see the establishment
of the United Nations Office to the African Union
as an important landmark in the two organizations'
cooperation in conflict prevention, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. Cooperation between the United
Nations and any regional organization - not only the
African Union - under Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations can be a way for the Security
Council to better exercise its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of peace and security across the
globe. In no way should cooperation on peacekeeping
be understood as a means of outsourcing the Council's
authority.

Financial constraints should not drive policy
decisions in cooperating with regional organizations.
Hybrid missions should be evaluated according to
their merit, not taken as models to be automatically
replicated. Although it is fair to recognize the
comparative advantages of local States - proximity,
better knowledge of regional dynamics, among other
things - we should be mindful that often neighbours
are not only part of the solutions, but also part of the
problems. Interests and priorities may vary as one
moves from the subregional to the global approach.
The closer one is to the conflict, the greater are the
effects of its action - unfortunately, not always in
ways conducive to ensuring lasting peace. Maintaining
international peace and security in Africa, as anywhere
in the world, is not and cannot be approached exclusively
through peacekeeping. Diplomacy, conflict prevention,
post-conflict peacebuilding and strong economic
development with social justice are key to maintaining
and consolidating political stability.

In discussing the United Nations-African Union
partnership in peacekeeping, one should not avoid the
question of ensuring adequate means for implementing
increasingly complex mandates. Peacekeeping mandates
must be accompanied by the necessary resources. By
the same token, regional actors should spare no effort
to progressively bring their troops up to United Nations
standards of performance. We commend the African
Union's efforts to have its Standby Force ready by
2015. Brazil reiterates that no amount of peacekeeping
resources will be enough if diplomacy is not deployed
with even greater emphasis. The cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union, as well as
this debate, should therefore also focus on initiatives
to foster mediation, prevention and peacebuilding.
Political consensus-building is at least as important
as building an effective peacekeeping force. The
promotion of stability, the prevention of relapse and
peacebuilding that leads to sustainable development
are the ultimate goals. Last month, in my capacity
as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, I visited
Addis Ababa and had a series of meetings with the
African Union Peace and Security Council, the African
Union Commission and the United Nations Economic
Commission for Africa. Ambassador Tete Antonio,
who represents the African Union here at the United
Nations, accompanied me. That dialogue underscored
the complementarity among the roles and functions of
the United Nations and regional actors in supporting
political and socioeconomic recovery processes in
African countries emerging from conflict.

As always, Brazil stands ready to contribute
its fair share, not only to peacekeeping but also to
efforts to invest in diplomacy, conflict prevention
and the peaceful settlement of disputes as an essential
basis for cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations.

