Mr. Garcia (Colombia) (interpretation from Spanish):
My delegation is pleased to address the Security Council at
this meeting, at which the Council will take action on a
draft resolution - which we support, and which we joined
in sponsoring as a member of the Group of Friends of the
Secretary-General for the peace process in El Salvador -
affirming that the mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL) will terminate as of
30 April 1995.

"Pleased" is the least we can be, along with the other
members of the international community, that an arduous
45-month process has been completed, given that El
Salvador is now clearly a nation at peace and that this
peace was built by the Salvadorans, with the firm support
of the United Nations.

We take this opportunity to pay a sincere tribute to the
people of El Salvador for having overcome the obstacles
that had deprived them of peace. We want to stress the
efforts made by the Salvadoran Government and by
Presidents Cristiani and Calderon Sol in their tireless quest
for peace and in their unswerving commitment to leading
their country towards a democratic society.

We pay tribute to the Frente Farabundo Marti para la
Liberacion Nacional (FMLN) for the vision and sincerity it
displayed during the entire process of reconciliation.

We pay tribute, too, to the Secretary-General and his
Special Representatives for the professional, wise and
skilful manner in which they carried out their mediation and
verification work.

The success of the process enables the Security
Council today to end the United Nations Mission. This is
a result, and the best indication, of the great importance in
the maintenance of peace of having the consent of the host
Government and the parties to the conflict, and of working
hand in hand with them. The achievements of the
Salvadoran process are also in part the result of the
Organization's action to support the Salvadorans in their
quest for peace and progress.

My delegation wishes also to support the points made
by the Secretary-General in his letter of 6 February 1995
(S/ 1995/ 143) with respect to the advisability of retaining a
United Nations office in El Salvador to assist with the
fulfilment of the commitments undertaken in the Peace
Accords.

I want also to emphasize that securing the path
towards an open, participatory society, one enjoying full
development, requires the effective completion of the
process through fulfilment of commitments with respect
to land transfers, human settlements, the strengthening of
the National Civil Police, modernization of the justice and
electoral systems, ratification of international instruments
on human rights, and other matters. These are
undoubtedly complex and need the full support of the
whole of Salvadoran society. We are entirely confident
that the Government will maintain the determination it
has shown to find solutions with respect to outstanding
commitments.

We underscore the importance of paragraph 4 of
draft resolution S/1995/335, by which the Council would
reiterate its call that States and international institutions
should continue to provide assistance to the Government
and people of El Salvador as they consolidate the gains
made in the peace process. The international community
will fully shoulder the great responsibility of continued
verification of what it now a deep-rooted process by
helping to deal with E1 Salvador's vast economic and
social problems.

In conclusion, I wish to express the satisfaction of
the Government of Colombia at having worked with the
Secretary-General in this process through its participation
in the Group of Friends, and to stress the importance of
the employment of means such as these in the quest for
peace.

