Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
appreciates the opportunity to contribute to this debate,
and thanks the Secretary-General for his latest report
(S/2010/463). We acknowledge and welcome the
presence of the Afghan Foreign Minister Rassoul and
Special Representative Staffan de Mistura and thank
him particularly for his extended briefing to the
Council.

I will focus on four issues from the Secretary-
General's report: elections, the security situation,
governance, and the need for a political solution.

Final results are still some weeks away, but one
outcome of the elections held on 18 September is
already very clear: millions of determined Afghans
showed courage and determination and defied threats
of violence to elect their Parliament. We congratulate
those who voted. They are entitled to see that same
resolve mirrored in all levels of their society.

We cannot and we do not hold Afghanistan to the
measure of long-standing, mature democracies, but we
are disappointed that, in some areas, the elections
could not be conducted because of security concerns
and we are concerned at reports of widespread voter
fraud.

We encourage the Independent Electoral and
Election Complaints Commissions to maintain rigorous
oversight of the election process and, more
specifically, to deal with the reports of fraud, thereby
ensuring that the new Parliament better reflects the will
of the people and works on their behalf.
Along with other international partners, New
Zealand is committed to help Afghanistan take the lead
on security, governance, and economic and social
development. President Karzai's commitments made at
the London Conference in January and the programme
of action endorsed in Kabul in July are benchmarks
against which Afghanistan's progress will be measured.

We accept that the security backdrop makes
progress very difficult. The elections were held during
one of Afghanistan's most violent periods since the
Taliban was driven from power. Violence has affected
Afghans, the United Nations Assistance Mission to
Afghanistan and the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF). Indeed, for ISAF, 2010 has been the
worst year of the war with, so far, more than 530
deaths, including New Zealand's first combat fatality.

Although the security situation remains tenuous,
we do see welcome signs of improvement. We
commend efforts to build the capacity of the Afghan
National Security Forces, and are particularly pleased
to see numbers increasing ahead of target. We welcome
the increase of nearly 40,000 ISAF troops, and also
President Karzai's commitment at the Kabul
Conference that Afghan National Security Forces will
have nationwide, lead responsibility for security by the
end of 2014. We will help to facilitate and support that
process in Bamyan Province.

Better security will increase opportunities for
improved governance, social programmes and
economic development. But the benefits of improved
governance must be evenly distributed, and they must
be sustainable. And they must withstand the scrutiny of
those who provide the support and the funding.

Corruption remains a central obstacle to
Afghanistan's progress, and it must be relentlessly
addressed. Corruption is corrosive; it destroys
capacity; it undermines public and international
confidence. We look to the Afghan Government to
make better progress on addressing corruption and
governance issues. That will ensure that with the
support of the international community, Afghanistan
will increasingly be able to stand on its own.

The new parliament has an important role to play
in ensuring confidence in central government and
ensuring that the central Government is connected to
the provinces, so that together, central and provincial
governments can form a cohesive whole. We
specifically encourage the parliament to find ways to
break the nine-month deadlock that has prevented
President Karzai from completing his cabinet.

In Bamyan, New Zealand works on the basis that
capable, credible governance remains critical to
effective development. We have increased development
spending, appointed a development adviser and put the
Provincial Reconstruction Team under civilian
leadership for the first time. We have appointed our
first Ambassador resident in Kabul. This is consistent
with international efforts to balance military and
civilian contributions and with Bamyan's transition to
Afghan leadership across all areas of security,
governance and development.

By itself, fighting will not secure Afghanistan's
future; only a political solution can bring lasting peace.
That solution must further isolate hard-core insurgency
leaders and encourage the majority back into
mainstream society. Compromises will be required on
all sides, but New Zealand would be alarmed if this
process saw the return of the very people who were
ousted nine years ago and would be dismayed if a
political settlement included official tolerance of
repression of women and minorities. We and others
have not put our people in harm's way in support of
such outcomes.

We will continue to watch for the longer-term
outcomes of the Peace Jirga hosted by President Karzai
in June. The establishment by the President of the High
Peace Council this month is a promising start, but we
do need to see results.

Afghanistan's neighbours also have an important
role to play in achieving a political solution. New
Zealand was encouraged when Pakistan backed the
reconciliation process in January, and we welcomed the
Pakistan-Afghan declaration on bilateral cooperation in
June. Pakistan obviously has an interest in a stable
State on its western border, so we look forward to its
closer, positive engagement with Afghanistan.
Cooperation on essential matters such as border
control, trade, policing drug trafficking and combating
the insurgency will be essential to help ensure a better
future for the region.

Next year will be the high-water mark of
international military involvement, with around
150,000 troops from nearly 50 contributing countries
in Afghanistan. New Zealand soldiers were among the
first to join the campaign against terrorism nearly ten
years ago, and today we continue to stand with the
people of Afghanistan as they grow as a nation. They
have our support in that growth and they have our
support in achieving that outcome.

