Mr. Ling (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus, too, welcomes Colombia's
initiative to convene an open debate on small arms and
light weapons in the Security Council.

The recently concluded United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects was undoubtedly a
landmark event in the life of the entire of international
community. I should like to express our gratitude to the
representative of Colombia, Ambassador Camilo
Reyes, whose experience and diplomatic skills enabled
the successful convening of the Conference and the
adoption of the Programme of Action, which, it must
be said, was no easy task. We must also refer to the
highly professional and effective work of the President
of the Preparatory Committee, Ambassador Carlos dos
Santos.

In the view of the Republic of Belarus, the
holding of an international Conference under United
Nations auspices and the adoption there of a final
document, the Programme of Action, represented a
great achievement. For the first time, discussing the
problems surrounding the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons was no longer a matter of mere national
or regional interest, but assumed a global dimension
that drew the attention of the wider world community
to this very serious issue. The next stage must be
concrete steps on the part of Member States,
international and regional organizations, the United
Nations and the Security Council to implement the
Programme of Action in order to solve the current
difficult problems in this area.

The Republic of Belarus shares the concern
expressed by the majority of the members of the world
community, who regard the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons as one of the main factors in the
spread of international terrorism, the emergence and
perpetuation of local armed conflicts and the expansion
of violence.

Belarus also fully shares the fears that the illicit
spread and destabilizing accumulation of small arms
and light weapons pose a real threat to regional and
international peace and security. The adoption at the
Conference of an agreed Programme of Action and the
subsequent discussion of that topic today here in the
Security Council are very convincing manifestations of
the international community's awareness of the fact
that the problem of small arms and light weapons
cannot be solved by individual countries, but require
agreed and coordinated efforts at the national, regional
and international levels.

My country is committed to the principles of
eradicating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition and is actively
contributing to the fight against that scourge. Relevant
information on national legislation and practical steps
adopted by the Government of Belarus to combat the
illicit trade in these weapons were contained in the
statement made by the head of the official delegation of
the Republic during the high-level segment of the
Conference and have been distributed to members.

We are convinced that the Security Council can
play an important role in solving the problem of the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons by giving
closer scrutiny to the following aspects of the problem:
first, reacting in a timely fashion to facts attesting to
the illicit spread and destabilizing accumulation of
small arms and light weapons; secondly, monitoring the
strict compliance of Member States with international
obligations regarding Security Council sanctions;
thirdly, providing assistance to States in matters of the
disarmament and demobilization of ex-combatants and
their subsequent rehabilitation and reintegration into
civilian society, including the dispatch of advisory
missions to States at their request; fourthly, reporting
on and summarizing, with a view to establishing best
practices, the experiences by States in undertaking
national and regional programmes and initiatives to
monitor the transfer of small arms and light weapons
and ammunition, including measures to combat the
illicit trade in such weapons.

In conclusion, I should like to point out that, in
the opinion of the Republic of Belarus, the Programme
of Action - adopted as a result of a compromise - is
a balanced document containing realistic proposals
that, if implemented by the international community in
the context of the United Nations, will help to resolve
the acute problems related to the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in all its aspects.

