Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): We are grateful to
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting. I would like to join previous speakers in
thanking Mr. Annabi for his comprehensive briefing
last Friday to introduce the report of the Secretary-
General, (S/2002/432 and Add.l), which presents a
clear picture of the challenges facing us. We are
pleased to congratulate His Excellency Mr. Xanana
Gusmao on his election as the first President of East
Timor, and we wish him every success in his important
endeavours. Unfortunately, we could not make our
statement when the President-elect and the Chief
Minister of the Transitional Government, Mr. Alkatiri,
were present in the Chamber. Still, we would like to
express our gratitude for their useful and very
informative statements.

I shall limit myself to only a few remarks on a
number of issues of particular importance to my
delegation. We cannot but mention the significant
progress made in the implementation of key elements
of UNTAET's mandate, including the transition to
independence, the establishment of a public
administration and the creation of a stable security
environment. We are encouraged by achievements in
the field of economic and social development, in the
health and education sectors in East Timor and in
building the civil service.

My delegation welcomes the adoption on 22
March 2002 of the Constitution of the Democratic
Republic of East Timor, which will come into force on
20 May 2002. That document provides for a unitary,
democratic State based on the rule of law and on the
principle of separation of powers.

We are particularly pleased with the successful
holding on 14 April of the presidential elections in East
Timor. We highly appreciate the efforts of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) and of the Transitional Cabinet to ensure
the holding of democratic and orderly general
legislative and presidential elections. We consider that
the adoption of the Constitution and the successful
presidential election were extraordinary, important
events on the way to the independence of East Timor.

At the same time, we agree with the Secretary-
General that once independent, East Timor will still
require further substantial international support in
many areas in order to ensure security in East Timor
and the Viability and stability of its Government
structures. In that context, we share the relevant
recommendations contained in the recent report of the
Secretary-General, which outlines in clear and specific
detail the proposed structure for the United Nations
presence in East Timor after independence.

We believe that the Secretary-General's
recommendations for the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) are both wise and
carefully considered in their details. Ukraine
wholeheartedly endorses them. In our opinion, the
proposed mandate, structure and size of the mission
will, on the one hand, ensure effective international
participation in the reconstruction of East Timor and,
on the other, provide first and foremost for the active
participation of the East Timorese themselves in the
building of their country.

In that regard, we welcome the high profile that
the Secretary-General has given to the issue of support
for the post-independence public administration, in
particular its Timorization. It is our view that the
strengthening of national justice and law enforcement
structures and capacities will also need particular
attention from UN MISET.

The second topic, which other speakers have
already referred to, is security in the country. I strongly
support the strong emphasis placed by the Secretary-
General on the areas of internal security and law
enforcement, as well as on external security and border
control. All these issues require effective police and
military structures. It is important to enable the East
Timorese to play an increasing role in enforcing public
safety and in the defence of East Timor's borders. We
are of the view that the strengthening of the East
Timorese Defence Force and the East Timorese police
should be among the priority tasks of UNMISET.

We believe that those measures must also be part
of great, sustained efforts aimed at economic and social
development through the appropriate use of resources
and the creation of national capacities in order to make
proper use of those resources.

Finally, I would like to pay tribute to the
UNTAET staff for their efforts and to the Special
Representative, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, personally,
for his able and effective leadership of the mission. We
are convinced that the successor mission, UNMISET,
will ensure that the gains made during the past two and
a half years are further consolidated. Let me assure
you, Mr. President, that Ukraine is ready to support the
efforts of UNMISET, headed by Ambassador Kamalesh
Sharma, who will succeed Sergio Vieira de Mello as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
East Timor. We wish Ambassador Sharma every
success.
