Mr. Serrano (spoke in French): In the spirit of
brevity, I shall read out an abridged version of the
European Union statement, the full version of which is
being distributed in the Council Chamber.

The candidate countries of Croatia and
Montenegro, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates of
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia, as well
as the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.

I should first like to welcome the presence of the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Mariano Fernandez Amunategui. I wish him every
success in carrying out his duties. I also pay tribute to
his predecessor, Mr. Edmond Mulet, for the services he
provided during an extraordinarily busy time.

We are pleased that, since our last debate in this
Chamber on this issue (S/PV.6510), the country has,
for the first time in its history, seen a peaceful transfer
of power from a democratically elected President to
another from the opposition. Nevertheless, it is
regrettable that, several months after the election of
President Martelly, political negotiations have not led
to the effective appointment of a new Prime Minister
and the establishment of a new Government. Political
stability and the resolute action of a competent Cabinet
are crucial to providing new momentum to the
country's reconstruction efforts. We encourage all
parties to accelerate consultations and to work to
establish a ministerial Cabinet that will be ready to rise
to the challenges at hand.

Turning to the security situation, while on the
whole the situation has remained calm during the past
few months, it could deteriorate given political
tensions and frustration among the people. Indeed,
while the Haitian National Police has gradually
improved in effectiveness, it does not yet seem ready
to fully guarantee internal security in the country.
Appropriate transfer of expertise and the strengthening
of institutions tasked with applying and enforcing the
rule of law and to ensure better protection of
vulnerable groups are, in our view, the priorities that
must be addressed immediately, with the essential
support of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH).

MINUSTAH continues to play a primary role,
and the European Union warmly welcomes the
recommendations of the Secretary-General on
extending its mandate. The European Union also notes
the recommendations of the Secretary-General for a
partial withdrawal of personnel.

Finally, the European Union deplores the
allegations of sexual abuse recently made against
certain members of MINUSTAH and calls upon the
United Nations to investigate those matters as quickly
as possible. Along those lines, I take note of the
declaration just made by the Permanent Representative
of Uruguay.

The European Union remains firmly committed to
standing side by side Haiti in its reconstruction and
development process over the long term. The financial
commitment made by the European Union at last year's
international conference is a perfect witness to that.

In order to better satisfy the various identified
priorities, we have re-evaluated our programme for
2011-2013 in cooperation with member States and in
close cooperation with the Haitian authorities.
Infrastructure, governance, decentralization, health and
education, food security and rural development remain
our main areas of action. We also continue to provide
budgetary support to ensure priority expenditures. The
European Union will continue to provide substantial
humanitarian aid in 2012. It is also essential for
30
reconstruction and development projects to strengthen
the resilience of both the Haitian population and public
infrastructure in confronting natural disasters.

Finally, we highlight our support for the principle
of the gradual transfer of the coordination role of the
Interim Haiti Recovery Commission to the Government
of Haiti, which should go hand in hand with the
strengthening of national capacities. In that context, we
support the extension of the Commission's mandate
and all initiatives aimed at strengthening its
effectiveness.

In conclusion, our role as the international
community is to help the country to rebuild itself
better. The European Union has demonstrated that it is
able to turn its promises into tangible reality by
working closing with the national authorities and the
United Nations family in Haiti.

