Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Director John
Ging for his briefing. We reiterate our appreciation to
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners for
continuing to provide life-saving assistance to millions
of Syrians in challenging circumstances.

We note from the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/777) that the United Nations no
longer categorizes any area in Syria as besieged. In
addition, the number of displaced people has decreased
significantly, particularly in south-west Syria. While
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons
in some parts of Syria could be taken as a positive
trend, we understand that humanitarian needs remain
at a high level. Therefore, the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners should be supported by all parties
so that they can reach all Syrians in need of assistance.

In that regard, we stress that safe, timely, sustained
and unimpeded humanitarian access to people in
need throughout the country remains indispensable.
The protection of civilians and civilian facilities is
also critical. In addition to supporting an effective
humanitarian response, the protection of aid workers
should be afforded special attention. In order to
continue need-based humanitarian programmes, the
United Nations and its humanitarian partners also
require sufficient and predictable funding for the Syria
humanitarian assistance response plan.

We are concerned that further military escalation
in Idlib and surrounding areas, where nearly 3 million
Syrians reside, could aggravate the humanitarian crisis.
The report of the Secretary- General clearly cautions that
increased military escalation in that area would not only
trigger further massive population movements, but also
have catastrophic consequences for civilians in terms
of protection and access to humanitarian assistance
and basic services. As Idlib is one of the de-escalation
zones, we encourage the Astana guarantors - who, we
acknowledge, had a meeting late last month - to abide
by the de-escalation agreement and find a sustainable

solution through dialogue that could protect civilians
in that area.

The Council - particularly those members that
have influence over local actors - should also play
a constructive role in avoiding military measures
that could have a huge impact on civilians. As the
Secretary-General reminds us in his latest report, we
all should have only one agenda - to end the continued
and enormous suffering of the people of Syria. It is
only a Syrian-owned, comprehensive and political
solution facilitated by the United Nations that could
sustainably end the humanitarian tragedy. Therefore,
all efforts should be made to accelerate progress on the
political track.

