Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I wish first
of all to thank Mr. Kieran Prendergast for his very precise
and specific statement; it constituted the best introduction
to our discussion.

It is good that the issue of sanctions is today the
subject of public debate in the Security Council. Our
debate is an extension of the recommendations of the

 

General Assembly on this issue. It is particularly timely
because the question of how best to hone the tool of
sanctions to make it more effective is at present the subject
of a number of seminars.

The Security Council has imposed sanctions 12 times
since 1990, while it had done so only twice before then.
Following what some have called the decade of sanctions,
the Security Council is justified in attempting to assess the
results of this policy and to formulate guidelines for the
future.

Sanctions are a legitimate instrument whose use is
governed by the Charter. They allow us, when faced with
a threat to the peace, to take intermediate measures,
between simple political pressure and the use of force. In
other words, they allow the Council to demonstrate its
determination that its decisions should be enforced, without
going so far as to use armed force. It is thus essential to
maintain the Council's capacity to have recourse to
sanctions when necessary.

When used well, sanctions have proved to be an
effective tool for achieving the aims the Council has set for
itself. They played a significant role in South Africa's
decision to abandon the apartheid regime. The imposition
of sanctions against Libya led that country to cooperate
with the legal systems of the countries concerned. The
sanctions against UNITA contributed to isolating and
weakening that movement. The Council is now trying to
make these measures more effective and to see to it that
they are universally applied. Lastly, for many years
sanctions have obliged Iraq to comply with most of the
demands stipulated in resolution 687 (1991).

We must nevertheless note that in many cases our
Council has experienced failure. In particular, when
excessively prolonged, comprehensive sanctions regimes
have a human cost that outweighs the benefits the Council
can expect. These sanctions are cruel to people and have
little impact on leaders. The effects of comprehensive
sanctions often run counter to the desired goal and permit
leaders of targeted States to tighten their grip over society
by virtue of the isolation in which their country is kept and
the increased dependence of the population on the existing
regime. Finally, these sanctions indiscriminately affect the
regime's supporters as well as those trying to oppose it.

Comprehensive sanctions also have a negative impact
on neighbouring States, whose cooperation is nevertheless
indispensable. Our Council has often deplored the many
Violations of sanctions regimes. But we must also realize
that this phenomenon is partly due to the fact that the
economic impact of sanctions on third countries is not
sufficiently taken into account. The case of Jordan in
1990 is the only example of a concrete decision by the
Security Council to help a country face such difficulties.
Too much embargo kills the embargo.

If sanctions sometimes have little effect,
responsibility also lies with the institutional arrangements
that accompany them, particularly at the United Nations.
In this regard, we should consider how the Secretariat and
the sanctions committee might do more and better in this
area. It is first of all essential for the Secretariat to have
the necessary expertise, especially with regard to the arms
trade, financial assets and customs work. This requires an
increase in its human and financial resources. It should be
able to play a real role in making proposals and following
up on them. The Secretariat should be in a position to
assess the impact of sanctions and the humanitarian
situation in targeted countries. It is not normal that after
10 years the Security Council has only scant information
on the situation in Iraq.
The way committees work must also be modified.
The rule of consensus is paralysing. Nothing in the
Charter or in resolutions of the Council requires
committees to take their decisions by consensus. The
adoption of decisions by simple majority, at least for
non-essential questions, could suffice. Transparency is
also a concept that sanctions committees too often ignore.
Third States and targeted States are not invited to speak
before the committees. Measures were planned to that end
but have not been applied. Proposals have been made but
have been rejected by certain members. Even briefings by
representatives of United Nations agencies are often
problematic. It is essential that the practice of hearing
outside speakers be the norm.

Well-founded criticism of sanctions might lead to an
overall questioning of their legitimacy. We want to avoid
this development because we believe in the relevance of
this tool. So what can be done? France would like to
propose three complementary approaches.

First, it would be wise not to use this instrument
lightly. Sanctions must remain an instrument reserved for
exceptional cases and only after other possibilities for
peaceful settlement have been used. Gauging their
impact - especially the economic and social effects -
on civilians should be done systematically. We regret that
this practice, which has been repeatedly recommended,

 

has never been implemented. Cases in which the imposition
of sanctions is feasible must be strictly interpreted. The
measures referred to in Article 41 of the Charter may be
used only to maintain or restore international peace and
security. For example, we are not in favour of sanctions
being applied solely because it is alleged that certain States
are not complying with sanctions decided upon by the
Security Council. It is obviously imperative that all Member
States of the United Nations comply with the sanctions
regimes imposed by the Council, which are mandatory; but
other, more effective means exist to enforce the Council's
decisions. We should avoid increasing the number of
sanctions regimes. The United Nations already has the
greatest difficulty in securing compliance with those
currently in force.

Secondly, we must take care that the measures decided
upon are in proportion to the situation and that sanctions
are adjusted with regard to developments in the political
situations they are supposed to correct. It is therefore
necessary to evaluate their appropriateness throughout the
time they are in force. No sanctions regime can work if it
does not encourage the targeted State to amend its attitude.
The logic behind sanctions is not punitive, but rather to
provide an incentive. We therefore believe it is essential to
define beforehand clear criteria which, once met, would
lead to an easing of sanctions. For sanctions to remain a
credible instrument, the Security Council, or some of its
members, must not give the impression that sanctions will
remain in force regardless of the attitude adopted by the
State concerned. Although it is indisputable that since 1990
Iraq has complied with some of its obligations, the Security
Council has never seriously examined the possibility of
reducing the sanctions against this country, although this is
provided for in paragraph 21 of resolution 687 (1991).

Thirdly, the problem of the duration of the sanctions
has to be addressed. Some sanctions have not been lifted
even though the circumstances that caused them to be
adopted no longer exist. Others are no longer applied,
without this prompting any reaction from the Council. The
credibility of sanctions suffers as a result.

In order to ensure periodically that the tool remains
legitimate, sanctions should be decided on for a specific
period. There should be a provision that at the end of this
period the Council is invited to take a new decision to
renew the sanctions. Experience has shown that the
international community's support for certain sanctions
regimes wanes because keeping them depends on the
resolve of a very limited number of Council members. This
can only strengthen the intransigence of the target State.

In conclusion, the Secretary-General's penetrating
analysis in his millennium report, which I commend,
should provide inspiration for the Security Council. The
sanctions should be better targeted and be "intelligent".
An effort has been made in a number of cases but
"unintelligent" sanctions still persist. We hope that the
Security Council's informal working group effectively
chaired by Canada, which has drafted a code which we
fully endorse, will be bolder not only with regard to
future sanctions but also for those regimes still being
applied.

