Mr. Raytchev (Bulgaria): I should like to begin
by joining others in extending a warm welcome to Sir
Emyr Jones Parry, the new Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom. We are confident that his
extensive diplomatic experience will be a valuable
asset for the work of the Council. We look forward to
continued and active cooperation with the United
Kingdom delegation.

Bulgaria associates itself with the statement to be
made later in the debate by the Italian presidency of the
European Union. We highly appreciate the considerable
efforts and the substantial contribution of the European
Union in this field.

Bulgaria welcomes and supports the briefing
given at this open meeting of the Security Council
pursuant to paragraphs 9 and 14 of resolution 1455
(2003) by the Chairman of the Committee established
by that resolution. I would like to take this opportunity
to compliment Ambassador Munoz of Chile for the
smooth transition in the chairmanship of the
Committee. It is obvious that, thanks to his committed
leadership, the Committee is making further progress
in its work. Our thanks also go to the members of the
dedicated team from the Chilean delegation, as well as
to the experts from the Monitoring Group and to the
Secretariat. We are grateful for the detailed briefing on
the overall activities of the Committee and for the
summary on the progress made in submitting the
reports requested in paragraph 9 of resolution 1455
(2003).

Success in the fight against terrorism, the Al

Qaeda organization and the Taliban - and other
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities
associated with them - requires synergy of action

based upon shared analysis, clear-cut goals and
continued improvement of the measures applied. A
well-calibrated balance between transparency of
purpose and secure, confident interaction at the
subregional, regional and international levels can
facilitate the achievement of our common goals in this
delicate sphere of activity.

It is our firm belief that, among the leading
priorities of the Security Council, the following are of
particular importance: first, setting and sustaining the
right context; and, secondly, guiding and assisting -
when and where necessary - in the strict
implementation of measures provided for in the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

We fully endorse the view of the Chairman of the
Committee that the stigma of recognition associated
with the possible presence of Al Qaeda or those
associated with the network within the territory of a
given State should be overcome. Such a presence is
like a Virus, and all measures should be taken to
prevent it from turning into a dangerous disease. We
expect that the forthcoming Visits of the Chairman to
various regions will serve that end. The establishment
of such a new framework will help national authorities
and facilitate more active intra- and interregional
cooperation in the fight against terrorism. It will also
create the basis for a more proactive approach by the
Monitoring Group in collecting and analysing
information to assist the Committee and the States
concerned. We thank the experts of the Monitoring
Group for their continuous efforts towards introducing
improvements to the consolidated list.

We are pleased that, on the basis of country
reports and with a view to recommending further
measures for the consideration of the Council, the
Chairman of the Committee will, by 15 December
2003, inform the Security Council in his next report of
the main difficulties encountered by the States in the
implementation of the measures referred to in
paragraph 1 of resolution 1455 (2003).

Finally, we believe that among the immediate
results of this meeting of the Security Council, the
following deserve particular attention: maintaining
genuine transparency in, and awareness of, the work of
the Committee when needed; deepening cooperation
with Member States; closer coordination and
cooperation between the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and the Committee established under resolution
1267 (1999), as well as more operational interaction
between the experts of the CTC and the Monitoring
Group; and more active and efficient cooperation with
existing subregional and regional mechanisms and
organizations. We also commend the further efforts
made to improve the process of implementing
resolution 1455 (2003) and to ensure concrete and
practical results in that regard.

