Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): Allow me also to extend the congratulations of
my delegation to you, Mr. President, on the efficient way
in which you are presiding over the Security Council
during the month of August.

The Peace Agreement between the Government of
Sierra Leone and the Revolutionary United Front of Sierra
Leone (RUF), signed on 7 July at Lome, marks a decisive
moment in the recent history of that country. We trust
that this will be the beginning of a stage of reconstruction
and reconciliation for Sierra Leone, as well as one of
stability and progress for the region.

We wish to underscore the role played by President
Eyadema of Togo; the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Francis Okelo; the other leaders of
the region; and most especially President Kabbah, who
had to take very difficult decisions at delicate moments in
the negotiations.

We would also like to highlight the contribution
made by the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) and
those who generously provided it with the resources to
allow it to carry out its operations. We would also like to
recall the importance of continuing to provide it with
assistance so that it can continue to perform its tasks.

We would also like to take this opportunity to pay
very sincere and express tribute to those who have lost
their lives in defence of the ideals of the United Nations.
We trust that all of us in the Security Council will
understand the importance of committing ourselves
explicitly to protecting those who carry out dangerous
missions on behalf of our Organization.

The implementation of the Lorne Agreement will
call for joint action on the part of the Government and the
people of Sierra Leone, of the African States involved in
the process through ECOWAS and ECOMOG, and of the
United Nations. The process of reconciliation and
reconstruction in Sierra Leone will no doubt be arduous
and complex. It will require considerable human and

 

economic resources. In particular, it will require strong
political will to overcome through negotiation and dialogue
the difficulties that will surely arise.

We believe that the Agreement establishes the
necessary institutions for the task of reconciliation and
reconstruction. This is where the international community,
the United Nations and the Security Council in particular
should focus their assistance, which does not consist merely
of sending military observers and additional civilian staff.
The implementation of the Agreement will require a clear
commitment to the values of democracy, liberty and the
rule of law. For example, we believe that a specific and
fundamental way of giving shape to those values will be to
place a portion of the proceeds derived from the mining of
gold and diamonds into a special account to be used,
among other things, to establish rehabilitation,
compensation and education programmes. We consider that
this should include the setting up of special education
programmes aimed at the children and young people who
have been victims of mutilation. The leaders of the future
should emerge from that group, for they understand better
than anyone else the horror and injustice of war.

The Lorne Agreement is complex and was the result
of intensive negotiations. The granting of wide-ranging and
general amnesty, as provided for in the Agreement, raises
very important questions. Argentina's position and practice
in this connection have been uniform and unswerving.
However, we understand that that very delicate decision can
be taken only by the parties involved, which assume the
historical responsibility inherent in that decision. At the
same time, we wish to express our satisfaction with the
provisions of the Agreement that establish the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission and the Human Rights
Commission.

The draft resolution before us is well balanced and
addresses realistically the main problems. At the appropriate
time, we will carefully study the proposals of the Secretary-
General on new mandates and concepts for the operations
of the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone.
We are convinced that the United Nations has an
irreplaceable role to play in maintaining and consolidating
peace in Sierra Leone.

