Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We would
like to begin by commending you, Mr. President, for
your wise management of Council affairs during this
month, and we thank you for convening this meeting.
We also thank the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, the Chief Scientist of the
World Meteorological Organization; and the Research
Assistant at the Environmental Security Program of the
Stimson Center for their valuable briefings.

Climate change is one of the foremost issues of our
times. Climate change-related challenges and concerns
are intensifying and therefore require a serious and
effective response from the international community.
This is no longer an issue ofthe distant future; its effects
are happening on our planet right now. The planet is
suffering the effects of this phenomenon, both slowly
and rapidly. It is of concern in many areas, including
natural disasters, threats to food and water security,
the prevalence of diseases, threats to biodiversity, the
scarcity of natural resources, leading to increased
competition for those resources, high tensions and
massive human displacement as a result of droughts,
floods and the loss of traditional livelihoods, such as
agriculture and fishing.

Vulnerable regions and communities, in particular
small island States and arid regions, are the most
threatened by the aforementioned dangers and adverse
effects. However, no region - including our own,
which is considered to be one of the world's most
arid - is spared the negative effects of climate change.
Developing countries in particular pay a heavy price
when it comes to climate change. Therefore, we must
step up the pace of our collective efforts to address
the climate threat within the framework of the United
Nations and at the international level in order to
confront climate change in a systematic manner. We
need to make this a priority issue across all relevant
forums and international bodies, in line with their
expertise and mandate.

In addition to the impact of climate change and
natural disasters on socioeconomic development and
human rights, there is a link between climate, peace
and security. The Security Council is increasingly
aware of that link, as noted in its presidential statement
S/PRST/2011/15, as well as in the Council's consideration
of certain regional issues, particularly in Africa. There
is a need to better understand climate-related dangers
and their effect on conflicts. There is also a need to
improve the collection and assessment of information,
as well as early-warning mechanisms, in order to
effectively respond to those threats, prevent conflict
and maintain peace.

The Paris Agreement on Climate Change reflects
the political will to work together to address the
negative impacts of climate change. We, together
with the international community, intend to fulfil the
commitments arising from the Paris Agreement. The
State of Qatar was honoured to host an important
segment of this process, which then led to the Paris
Agreement. We hosted the eighteenth session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, and joined
in the consensus reached in Poland in December 2018
at the twenty-fourth session of the Conference of the
Parties to the Framework Convention on implementing
the 2015 Paris Agreement.

In line with our commitments under the Paris
Agreement, the Qatar Investment Authority is investing
in climate-related funding projects. We are a founding
and active member of the One Planet Sovereign Wealth
Fund, established at the One Planet Summit held in
Paris in 2017 to strengthen the global allocation of
funds to contribute to a harmonious transition to more
sustainable and low carbon economies.

The State of Qatar is interested in environmental
protection, as can be seen in the environmental
development projects within the framework of our
2030 National Vision. We have developed national
strategies and plans to protect the environment and
reduce dependence on hydrocarbons. We also have a
number of national projects for clean energy and energy
efficiency, including the use of solar energy. Our
dependence on solar energy will account for more than
20 per cent of our use by 2030. We are making efforts
to reduce carbon footprint by diversifying our revenue
sources and reducing dependence on depleted energy.

In conclusion, the State of Qatar underscores
its full commitment to cooperating with the United
Nations and the international community to respond
to all emerging threats and international challenges,
in particular climate change and natural disasters,
with a view to ensuring the well-being of present and
future generations.

