Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me to welcome you, President Santos Calderon. I thank
you, Sir, and your Government for convening this
timely and important debate. Also allow me to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon and the United
Nations Special Envoy for Haiti, President Clinton, for
their comprehensive briefings and contributions to
today's debate. We also welcome the participation of
His Excellency President Preval in today's meeting.

Bosnia and Herzegovina appreciates the
opportunity to express its support and encouragement
to the people of Haiti in their efforts to overcome
difficulties and rebuild their country.
The successful conclusion of the presidential
elections and the establishment of a legitimate
Government are an important component of Haiti's
ongoing recovery as well as a significant step towards
long-term stability and development. We therefore
welcome the ongoing electoral process in Haiti and
encourage the Haitian authorities to conclude the
process in a credible manner. We praise the role of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and the Organization of American States
and their commitments in assisting Haitian authorities
in the electoral process.

A new Government in Haiti will face many
challenges, bearing in mind the existing conditions on
the ground. Along with reconstruction, the Government
will have to address outstanding issues in many areas,
particularly in security, the rule of law and institutional
reform. Haiti needs to strengthen its governance
structure and put in place basic services in order to
improve the conditions and alleviate the suffering of its
population.

It is therefore of the utmost importance that
during this crucial period in determining the future of
the country all political actors are united by their
common goal: a stable and prosperous Haiti. Political
instability, on the other hand, may divert their country
from the road to recovery and development. It is also
imperative that MINUSTAH and its international
partners extend their indispensable support to the
national authorities in those endeavours.

Haiti's reconstruction and recovery will be a very
complex task, requiring the full commitment of the
national Government and its institutions. This process
will inevitably be accompanied by challenges and
obstacles, which should be addressed with increased
resolve and intensified efforts. The determination of
the Haitian Government and its people to build a better
Haiti is the crucial ingredient that, with the continuing
support of the international community, will
additionally reinforce efforts to achieve that goal as
soon as possible.

In this context, we commend the work of the
Interim Haiti Recovery Commission and the Haiti
Reconstruction Fund for their pivotal role in long-term
reconstruction. It is essential that the international
community coordinate its activities with the Interim
Haiti Recovery Commission to make international
assistance more efficient. We plead with all donors to
continue fulfilling their commitments and providing
resources necessary for Haiti's reconstruction and
development.

We are deeply concerned about the dire living
and economic conditions of internally displaced

persons (IDPs) in Haiti. We consider it crucial that
national authorities, with assistance from their
international partners, continue to provide services to
IDPs and create an environment conducive to
resettlement of that vulnerable population. All
activities related to IDPs must be carried out with due
sensitivity. Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports the
efforts of MINUSTAH and the assistance it provides to
the national authorities in the protection of civilians, in
particular IDPs.

During these difficult times for Haiti, the United
Nations and MINUSTAH have played a critical role. It
is important that partnership between the Haitian
people and the United Nations be further strengthened
in order to preserve positive developments and meet
remaining challenges. The international community
should remain with the Haitians and help them in
shaping the future of their country. This is a long-term
commitment, and both sides must be patient and
devoted until the ultimate goal is achieved.

In conclusion, on behalf of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, I would like to praise the United Nations
and MINUSTAH personnel for their tireless efforts and
the important work they are carrying out in Haiti.

