Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, I congratulate
the delegation of Japan on its skilled leadership as
President of the Security Council and I express my
appreciation for the convening of this important
open debate. I also thank His Excellency Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for being with us today and for
his valuable briefing to the Council. It was delightful
recently to see him Visit the State of Palestine and
to receive the highest order decoration by President
Abbas in Ramallah. It was a special moment and I was
delighted to witness that special moment.

The Security Council is meeting against the
backdrop of an extremely volatile and tense situation
on the ground in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and ongoing deadlock in the
efforts to create a viable political horizon to resolve
once and for all this deadly, destructive and tragic
conflict. It is also meeting against the backdrop of
ongoing regional and international initiatives aimed at
salvaging the two-State solution and the prospects for
peace and charting a way forward for their realization.
Regrettably, however, for various reasons, none of those
initiatives have come to fruition and the political will to
act responsibly and boldly - in line with international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions, in the
interest ofjustice and human rights and for the sake of
peace and security - remains perilously absent.

The Arab States continue to extend their hand
in peace, supporting the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, including to self-determination and
independence, while also striving to open up a new
era of peace, stability and security in our region. For
over 14 years, the Arab Peace Initiative has offered a
bold path forward, and yet Israel, the occupying Power,
remains intransigent, belittling that most significant
initiative, failing to reciprocate time and time again,
and obstructing the revival of a political horizon on its
basis. Israel has also stood in rejection of the important
multilateral effort for peace undertaken in the context
of the French initiative to establish an international
support group for Palestinian-Israeli peace and set
the foundations for an international peace conference
aimed at bringing the parties together to finally resolve
the conflict.

In this regard, while underscoring its limitations
and the need for further bold steps commensurate
with professed intentions and commitments and the
real urgency of the matter, we recognize the joint
communique issued by the participants in the Middle
East peace initiative meeting held on 3 June in Paris.
We reaffirm our continued cooperation in this regard
and appeal for ongoing coordination and efforts to
advance that initiative and the prospects for peace.

The most recent international initiative is that
undertaken by the Middle East Quartet, which on 1 July
released a long-awaited report. Unfortunately, the report
did not meet expectations, failing to rise to the urgent
needs of this critical juncture and regrettably failing to
acknowledge the gravity of the nearly half-century of
Israeli foreign occupation of our land and its existence
as the primary source of the instability, Violence and
violations we are witnessing; its impact on every single
aspect of Palestinian life, scarring and depriving one
generation after another for decades, forcing them to
live in a perpetual state of oppression and misery in
which they are being denied every human right; and its
total incompatibility with any peace effort predicated
on international law and justice and the two-State
solution, as per the long-standing global consensus.

After nearly 50 years of occupation; after more
than 20 years of negotiations; and after nearly 70 years
of the question of Palestine remaining unresolved on
the United Nations agenda and constituting an open,
painful bleeding wound in the international body
and a threat to international peace and security, we
expected and were promised more from the Quartet.
The patience exhibited not just by Palestine but also
by other regional and international partners was
clearly based on a belief that this time the Quartet
would rise to the responsibilities it has assumed and
make bold recommendations to address the main
challenges, including the final status issues, aimed at
finally and definitively ending the Israeli occupation
of the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
that began in June 1967 and achieving the two-State
solution of an independent, sovereign, contiguous
and viable State of Palestine, living side by side with
Israel in peace and security within recognized borders
based on the pre-1967 borders, and a just solution for
the Palestine refugees based on General Assembly
resolution 194 (III).

Regrettably, this was not the case. The Palestinian
leadership has clearly expressed its deep disappointment
and dismay regarding the report and the manner in
which it deals with critical and sensitive issues, or fails
to do so. This includes the report's glaring failure to deal
appropriately with the ongoing criminal actions, illegal
measures and constant provocations being perpetrated
by Israel, the occupying Power, against our people
and land. It also includes the repeated inappropriate
attempts to draw a symmetry between the occupying
Power and the occupied people and to equate individual
acts ofviolence with the official, deliberate policies and
actions of the occupying Power, which are the source
of this conflict and all of its ills. Moreover, the report
represents yet another attempt to manage the conflict,
rather than reaffirm the principles and parameters
of a final and just solution and define the means for
reaching that objective within a set timeframe and with
the necessary international support and guarantees.

The report's characterization of nearly every Israeli
action as simply a response to Palestinian actions, rather
than as part of systematic, deliberate and decades-long
policies and practices, is unacceptable and offensive.
This is the case whether in reference to the use of
administrative detention against Palestinians, punitive
home demolitions, the severe closures, the provocations
and incursions at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, or the killing of
Palestinian civilians by the Israeli occupying forces in
military raids or demonstrations. Equally offensive is
the implication that security is only a need and a right
for Israel, while this right for the Palestinian people,
along with their need and right to protection as occupied
people, is ignored.

The inability of the Quartet report to refer to
the incessant violence, destruction, intimidation
and barbarism of some extremist Israeli settlers as
terrorism, including the burning to death of a young
family as they slept in their home, while repeatedly
and liberally characterizing Palestinian actions as
such, is telling of the narrative adopted. In this regard,
as the report actually does in one instance, we would
point to the reflections and statements of senior Israeli
officials - both military and political - referring to
such actions as terror and cautioning about the extreme
dangers posed by such individuals and groups to the
Palestinian civilian population under Israel's occupation
and to Israeli society itself.

Not the least ofthis is the incitement to violence, the
Vicious hatred and racist extremism routinely fomented
by Israeli settlers and Jewish extremists against the
Palestinian people and often declared as well by
numerous Israeli officials and religious leaders who are
on the Israeli Government's payroll and continue their
malicious incitement against the Palestinian people and
their leadership. The Palestinian people are suffering
immensely from such inflammatory and racist rhetoric
and incitement, which continue to fuel terror and hate
crimes against innocent Palestinian civilians. Yet, rather
than go into further detail in the context of this debate
about the extent and impact of such Israeli extremism,
we would refer to the many recent statements made in
this regard by several Israeli leaders themselves, who
are directly addressing this dangerous phenomenon and
illness as we speak.

We note the Quartet's recognition of the destructive
nature of Israel's settlement construction and expansion
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and
that its designation of occupied Palestinian land for
exclusive Israeli use, whether for military or settler
purposes, its confiscation of Palestinian property
and demolition of Palestinian homes, and denial of
Palestinian development are part and parcel of this
illegal settlement campaign. Moreover, the persistence
of such illegal policies and practices certainly raise
serious questions about Israel's long-term intentions, as
noted by the report. Those intentions are reconfirmed
by the statements of some Israeli Ministers, including
the Prime Minister himself, that "there should never
be a Palestinian State", as opposed to the deceptive
statements that we hear in this Chamber from the
representative of the occupying Power.

It is an understatement to say that, through this
illegal network of colonies and infrastructure Israel, is
entrenching its occupation daily, hammering one nail
after another into the coffin of the two-State solution.
While the report rightly concludes that all of this
is eroding the viability of the two-State solution, it
fails to affirm that Israel stands in grave Violation of
international law, including humanitarian and criminal
law, in its implementation of its settlement schemes and
constant attempts to de facto annex the Palestinian land.

In that regard, we note the report's finding that at
least 70 per cent of so-called Area C, which actually
comprises 60 per cent of the West Bank, has been
expropriated for exclusive Israeli use. Nearly all of the
30 per cent that remains, much of it private Palestinian
property is, as noted in the report,

"effectively off-limits for Palestinian development
because it requires permits from the Israeli military
authorities that are almost never granted".

That fact alone is telling ofthe Israelis' true intentions in
occupied Palestine, where the Israeli settler population
now exceeds half a million and the construction of
settlements and related infrastructure continues every
single day.

Actually, in an immediate response to the Quartet's
report, the Israeli Government provocatively approved
the construction of another 800 housing units and
illegal settlements in and around occupied East
Jerusalem. That is further proof that the failure to
hold Israel accountable for its violations and to take
hold measures for peace, as opposed to recommending
piecemeal confidence-building measures, is a mistaken
and futile approach that will only be met with further
Israeli contempt and arrogance.

As for the situation in the Gaza Strip, where Israel's

inhumane and illegal blockade continues to be imposed
and the man-made humanitarian catastrophe continues
to deepen, the report neglects to address the underlying
issues and the flagrant Violations that are being
perpetrated by the occupying Power as it collectively
punishes the entire Palestinian civilian population
there. In that regard, despite the regrettable political
divide and the ongoing efforts to achieve Palestinian
reconciliation and unity as a matter of national urgency,
the failure to bridge that divide cannot be used as
an excuse to continue imprisoning nearly 2 million
people and forcing them to live in the ruins of war and
mass deprivation.

In that context, I wish to conclude my statement by
conveying to Council members the depths ofthe despair,
hopelessness and human devastation that the Israeli
occupation and the ongoing Israeli aggression have
inflicted on our people for decades. They are among
the dimensions that we believe the Quartet report did
not properly, sensitively or respectfully address. But I
hope that today those matters will be heard and felt and
responsibly acted upon as I read to you excerpts from a
letter to the international community from a Palestinian,
Rafat Badran, the father of a young Palestinian boy,
Mahmoud Badran, who was brutally murdered by the
Israeli occupying forces on 21 June. By the way, when
the Secretary-General was in Ramala he met the father,
his wife and his family. These are his words:

"Last Friday, my wife Amal and I lived our
greatest nightmare when we buried our precious
son Mahmoud. He was 15 years old.

"A few days earlier, he was enjoying an evening
of relative normalcy, an occurrence all too rare in
the life of a Palestinian child. It was the holy month
of Ramadan, and after spending time celebrating
with our family, Mahmoud, along with his friends
and cousins, ventured out to a local Village pool.
After swimming for several hours, the group piled
into the car to return home, smiling and fatigued,
relishing some relief from the pervasive and cruel
conditions of Israeli military occupation. And
then suddenly, Israeli soldiers riddled the car that
Mahmoud was riding in with bullets, hitting several
of the children. Four of them are still recovering
from their wounds. Mahmoud was killed.

"Mahmoud was a gentle child who focused
on his studies. He had two great ambitions: to
become a doctor and help others and to play for
his favourite soccer club, Real Madrid. He cleverly
planned to attend medical school in Spain so that
he could pursue both of these dreams at once. Now
he is gone, and the sudden void left in our lives can

never be filled. It is still impossible to comprehend.
We are left only to ask why.

"The Israeli forces claim they were responding
to stone throwers. Israel considers it reasonable
to respond to children throwing stones with
machine-gun fire, which is itself an inhumane,
extreme policy. But Mahmoud and the other boys
were not throwing stones. They were sitting in a
car, driving home, wrapped in towels and swimsuits
and posing no threat to anyone when they were
ambushed by occupying forces.
"For Palestinians, this sort oftragedy is nothing
new. I have lived under decades of Israeli military
occupation, and my children were born into this
brutal reality and have known no other life. As a
parent, I have struggled each and every day with
how much freedom to allow my children and how to
carve out some semblance of a normal life for them
under wildly abnormal circumstances My wife
and I took the former path and hoped for the best,
but now, the worst pain imaginable has arrived on
our doorstep

"Timeandagain,Palestiniancivilians-children,
women and men - have been killed by Israeli
fire in situations where lethal force is utterly
unjustified. Recently, the world watched as an
Israeli soldier executed a Palestinian by shooting
him in the head as he lay wounded on the ground
and totally surrounded. Although this cold-
blooded murder was caught on video and created
controversy in Israel, many rallied to support the
murderous soldier, including Israeli politician
Avigdor Lieberman, who was shortly thereafter
named Defence Minister and is now responsible for
overseeing the military occupation.

"An extremist climate prevails in today's Israel
and never before has the value of Palestinian life
been so cheap. Our bodies, our minds, our passions,
our very lives and by extension, our deaths, are all
considered lesser, and nothing makes this clearer
to us than our repeated slaying at the hands of
the Israeli military and the subsequent refusal to
bring us justice. It is important to recall that as
the occupying Power, Israel is obligated under
international law to ensure the well-being of the
civilian population - we the Palestinians. Instead,
we have witnessed the ongoing and intensifying
brutalization of Palestinian bodies to the point
where our lives are treated as entirely expendable.

"We Palestinians want a life ofpeace, freedom,
justice and equality. We want the basic human
dignity of not having our lives arbitrarily ended. We
want to be able to know that, if our children leave
the house to do the things children do, like going to
school, playing soccer and going swimming, their
lives are not at risk.

"So many Palestinian parents have lost their
children to Israeli bullets fired in order to preserve
an unjust system of military occupation, denying
an entire nation of people their human rights.
Mahmoud is but the most recent innocent victim. I
write to you today as a grieving father because you,
the international community, who are allowing
Israel to sustain its brutal occupation into its fiftieth
year, can help make sure that Mahmoud is among
the last of the lives taken. I ask that you demand
accountability from both the Israeli Government
and your own and stand with the calls for freedom,
justice and peace".

