Mr. Corman (Turkey): I should like to welcome
you, Sir, and to thank you for presiding over the
Council today. I should also like to thank the Nigerian
presidency for its leadership in preparing the
presidential statement we have just adopted. I should
also like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Asha-Rose
Migiro and the World Bank Special Representative,
Ms. Cliffe, for their presentations.

I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this meeting. As members will recall,
at the Istanbul retreat, where Council members
discussed the issues of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, the complementary nature of preventive
diplomacy in the overall peacemaking process was
underlined, and it was suggested that the Council take
up this issue in the future. Today's meeting fits into
that understanding.

Preventive diplomacy, in the sense of using
proactive measures to prevent political conflicts from
erupting into violence and to promote peaceful dispute
resolution is, indeed, a crucial part of the peacemaking
process. We all agree that international security is
better served by working to prevent the outbreak of
crises rather than by simply reacting to them once they
have occurred. Adopting a policy of doing nothing in
the face of deadly conflict simply defers the problem to
a later date, when the level of destructiveness and the
costs of intervening are much higher and the risks of
action even greater.

There is broad consensus that the usefulness of
preventive action depends critically on the sense of
legitimacy they elicit, not just from domestic
constituencies, but also from the larger international
community. Undertaking such actions without due
regard for their legitimacy can prove
counterproductive, in particular where these actions
conflict with established norms of State sovereignty.
Poorly justified actions from outside may provoke
resentment and further escalate conflict.

In fact, conflict prevention is one of the chief
obligations set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations; primary responsibility for it belongs to
national Governments. Yet, no State or organization
can act alone. Sovereign Governments must be able to
rely on the support of external actors, whose activities
can be crucial in helping to prevent conflict. National
sovereignty is strengthened by early action to prevent
armed conflict because such action rules out the need
for unwelcome external interference later on. That
having been said, it is also a fact that third parties
cannot remove the underlying causes and perceptions
of conflict. They can undertake and encourage
measures to set relations between the parties to a
conflict on a new course.
Best practices for conflict prevention rely on well
developed systems of early warning, explicitly provide
for resource pooling and burden sharing among a range
of diverse actors, and apply diplomatic as well as
military leverage appropriate to the problem at hand.
No single agent is likely to be equal to the complex
task of helping others with their conflicts.
Interventions and pressures are more effective when
employed collectively, and are most effective when
issued by an institutionalized group of which the
parties to the conflict are members, such as an
international or regional organization. Beyond
unilateral action, non-governmental organization
assistance, State coalitions, regional and subregional
organizations and, finally, the United Nations comprise
the other layers.

As the organ with primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council has a responsibility to promote and
support mediation as an important means for the
peaceful settlement of disputes. It is the only
institutionalized collectivity available, yet it is
strained.

Here, it becomes clear how important the
coherence of mediation processes conducted by or
under the auspices of the United Nations is, through
the improved coordination of efforts with other actors,
including regional and subregional organizations.
Engaging the potential and existing capacities and
capabilities of such organizations in mediation efforts
will help ease the burden on the United Nations.

As a matter of fact, regional organizations have
an important role in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts in accordance with Chapter VIII
of the United Nations Charter, as well as relevant
resolutions. We are encouraged to see the Council's
resolve to strengthen United Nations support to such
prevention and mediation efforts through improved
coordination and cooperation, in particular in Africa.

We welcome the promotion of the deepening and
broadening of dialogue and cooperation between the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union. Moreover, we believe that there is
definitely a need for closer and more operational
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in Africa, such as the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the Southern African Development Community, to
build national and regional capacities in relation to the
preventive diplomacy tools of mediation, information
gathering and analysis, early warning, prevention and
peacemaking, with a View to responding more

promptly to the emerging threats to security in their
areas.

In this context, I should like to make reference to
the importance of the role played by the regional
United Nations offices, such as the United Nations
Office for West Africa, and the valuable contribution of
mediation capacities such as the Council of Elders, the
Panel of the Wise, the good offices of the Secretary-
General and the Secretary-General's special envoys.

If we are to enhance the impact of our efforts and
address the root causes of conflict, the thrust of
preventive work must shift from reactive, external
interventions with limited impact to internally driven
initiatives for developing local and national capacities
for prevention. This approach fosters home-grown,
self-sustaining infrastructures for peace that promote
ownership.

We believe that the attainment of the Millennium
Development Goals and development in general are the
indispensable foundations for prevention. Many of the
Millennium Development Goals, if attained, would
serve to significantly reduce the overall sources of
tension for developing countries that are vulnerable to
conflict. Women have an important role to play in the
settlement of disputes. Their equal participation and
full involvement in all efforts for the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security is particularly
important.

Addressing the primary sources of tension in
conflict-vulnerable regions and countries is key to
preventing armed conflicts. Conflict situations require
monitoring to coordinate action since, whether early or
late, opportunities are often brief; but attention must be
sustained.

The establishment of the Department of Political
Affairs Mediation Support Unit, which provides
expertise to support the mediation efforts of the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations, is
a welcome development in that sense. Yet, it is not
sufficient. If prevention is central to United Nations
efforts, system-wide strategic leadership in this area
should be strengthened. The Department of Political
Affairs, which is the centre for direct support for
preventive diplomacy and good offices, should be
better equipped in the light of its growing workload.
The Security Council must also undertake more
missions to areas of potential or actual conflict.

Meeting humanitarian needs in a timely way can
also contribute to preventing the outbreak or recurrence
of armed conflict. A great deal more can and should be
done on the humanitarian front to avert crises before
they lead to armed confrontation. In particular, tackling
climate change, food insecurity and related problems
of agricultural underproduction and resource scarcity
can do much to stabilize a fragile situation.

In that sense, development of a more structured
relationship between the United Nations system and
the international financial institutions to ensure better
coordination in the policy planning process and to
create greater synergies and stronger joint leverage
could be encouraged. Similarly, effective coordination
between and within United Nations organs,
programmes, funds and agencies involved in policy
formulation and implementation is vital to ensure
greater coherence in existing mechanisms and
appropriate balance between peacekeeping operations
and preventive activities.

The financial resource question should be
examined in comparison to the costs of handling the
problem later, when it is worse, more costly, more
difficult to handle and more disruptive to our own
concerns. "Future opportunity cost" is a concept that
needs to be taken into account.

In order to build the foundations for sustainable
peace, recovery requirements should be taken into
consideration during the mediation process. This
highlights the crucial role that the Peacebuilding
Commission has to play in promoting mediation.

Every conflict prevented or managed contributes
to building precedents and principles for dealing with
future cases. Early intervention and prevention are
always the better approach. Most important, missed
early opportunities should not be taken as cause for
despair or unripe later situations as an excuse for
inaction.

