The United Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution 2531 (2020) to renew the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) for a further 12 months. The United Kingdom remains a strong supporter of MINUSMA and of the crucial role that the Mission plays in promoting peace and stability in Mali. The United Kingdom's military deployment, planned to start later this year, is testament to our support for the Mission. We welcome the re-emphasis of the Mission's two strategic priorities: driving forward and accelerating the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, and the protection of civilians in the centre. Both tasks are fundamental to lasting peace and stability in Mali. Meeting both of these priorities depends on full and committed respect for human rights and a redoubling of efforts to tackle conflict-related sexual violence and sexual exploitation and abuse. We must continue to prioritize policies that ensure that the United Nations and its Member States meet these standards; these are critical to meeting mandates. We will continue to work for stronger adherence to the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy on United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces and an intensification of efforts to tackle conflict-related sexual violence and sexual exploitation and abuse. The United Kingdom would also like to take this opportunity to urge Council members not to lose sight of the primary objectives of the Mission. The Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), including its Joint Force, is an important part of the solution to instability in Mali and the broader region. The United Kingdom is proud to have supported its operationalization. However, we believe that it is important for MINUSMA's success - and its capacity to deliver for the population of Mali and the broader region - that the Mission be able to focus on its core peacekeeping tasks and objectives. With reference to paragraph 38, the United Kingdom would like to underline the importance of Mission activities complying with United Nations regulations and rules, and procurement activities complying with existing United Nations procurement procedures as set out in the United Nations Procurement Manual. Lastly, we share Council members' deep-seated concerns at the trajectory of violence and hardship in Mali, further exacerbated by the coronavirus disease, and stand firmly behind MINUSMA in its efforts to adapt to the challenging circumstances it faces. We are committed to playing our part, now and in future. All Malians deserve to live their lives free of fear and insecurity and to reap the dividends of a lasting peace.
