Mr. Guehenno: Allow me to thank the Council
for the support it provides to a very challenging
mission. Our partnership with the African Union is key,
and I am very grateful for the very close relationship
that we have with the African Union in moving forward
together in that endeavour.

I was asked three specific questions. I will start
with the last question, from the representative of the
United States of America, regarding the helicopters and
the Ethiopian offer. We are indeed very grateful to the
Government of Ethiopia for making that offer and we
welcome that pledge. I am not in a position today to
give the exact timeline. We will quickly conduct a
review of that offer to see whether it meets the
requirements. But it is indeed a very welcome pledge.

The representative of the United Kingdom asked
about the conclusion of the status-of-forces agreement
and protecting the freedom of movement in that
agreement. We have had very constructive discussions
with the Government of the Sudan on the agreement,
so I do hope that we will not find any obstacles in our
path, on this critical issue of freedom of movement. I
look forward to the conclusion of the agreement in the
same spirit in which we have conducted the discussions
thus far.

Let me now come to the other question raised by
the Ambassador of the United Kingdom with respect to
the events presently unfolding in Darfur. It was in the
course of this briefing that we received what are still
preliminary reports. They will need to be confirmed
and verified, but it seems that an attack was launched
this morning by a joint Sudanese Armed Forces-Arab
militia convoy on two localities north of El Geneina -
Abu Suruj and Sirba. That attack, apparently, was
supported by helicopters and possibly fixed-wing
aircraft. Moreover, just north of those two localities,
the attack would have been pursued on Sileia, which is
a bit to the north-east of Sirba, I am told, with two
bombs dropped on that particular locality. A compound
of Medecins sans Frontieres was looted a week or so
ago. There has been a lot of upheaval in those
localities, but these are still very preliminary reports.

What I would want to say on this very disturbing
new spike in violence in Darfur is that, unfortunately,
for those who have been following the situation it does
not come as a surprise. We have seen in recent weeks
and days - actually, even yesterday - more
reinforcement in El Geneina. Vehicles are coming from
Nyala to reinforce Government forces. Also, we can
recall the events in December. As this Council will
recall, in December there were attacks conducted by
the movements in those same areas where the Justice
and Equality Movement (JEM) is trying to consolidate
its positions north of El Geneina, with bombings and
attacks against the Sudanese armed forces by JEM. in
response.
What we are witnessing is actually a war, with
offensive and counter-offensive fighting, which will
put the peacekeeping operation in a very difficult
situation, because we will be there in the midst of a
shooting war between parties that want to consolidate
their positions. Neither side can accept a defeat, and
that is a very worrying trend, as Special Envoy
Eliasson said, if we want to gradually lower the level
of violence.

We do hope that those attacks will not be pursued
further into Jebel Mun, because the reality of that war
is that civilians are the victims of such combat.
Whether attacks are launched by movements or by the
Government of the Sudan, the civilians are the main
victims. Their houses are burned, their villages are
28
destroyed, and peace becomes a more remote prospect
as violence develops.

