Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Permanent
Representative of Germany and the Chairs of the
country configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), the Permanent Representatives of
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Jordan, Luxembourg and
Sweden, for preparing the report on the work of the
fourth session of the Peacebuilding Commission
(S/201l/41). We thank the Permanent Representatives
of Germany and Rwanda, the former and current
Chairs of the PBC, for presenting their reports and
their vision of the roles of the PBC.

We welcome the outcomes of the already fourth
year of the work of the PBC. This period has been of
particular importance to the peacebuilding architecture
of the United Nations. The first five-year review of the
PBC's activities was a success. Its outcome should
contribute to further enhancing the effectiveness of the
Commission in coordinating international
peacebuilding efforts and in crafting recommendations
on the rehabilitation of States and the restoration of
economic stability in countries that have emerged from
the hot phases of crisis.

Thorough work has been done within the country
configurations. One of the great merits of the PBC is
its ability to establish a direct dialogue with national
Governments and to ensure their leading role and
responsibilities for the peacebuilding process. We also
see evidence of the growing credibility of the PBC in
the recent addition to its agenda of two new countries,
Liberia and Guinea.

In the broader peacebuilding context, we note the
issuance of the report of the Secretary-General's Senior
Advisory Group for the Review of International
Civilian Capacities in the aftermath of conflict. We
continue to explore the conclusions and proposals of
that document. Our position is that the leading role in
any consideration of its recommendations should be
played by the General Assembly and its Fifth
Committee. Furthermore, we believe that one key
aspect of the system of international peacekeeping is
the establishment of qualified staffing reserves
consisting of national teams of civilian experts. The
Russian Federation has already submitted to the
Secretariat lists of national experts in various fields.
The Russian Federation views peacebuilding as
an important tool for ensuring international peace and
stability. It should be based on the principle of national
ownership in defining priorities and approaches to their
implementation, as well as on building the institutional
capacities of States that are recipients of international
assistance. It is only national stakeholders that can
ensure sustainable peaceful development.

A key component of post-conflict peacebuilding
entails establishing and building national institutional
capacity. That should become a system-wide priority
for the entire United Nations in deeds, not just words.
Achieving sustained peace and stability is only
possible when the entirety of ownership lies with the
national players.

The Russian Federation attaches great importance
to the activities of the PBC as the unique advisory
mechanism mandated to coordinate peacebuilding
activities in the United Nations system and outside it,
and for crafting peacebuilding strategies as well as
mobilizing international cooperation for post-conflict
reconstruction. At the same time, we suggest that the
Commission could be more active in taking on the
tasks of peacebuilding and socio-economic reform that
are currently entrusted to peacekeeping operations.

We attach great importance to the Peacebuilding
Fund as a mechanism for immediate financing that can
contribute to long-term mechanisms for assistance in
reconstruction and development. Our position is
underscored by our annual contribution to the Fund,
which totals $2 million.

