The President: I want to thank all Council members
for their support of today's meeting and of previous
meetings and, of course, for their excellent support of
President Mandela. A special thanks goes to Secretary-
General Kofi Annan for his leadership today and his
participation in this entire meeting.

I shall now make a brief statement in my capacity as
representative of the United States.

The United States is deeply concerned about this
human tragedy. President Mandela's eloquent and forceful
statement reflects the urgency of the crisis. Burundi may
be a small country, but the ramifications of the current
crisis are enormous. The solution we seek in Burundi is
what we seek for all the conflicts in Africa - and we
will discuss the Congo next week - a peace not based
on military stalemate, not on ethnic division or hatred, but
a peace based on national reconciliation.

The late President Nyerere, one of Africa's greatest
statesmen, made great progress in the Arusha process.
Now, with the leadership of President Mandela, we have
an opportunity to revitalize that effort. We support
President Mandela's call to pursue an inclusive peace
process. In order for peace to be lasting and just, the
negotiations must address the concerns of all parties.

The United States must again condemn the policy of
forced regroupment and is concerned about the conditions
of the so-called regroupment camps in the vicinity of
Bujumbura and elsewhere. I would associate myself in
that regard with the strong and eloquent remarks made by
several people here, notably Ambassador Greenstock of
the United Kingdom. Today some 350,000 Burundians are
forced to live in these makeshift camps, in appalling
conditions. We understand the complexities of the
conflict, or we hope we are trying to understand them,
and we have heard the justification for regroupment. But

 

this complexity does not absolve the Government from its
basic responsibility under international law.

We urge the Government of Burundi to take the steps
necessary to alleviate this untenable situation. It must
permit humanitarian workers to have immediate, full and
unconditional access to regroupment camps. It must adhere
to the United Nations Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement.

In this context, we welcome the statement made
yesterday by the Government of Burundi that it would
review the policy and begin dismantling a portion of the
camps. But this is not enough, although it is an important
step in the right direction.

We also condemn the attacks on innocent civilians,
who have been victimized by all the armed belligerents.
This culture of impunity must come to an end. Those who
have committed crimes against innocents must be brought
to justice.

Finally, and no less urgently, as reflected in this
morning's meeting, the international community must
support the Arusha process. Today's resolution will be an
important start. But we must build on our work here, and
our Government is prepared to do its part. I would like to
announce that, in consultation with the Congress - seven
of whose members are here today with me, two of whom
are sitting directly behind me as I speak: Congressman
Meeks and Congressman Ackerman - the United States is
prepared to provide an additional $500,000 to facilitate the
peace process. But I must be frank: no solution to the
Burundi crisis will be easy. While the most vital ingredient
is the will and effort of the parties, no agreement will last
without sustained international effort. Therefore, let us do
everything we can to assist President Mandela as he moves
forward.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now call on the Minister of External Relations and
Cooperation of Burundi, His Excellency The Honourable
Severin N tahomvukiye. We welcome his statement and will
pay it close attention, and we thank him for his patience in
listening to the previous speakers.

