Ms. Leong (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Our delegation would like to wish
the United Kingdom every success in its delicate
mission of chairing the Security Council during this
month of April. Our delegation would also like to
associate itself with the statement made by Pakistan on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China as well as the
statement that will be made by Cuba on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is aware of
the serious implications for humanity of the problem of
climate change, given its economic, social and political
repercussions, particularly for the developing
countries, which are the most vulnerable. However, we
feel that the Security Council is not the appropriate
body to deal with the subject of climate change, just as
it is not the appropriate body to deal with energy.

The Security Council should frame its actions in
accordance with the spirit and letter of the Charter of
the United Nations, by adopting the strictest
interpretation of what really constitutes a threat to
international peace and security, in accordance with
Article 39 of the Charter. Venezuela considers the
multidimensional character of security to mean that
each sovereign and legitimate State defines its
priorities in this area on the basis of its own national
needs and interests, as has been recognized in various
international instruments. Additionally, we feel that the
subject of energy is an area falling strictly under the
sovereignty of States as part of their national
development policies. Venezuela reaffirms that every
country, on the basis of its sovereignty, has the
authority to decide on the use of its natural resources
and to set its own environmental and energy policy.

The interference of the Security Council in areas
that are not part of its mandate could have adverse
effects, since the measures that may be suggested in
this body would not be the most appropriate to provide
solutions to problems of an economic, social and
environmental kind affecting all Member States.

Bringing before this body matters that are not
part of its specific remit in the area of international
peace and security could give rise to the illusion that
this body is a democratic one, discussing subjects of
global interest, when that is far from the case.
Venezuela would advocate a real democratization of
this body, but this exercise is not the best way to
achieve that objective, especially when the subjects are
not part of the agenda of the Council but, on the
contrary, already have their own forums in which they
can be discussed.
The United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change and its Kyoto Protocol, to both of
which the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is a
contracting party, have the proper mechanisms for
examining the issue of climate change. Dealing with that
group of problems outside the proper bodies for
discussion of them could diffuse and complicate
international efforts. Doing so could also be understood
as an effort to dilute the responsibilities of developed
countries to reduce greenhouse gas emissions into the
atmosphere. The search for appropriate solutions to the
problem of global warming requires that the principal
emitters of these gases meet their obligations in
accordance with relevant international instruments.

Here, the committed cooperation of the United
States - a permanent member of the Security Council -
whose economy produces the greatest quantity of
greenhouse gas emissions, is indispensable if a real
contribution is to be made to the objectives of the
Convention and its Protocol.

The threats posed by climate change are
indubitably associated with the neoliberal model of
development that some societies of the industrialized
world have tried to promote as a paradigm across the
planet without measuring the environmental
consequences of the consumption patters arising from
that model. Climate change is a problem that affects all
countries, small and large, rich and poor.

However, bearing in mind Principle 7 of the Rio
Declaration on Environment and Development of 1992,
Venezuela considers that, while there is a joint
responsibility relating to the agreements and
arrangements of an inclusive nature to mitigate the
impact of climate change, there is also a differentiated
responsibility to take into account the factors that since
the Industrial Revolution have led to such degradation
of the environment, as well as States' response
capability to face the challenge of the problems.

To Venezuela, it is a source of concern that we
are trying to promote partial solutions or stereotypes on
the causes of the problem, which end up distorting its
nature and scope, including possible measures to
mitigate its real effects. It is therefore essential that
studies are carried out through the mechanisms of the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and its Protocol, in order to make it possible to
determine the real dimensions of the problem and the
possible measures to counteract its impact on all States,
particularly on the developing and more vulnerable
countries, such as the small island developing States.

Dealing with the problem of climate change
requires that the countries that produce the greatest
amount of greenhouse gas emissions fully assume their
responsibilities with regard to the need to reduce those
concentrations of gases in the atmosphere to a level
that will prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference
with the climate system, in conformity with article 2 of
the Framework Convention on Climate Change.

Although Venezuela does not have reduction
commitments and its emissions account for only 0.48
per cent of global emissions, the national authorities of
Venezuela, as part of an integrated environmental
policy, have adopted a series of initiatives in this area

In June 2006, President Hugo Chavez Frias
launched a programme known as Mision Arbol - the
tree mission - which aims to promote the
reforestation of 150,000 hectares by planting 100
million trees within the space of five years. As part of
this environmental effort, in November 2006 the
Government of Venezuela began another initiative
called Mision Energia - the energy mission - with
the aim of promoting rational use of energy in
Venezuela over the next five years.

Both the phenomenon of climate change and the
energy issue should be considered in the context of the
mechanisms established in accordance with the
appropriate arrangements or forums. Venezuela reserves
its position as to the appropriateness of the Security
Council becoming involved in the consideration of
these matters and considers it to be of fundamental
importance that this body keeps strictly to the matters
conferred to it under the United Nations Charter.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is
convinced that the strengthening of multilateralism as a
mechanism to implement effective cooperation for
development will be able to promote an international
system that is transparent, inclusive and showing
solidarity and which offers greater well-being and
social justice to the peoples of the world.

