Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to thank Mr. Jan Kubis, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), for his valuable briefing.

Despite the many challenges that Iraq is facing in
the post-Da'esh period, the Iraqi people have proven
themselves capable of rebuilding their country and
of confronting the challenges facing them in order to
strengthen the principles of democracy in their country,
as reflected in the mid-May parliamentary elections.
The outcome of the elections has been accepted and
confirmed and the country has seen a peaceful transfer
of power, which has allowed a new Iraqi Government
to be established within the time frame set by
the Constitution.

I take this opportunity to sincerely congratulate,
on behalf of the State of Kuwait, the leadership, the
Government and the people of Iraq on the election of
His Excellency Mr. Barham Salih as President of the
Republic of Iraq and His Excellency Mr. Mohammed
Al-Halbousi as Speaker ofthe House ofRepresentatives,
and the appointment of His Excellency Mr. Adil
Abdul-Mahdi as the Prime Minister to head the new
Government. We are fully confident that all of them are
trustworthy, and we wish them every success as they
make efforts in the best interests of our brotherly Iraq
in order to fulfil all the aspirations of its people, who
deserve to live in a stable, prosperous and safe State.
We hope that the full Cabinet of the new Government
will be appointed soon because the post-election phase
is very critical in Iraq. We believe that those positive
developments are promising and reflect positively on
the situation in Iraq and indeed in the entire region.

It is high time for Iraq to be able to recover from the
painful tragedies that it suffered over the past few years
at the hands of the terrorist group Da'esh. The State

of Kuwait renews its solidarity with the leadership, the
people and the Government of Iraq in their efforts to
defeat terrorism and entrench Iraqi national unity, while
preserving the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of the country. We were delighted to host the Iraqi
President in Kuwait just two days ago, which speaks
volumes of the links that tie our two countries together
and allow us to move sincerely forward together to
serve the interests of our two peoples.

Allow me now to address two points: first, UNAMI
responsibilities under its mandate; and secondly, the
commitments pertaining to the Kuwaiti and third-party
nationals who have been reported missing, and the
lost Kuwaiti property, including the national archives
of Kuwait.

With regard to the first point, I would like to
commend the United Nations staff in Iraq for their
tireless efforts to forge a promising future for that
country through its ongoing advice and assistance
to the Government and the people of Iraq, as well as
all stakeholders in the framework of a partnership
that brings together UNAMI and the United Nations
country team. That partnership is apparent in many
much-needed areas.

In that regard, I underline the continued full
support of the State of Kuwait to and its cooperation
with the Mission and the country team to allow them to
fully carry out their tasks. The aim is to meet the needs
ofIraq. We are very well aware of the scale of the major
challenges facing Iraq. That requires the full support
of the international community in order to ensure its
stability and security.

We are completely convinced that security and
stability cannot be achieved without sustainable
development in its various dimensions. We will
continue to provide all kinds of support to the brotherly
Iraqi people so that they can meet their needs.

The International Conference for the Reconstruction
of Iraq was hosted by Kuwait in February, with the
cooperation of Iraq, the United Nations, the European
Union and the World Bank. The pledges we made
at the Conference demonstrated international and
regional solidarity with our Iraqi brothers to heal the
wounds inflicted by Da'esh. I refer to the programmes
of rehabilitation and reconstruction for cities liberated
from terrorism. We shoulder our responsibilities towards
the humanitarian situation of our Iraqi brothers. That is
a response to the humanitarian appeals of the United

Nations to alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi people,
particularly displaced persons, in order to let Iraq
achieve its future vision of a new and united country.

Our concern today is that terrorist groups continue
to pose a threat to the security and stability of Iraq
and the region, despite the fact that Da'esh has been
defeated. That is why we must all pull together, step
up our efforts and take more critical measures in order
to ensure that the perpetrators of those horrifying
crimes are accountable and brought to justice. The
State of Kuwait counts on the efforts made by the Iraqi
authorities to arrest and prosecute the perpetrators of
those terrorist acts, in coordination and cooperation
with the international mechanism involved in collecting
evidence, which was established by resolution 2379
(2017). Those are critical steps within the broader
framework of the global counter-terrorism strategy.

I turn now to my second point regarding the
commitments made to the Kuwaiti and third-party
nationals who have been reported missing, and the
lost Kuwaiti property, including the national archives
of Kuwait. That is an important issue due to its
legitimate human and legal dimensions. The State of
Kuwait appreciates the efforts that have been made by
the Security Council to implement all the remaining
commitments pursuant to its relevant resolutions since
the liberation of Kuwait in 1991. We commend the firm
resolve of Iraq to meet all its international commitments
towards the State of Kuwait in that regard. We are ready
to provide the support that Iraq needs in order to speed
up the implementation of the remaining commitments
stipulated in the relevant Council resolutions.

At the same time, we urge UNAMI to continue to
fully discharge its mandate pertaining to the missing
prisoners and the return of Kuwaiti property, including
the national archives, pursuant to resolution 2107 (2013).
The steps that have been taken so far are insufficient
and no significant progress has been made since 2004.

We underscore that the State of Kuwait has spared
no effort to support measures over the past 28 years
to uncover the fate of its missing Kuwaitis and other
third-country individuals. In that regard, we cannot but
commend the efforts of the International Committee
of the Red Cross in chairing the tripartite mechanism,
including its Technical Subcommittee. At the same
time, I thank the United Kingdom, France and the
United States for their recent positive contributions
by providing the Subcommittee with satellite images
and maps dating back to the relevant period from 1990
to 1992. We hope that those contributions will yield
positive results on the ground.

I should like to draw the Council's attention to
another issue related to the remaining commitments,
namely, the question of Kuwaiti assets, including the
national archives, which represent our historic wealth
and an important part of the national heritage and
memory of the Kuwaiti people. Unfortunately, we do
not know what has become of them. We therefore hope
to follow a new and innovative approach with a view
to making progress in that area. At the same time, we
welcome the efforts of the Iraqi authorities to return
to the State of Kuwait the books and other assets that
have been found, despite taking more than a year to
accomplish that.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait appreciates the
valuable efforts of Mr. Kubis as Head of UNAMI and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Iraq.
We commend his dedication and personal commitment
over the past three years, and wish him every success in
his future endeavours.

