Mr. Baja (Philippines): We thank Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for briefing us on the
situation in Kosovo and for presenting the Standards
Implementation Plan. The Plan comes to us a few
weeks after Kosovo was convulsed by the worst
outbreak of inter-ethnic violence since the international
community stepped in to restore the rule of law five
years ago. The quarters for the Philippines contingent
were among the structures razed, along with their
belongings.

Kosovo is a conflict area where violence can be
reasonably expected to be least, considering that it is
an area that one might consider as being under state-of-
the-art conflict resolution in this building. That is due
to the fact that KFOR is there, with its power and
prestige. There is the power and prestige of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the United Nations. It is practically and
technically under United Nations protection and has the
support of the international community. Suddenly,
however, those considerations were not sufficient to
abort the violence. However, we commend the swift
response of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in restoring the rule of law, and we
note with satisfaction that steps are being taken to
prosecute the perpetrators of last month's violence. In
this connection we would like to verify the reports that
Kosovo is emerging as a centre of organized crime in
the region and possibly as a base of operations for
Al Qaeda.

Under the Standards Implementation Plan we
expect the establishment of democratic institutions to
move forward. It is important to pursue the holding of
elections, with the participation of all communities,
before the end of the year. Political transformation
must keep pace with the fight to restore security. It is
crucial to involve as many stakeholders in the plan as
possible. Also, an effective communication strategy to
demonstrate to the population the benefit of adhering to
the Implementation Plan is essential.

We continue to believe that the situation in
Kosovo is essentially an ethnic dilemma. The
Albanians and their supporters will accept nothing less
than independence and the Serbs and their supporters
firmly want to remain part of Serbia, lest the Albanians
remain reluctant to support rights for the Serb minority
and lest the Serb minority not recognize the authority
of Kosovo's institutions.

UNMIK's challenge, I think, is how to bridge the
divide, how to build the trust necessary to bridge the
gulf between the two communities. We went through
the history of the situation, and we came across the
agenda for coexistence. We were wondering how far
the three major actors - Albanians, Serbia and
Belgrade - have cooperated in this agenda for
coexistence. Also, what is UNMIK's assessment of
how far the ethnic groups - not only the leaders -
have accepted the strategy of "standards before
status"? We appreciate the fact that raising the status
issue may radicalize all sides, but it is difficult to see
how it can be avoided and Wished away for a long time.

The people themselves must be able to own the
strategy and the Plan so that no one feels ostracized.
The challenge for UNMIK and KFOR and the rest of
the international community is how to instil sufficient
confidence and trust among the peoples to overcome
the vendetta and the fear resulting from the violence
before, during and after the conflict. In that regard, an
effective judicial system is crucial.

At the time of the Council's last briefing by
Ambassador Holkeri we endorsed his plan and
UNMIK's strategy of developing directly with the
people their own political constituency for the reforms
and the strategy for political and economic stability for
Kosovo. We continue to do so.

