Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to see you presiding over
the Security Council, Sir, and it is an honour to have
you conducting today's meeting. We also welcome
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, and Mr. Emilio Jose Archila, High
Counsellor for Post-Conflict, to today's meeting.

I would first like to express my condolences to the
families of those killed and injured during the attack
on the police academy in Bogota on 17 January. That
heinous crime, which killed and maimed dozens of
people, should be thoroughly investigated and its
perpetrators duly punished.

We would like to express our gratitude to Mr. Jean
Arnault, former Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Colombia, for his genuine commitment to the
peace process in Colombia. We congratulate Mr. Carlos
Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, on his debut in the Security
Council, and thank him for his comprehensive briefing
on the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/1159), which
is a reasonably objective reflection of the situation
regarding the Colombian parties' fulfilment of their
obligations under the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. We
note the report's conclusions about the steps taken by
Bogota to stabilize the situation in the country and
consolidate public opinion on the Agreement, which
has established a reliable legal basis for a settlement
and made broad international support possible. It is
now important to ensure that its signatories strengthen
and develop the progress that has been made in the 16
months of the Verification Mission's existence.

The security of citizens must be a top priority.
One task that cannot be put off is preventing and
investigating the murders and attacks on civilians,
including former combatants. As long as the problem
remains unresolved, it will compel people to seek
security independently. That trend must be stopped and
efforts must be focused on the problem.

Needless to say, there is a great deal to be done
to create conditions that can enable the people to
earn a stable and legal income. Political problems
persist. It will also be essential to ensure that the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun is
duly represented in Colombia's Parliament and the
independence of the work of the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace is guaranteed. In that context, the commitment of
President Ivan Duque Marquez to the socioeconomic,
political and legal reintegration of former combatants,
noted in the Secretary-General's report, is crucial, in
our View. We firmly believe that under the leadership
of its new Head, the Verification Mission will continue
to be of reliable assistance to the Colombians in
monitoring the implementation of the peace Agreement
by its signatories.

The Security Council has often pointed out
that Colombia is the poster-child example of how
international support can and should be provided,
through close cooperation with a host Government in
the leading role, and a responsible attitude on the part of
the whole of society. It was its citizens' avowed national
ownership and desire to seek a politically sustainable
solution that made peace possible in Colombia.
In conclusion, I want to again touch on the tragic
attack on the police academy. Our position is well known.
We are firmly against all terrorist acts, regardless of
their aims. It is clear to us that the organizers of the
17 January attack intended to undermine the peace
process, and if that leads to incitement, they will
achieve their goal. We believe that in their wisdom, the
Colombians who struggled for decades to achieve peace
will not permit those evil plans to come to fruition and
that the peace process will continue. For our part, we
will continue to support the people and the Government
of Colombia in the work of building a lasting peace and
post-conflict development.

