Mr. Hoxhaj: It is my honour and pleasure to
address the Security Council today with regard to the
latest developments in Kosovo. First, let me thank the
Secretary-General for his efforts for peace, stability
and progress in my country and in the Western
Balkans. I would also like to thank all States Members
of the United Nations for their support in building a
democratic and independent Kosovo. Let me reiterate
here that the only aspiration Kosovo has today is
integration into Euro-Atlantic institutions and
membership in the United Nations.

Today, Kosovo is an independent State in its fifth
year. Its State-building process during those years is a
Kosovar, European and international success story. We
adopted and implemented a modern Constitution that
includes all provisions of United Nations Special
Envoy Martii Ahtisaari's comprehensive settlement
proposal - a Constitution that commits Kosovo to the
principles of democracy, secularism and multi-
ethnicity.

Before the declaration of Kosovo's independence
there were perceptions that its statehood would create
instability in the region. However, in the period since
17 February 2008, Kosovo's independence produced
peace, stability and security in the whole region. That
is why Kosovo's independence has been recognized by
all of its neighbours, with the exception of Serbia, and
by the overwhelming majority of European countries.
Today, close to half of the States Members of the
United Nations have recognized our State. I would like
to thank Haiti, Sao Tome and Principe, and Brunei
Darussalam for their decision to formally recognize
Kosovo.

Today, I will speak about Kosovo's current
situation, the progress we have made and the
challenges that lie ahead. I should like to make four
points. The first relates to Kosovo's consolidation of
statehood. During the reporting period, Kosovo's
leaders and its citizens, due to the commitment and
support of international partners, focused on
strengthening its multi-ethnic and democratic
institutions. The President, Parliament and the
Government were active and effective in further
building a cohesive State, strengthening the rule of law,
implementing needed reforms and tackling the pressing
priorities of our society. Besides other important
national and international tasks, the President was
active in the fight against corruption and in our
European agenda. Under her leadership, Kosovo has
established two important bodies, the National
Anti-Corruption Council and the National Council for
European Integration.

Parliament adopted 22 important laws and made
significant progress in aligning Kosovo's legislation
with European standards. Two of those laws help to
promote and protect the cultural and religious heritage
of the city of Prizren and the village of Velika Hoca.
Kosovo's institutions have granted special protection to
45 Serbian Orthodox cultural heritage sites, based on
the highest international standards.

We have undertaken reforms and made
investments to ensure economic growth and to enable
Kosovo to compete with other countries. As a result,
Kosovo's gross domestic product growth is estimated
at 5 per cent - a rate twice as high as in the period
before independence and twice as high as that in the
region. However, unemployment is a pressing issue for
us. While Europe is facing financial and debt crises,
Kosovo has maintained its macroeconomic and fiscal
stability. Due to very good planning and
implementation, Kosovo reached a new stand-by
arrangement with the International Monetary Fund,
whereby the Fund will provide €107 million in support
for our Government's programmes.

Kosovo's institutions have also been very focused
on law enforcement, reforming the justice system and
public administration. As the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2012/275) confirms, Kosovo's institutions
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) have done very good work on
several trials and cases involving war crimes,
corruption and organized crime. Such cases are the
main focus of EULEX. Kosovo's police continues to
devote itself to the rule of law and has incorporated a
relatively strong representation of Kosovo Serbs and
other communities. Thanks to our justice and police
institutions, the crime rate has fallen by 11 per cent
since last year.

Let me reiterate that the Government of Kosovo
remains committed to and supports the EULEX Special
Investigative Task Force in its investigation of all
allegations contained in the report of Mr. Dick Marty.
Kosovo's institutions are very determined to support
the full clarification of those allegations in an open,
independent, professional and transparent way. We
welcome adoption by the Parliament of Albania of a
law ensuring full cooperation between Albania and the
EULEX Task Force.

My second point speaks to the situation in the
north of Kosovo. In the past five years, Kosovo has
made important progress in the integration of the Serb
community at the central and local levels of
governance. Today, the Kosovo Serb community takes
part in Parliament. Out of 120 members, 13 are from
the Serb community. Serbs are also represented in the
central Government by a Deputy Prime Minister and
three ministers. Through the decentralization process,
we have established six new municipalities, where
Kosovo Serbs participate in self-governance in the
areas of administration, police, justice, education and
culture.

Kosovo has been built on the principles of
citizenship and multi-ethnicity. Based on our
Constitution and laws, Kosovo citizens enjoy the right
to dual citizenship. Therefore, when the presidential
and parliamentary elections were held in Serbia on
6 May, Serbs living in Kosovo were able to vote in the
elections. In accordance with an agreement reached
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), that organization facilitated the voting
process for Kosovo Serbs. Under the OSCE symbol,
mobile voting centres were opened, Kosovo Serbs
voted and their votes were counted outside the territory
of the Republic of Kosovo.

That was an important step for the State of
Kosovo, because Serbia agreed not to organize any
type of election activities in Kosovo, 13 years after the
end of the war. It is very important to mention that
Serbia did not try to organize local elections in the
three municipalities in the north. That is a good sign
that Serbia is beginning to accept the reality of an
independent Kosovo.

We are very concerned about the situation in the
three northern municipalities of Kosovo. Serbia still
maintains illegal police and security structures in that
part of Kosovo, in violation of resolution 1244 (1999).
The stability and security situation is very tense, and
there are still barricades set up by those entities. What
we are facing in that part of Kosovo now is not new to
the region. In the 1990s, barricades in Croatia and
Bosnia were set up by police and security structures
that were led and financed by Serbia in much the same
way that the illegal structures in the north of Kosovo
are controlled, led and financed by Serbia. Serbia's
agenda in that part of Kosovo is to keep the status quo
and to create conditions for a deadlocked conflict, and
subsequently to territorial partition. Due to that
situation, it has not been possible for our institutions to
integrate the Kosovo Serbs and to implement the
Ahtisaari Plan in that part of our country, as we have
successfully done in the rest of Kosovo.

That is the only corner of Europe where there is
no rule of law and no democratic participation in
institutions. As the report of the Secretary-General
states, the Kosovo Force and EULEX are prevented
from operating there to fulfil their mandates.
Moreover, the entire stability of Kosovo and the
architecture of security in the region hinges on the
situation in the north. Let me give an example. In the
early morning of 8 April, a 38-year-old Kosovo
Albanian father was killed in his apartment and two of
his four children were wounded in an explosion. That
happened in north Mitrovica, and it is not an isolated
act. The city of Mitrovica is divided not by the River
Iber, but by fear. Through fear and threats, the security
structures are expelling all non-Serb communities from
northern Kosovo.

The position of my Government is very clear. The
violence has to stop, and Serbia has to withdraw its
police and security units from the north of Kosovo.
Kosovo has always been a multi-ethnic society, and it
will forever remain so. As such, we are against any
kind of partition, change of borders or exchange of
territory. For our Government, the integration of the
30,000 Kosovo Serbs in the north is crucial and should
happen in the same way that 100,000 Kosovo Serbs
were integrated in the rest of Kosovo. In that sense, our
Government is determined to pursue an internal
dialogue with Kosovo Serbs in the northern

municipalities in order to integrate that community into
democratic institutions and help to shape an agenda for
social and economic development.

My third point concerns the technical dialogue
between the Republic of Kosovo and the Republic of
Serbia. 1 would like to highlight the agreements
reached on regional cooperation and integrated border
management. On 24 February, an agreement was
reached on Kosovo's regional representation and
cooperation. Based on this agreement, Kosovo will
now participate on its own account and will speak for
itself at all regional forums as an equal partner with
other participating States. This will require Kosovo to
sign new agreements and allow it to apply for
membership in different regional organizations.
Kosovo and Serbia have also reached an integrated
border management agreement, which includes a
technical protocol on its implementation that provides
for a European solution to the issue of an inter-State
border.

There is no doubt that the dialogue has marked
progress in terms of concluding the agreements. These
are bilateral and legal agreements between two
independent countries. However, the credibility of the
whole dialogue process is at stake. Agreements are
worthless if they remain only on paper and are not
implemented on the ground, and most of these have not
been implemented at all. For example, Serbia has not
signed and ratified the technical protocol on the
implementation of the integrated border management
agreement due to the fact that it still believes that the
partition of northern Kosovo is an option. On the other
hand, Serbia has accepted an agreement on Kosovo's
representation in regional forums, but has boycotted
meetings at which Kosovo has been present and
insisted on obligations not foreseen in that agreement.

Some agreements have been only partially
implemented, such as those on the freedom of
movement and on free trade. These have been directly
impacted by the road blocks in the northern
municipalities and by the systematic arrest of Kosovo
citizens by the Serbian authorities. In the past two
months, more than 10 Kosovo citizens who were
passing through Serbia on the way in or out of Kosovo
were arrested without any reason and then released.

Kosovo has approached the dialogue in good
faith and played a very constructive role in reaching
and implementing agreements. The European Council

decided on 2 March to grant Serbia the status of
candidate country as a result of the agreements reached
in the technical dialogue. But we deeply regret that
Serbia has not shown the same good faith approach in
implementing the agreements. Furthermore, Serbia still
maintains illegal security, police and criminal
structures in the territory of Kosovo, which are in gross
violation of the very spirit of the European Union and a
threat to regional and international peace and stability.
Over the past three months, we have seen two faces of
Serbia - the Serbia that behaves as a pro-European
country in relation to Brussels, and the Serbia that
behaves in an anti-European way in relation to Kosovo
and to the region.

My final point today is on Kosovo-European
Union relations. This year began with the visit of
European Commissioner for Home Affairs Cecilia
Malmstrom to Kosovo, marking the beginning of the
visa liberalization dialogue. The road map is expected
soon. Kosovo's institutions have made significant
progress in fulfilling the criteria for visa-free travel of
our citizens.

In the current reporting period, there was another
very important development for Kosovo's relations
with the European Union. The European Union has
confirmed that Kosovo has a clear European
perspective. However, agreements reached in the
bilateral talks between Kosovo and Serbia have paved
the way for our country to follow the same European
path as other countries in the Balkans. The European
Commissioner for Enlargement and European
Neighbourhood Policy, Stefan Fiile, announced the
launching of a feasibility study for a stabilization and
association agreement between Kosovo and the
European Union during his visit to Kosovo on
27 March.

We are aware that the overall process will require
some time and a lot of reforms in some key areas, such
as the rule of law, public administration, trade and
market economy. However, the launching of the
feasibility study for the stabilization and association
agreement confirms the start of the process of
establishing contractual relations between Kosovo and
the European Union.
Let me conclude by saying that the main goal of
Kosovo's institutions and its people is integration into
the Euro-Atlantic institutions. We are committed to
good-neighbourly relations, and we are working hard
to implement the required reforms for membership. We
believe that dialogue is a democratic value. Neither
threats nor violence can solve mutual issues between
Kosovo and Serbia.

We will never compromise the independence,
sovereignty and functionality of our State. We call
upon Serbia to withdraw its illegal police and security
structures, to start implementing fully and in good faith
the agreements reached in the technical dialogue, and
to behave in accordance with the European principles
of cooperation and good-neighbourly relations.

