The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to address the
Security Council on the protection of journalists in
conflict situations. This issue is fundamentally about
the right to information, protection of civilians, respect
for human rights and not giving in to threats and
intimidation from those who advocate and practice
violence and intolerance.

In recent years, we have seen a deeply troubling rise
in the number ofjournalists killed in conflict situations.
Ofthe 593 cases ofkillings ofjournalists between 2006
and 2013, almost half - 273 - occurred in conflicts
zones. Journalists are also being increasingly targeted
and subjected to threats by criminal or terrorist groups,
with the blatant intention of silencing them. Recent
killings of journalists have been given extensive
and welcome attention around the world. We recall,
for instance, the brutal murders of Western media
representatives in Syria. Yet, we must not forget that
around 95 per cent Ofthe killings ofjournalists in armed
conflict concern locally basedjournalists, with far less
media coverage. The Security Council and the Human
Rights Council have been presented with findings that
illustrate the extent of the problem from South Sudan to
Libya, from Syria to Somalia and beyond.

Against the background of this sobering reality, it
is not surprising that countries facing armed conflict
and a breakdown of the rule of law are ranked at the
bottom of the very important annual World Press
Freedom Index compiled by Reporters Without
Borders. Here, I want to commend Director-General
Deloire and Reporters Without Borders for their work.
We know that armed conflict not only endangers the
life and safety ofjournalists; it also limits the free flow
of information, eroding the rule of law and democracy.
We should recall that conflict can easily be exacerbated
in an environment that stifles freedom of expression.
Conflict and insecure environments must never be a
pretext for silencing journalists; on the contrary, it is
precisely in these situations where the voices of the
voiceless and reports from the front lines must be heard
loud and clear.

Ensuring the safety of journalists requires a
comprehensive and multifaceted approach. The
challenges for journalists reporting from an armed
conflict situation may not be the same as for those
who are engaged in other forms of reporting. Women
journalists may face challenges different from their
male colleagues. The security situation of foreign
correspondents may differ from those of locally based
journalists. Furthermore, corruption, intimidation,
reprisals and weak judicial systems, all of which
contribute to impunity, must be seriously tackled if we
are to deal with the roots of the problem. The same goes
for the basic need for a culture of respect for human
rights and the rule oflaw.

Let us also remember that the safety of journalists
is of concern in non-conflict zones as well. Ensuring
their protection and their work can be of the essence if
we are to prevent conflict and human rights violations
in threatening situations. As we know, threats and
attacks are committed by State and non-State actors
alike, often to silence journalists seeking information
or opinions on subjects perceived to be off-limits, such
as human rights violations, political repression or drug
trafficking, to name a few. The United Nations Plan
of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue
of Impunity aims to help tackle these challenges. The
Plan is being piloted and laid out in several countries,
including Iraq, Nepal, Pakistan and South Sudan.

Members of the Security Council have a critical
role in advancing this agenda. Let me briefly and in
closing point to five ways in which they can do so.

First, they can unequivocally and consistently
condemn the killing ofjournalists in conflict situations.
Secondly, they can continue to hold regular debates
on the protection of journalists. I encourage them to
continue to hear the views of journalists, affected
family members such as Ms. Pearl here today, civil
society representatives and relevant United Nations and
regional mandate-holders. Thirdly, they can encourage
Security Council-authorized missions to also look into
the safety of journalists and media workers as part of
protection of civilians mandates, and report back to
the Security Council on their findings. Fourthly, they
can encourage Security Council-authorized missions
to ensure that freedom of expression and the safety of
journalists are integral parts of human rights and justice
reforms. Fifthly and lastly, they can endorse and support
the United Nations Plan of Action. Occasions such
as the International Day to End Impunity for Crimes
against Journalists - which falls on 2 November every
year - can also be better utilized to draw attention to
these problems.

The United Nations system will continue to assist
the Security Council in all these efforts by bringing to
its attention situations of concern in this area in a timely
and proactive manner. It is our shared responsibility
to protect the voices that alert, warn and inform on
situations threatening international peace and security.

