Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): The Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
( 1999) continues to play an important role in the fight
against the Taliban, Al Qaeda and groups associated
with them, and we very much appreciate its activities.
Terrorism, as seen in the activities of the Taliban and
Al Qaeda, continues to spread across national borders
today. It is a challenge for the international community
to take effective measures in solidarity against the
terrorists, because that will have a great impact on our
future peace and security. We cannot afford to relax at
any time in our efforts to fight terrorism.

The report issued last month by the Monitoring
Group, which was established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1363 (2001), states that the Al
Qaeda ideology has continued to spread. Japan is
deeply concerned about this situation. More than two
years have passed since the shock of 11 September
2001, and it is a matter of serious concern that the
sense of crisis shared jointly by the international
community at that time seems to be fading. We
consider it a very serious issue that, as observed in the
report, the cooperation of Member States is not
adequate for the activities of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), which aims at
taking concrete measures to control Al Qaeda.

We would like to comment in particular on three
issues mentioned in the report. First, it is pointed out in
the report that since the consolidated list was
established, there has not been a single report by any
Member State of the arrest of any listed individual at
its borders. The report also mentions that there remain
cases in which border control authorities in Member
States have not included sufficient information from
the consolidated list in their national stop lists. That is
regrettable; these facts indicate that our efforts are not
yet sufficient.

The report also cites the activities of foreign
entities and individuals in Iraq. After our efforts in
Afghanistan, we must at all costs prevent Iraq from
becoming a sanctuary for terrorism. At this juncture,
Japan welcomes the adoption of a new constitution for
Afghanistan through democratic processes. We hope
that the various factions in the country will work
together to hold elections for the establishment of a
permanent administration in accordance with the new
constitution, and call upon the international community
to extend further support and cooperation. However,
the resurgence of the Taliban and the continuing
activity of Al Qaeda in the border regions are matters
of great concern, and it is crucial that the international
community act in unison to ensure that Afghanistan
does not revert to being a safe haven for terrorists. Also
for that reason, strict border control policies in States
sharing a national border with Iraq and Afghanistan are
essential, and we expect those States to take further
measures, in addition to the efforts made so far.

Secondly, the media has widely reported that the
report of the Monitoring Group contained worrisome
accounts indicating that Al Qaeda had already decided
to use chemical and biological weapons. Japan, as the
country that experienced the subway Sarin attack
perpetrated by the Aum Shinrikyo cult, is strongly
aware of the danger posed by the acquisition and use of
such weapons by terrorists. We therefore call for more
rigorous arms embargo measures to be taken by all
States, so that such weapons and materials will not fall
into terrorists' hands. In this connection, Japan
supports the Monitoring Group's recommendations
with regard to the adoption of measures incorporated in
the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects; encouraging the
ratification or implementation of international
instruments, such as the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material, the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical
Weapons Convention, the Biological Weapons
Convention, the Convention on the Marking of Plastic
Explosives for the Purpose of Detection and the
International Convention for the Suppression of
Terrorist Bombings; and ensuring controls on man-
portable air-defence systems.

Japan has taken action in this regard, including
hosting a seminar for South-East Asian countries in
Tokyo last October to encourage the conclusion of
treaties and protocols related to the prevention of
terrorism.

Thirdly, as stated at the outset, Japan is greatly
concerned about the situation referred to in the report
regarding the inadequacy of Member States'
cooperation in the activities of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). With
regard to measures to freeze assets, the lack of
uniformity in the notation of data in the list of
designated individuals and entities, the notable lack of
necessary information and the lack of transparency in
the process of adding to or altering the contents of the
list make it hard for Member States to identify whether
suspicious individuals or entities within their States are
the same as those included in the list. This poses
difficulties for Member States in implementing the
required measures domestically.

Japan would like to ask the Committee to make
further efforts to achieve improvements in these
respect. For its part, Japan has introduced a system to
further expeditious implementation at the domestic
level of any changes in the consolidated list once
changes have been announced. As the report indicates,
it is extremely important that the updated version of the
consolidated list issued by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) be reflected in the
domestic regulations and measures implemented in
each Member State without delay. For that purpose, as
suggested in my statement in the public meeting on this
issue held in July last year, we would consider it
helpful for the Committee to establish guidelines on the
timing of the domestic implementation of updates,
indicating that any update should be domestically
implemented within a certain period of time after
issuance of a press release or official notification to
Member States by the Committee.

In addition, the report points out that there are
situations in which entities suspected of being
associated with terrorists are allowed to continue their
activities. Although we are fully aware of the difficulty
in regulating the activities of such entities, including
charities, it is necessary, in our view, to ensure the
transparency of the activities of such entities by, for
example, working out a means of gaining a clearer
understanding of where the money from charities has
gone. Activities such as the use of illegal underground
financing should also be prevented through the use of
strict controls.

In closing, I would like to reiterate our
appreciation for your dedication, Mr. President, as
Chairman of the Committee, as well as for that of your
outstanding staff, and for the efforts of the Secretariat
and the Monitoring Group experts. We trust that the
Committee will continue to function with ever greater
efficacy in the future.

