Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): There is a big, raging elephant in Syria
that some Council members do not see. There is
an occupation by the United States, which is also
conducting an armed robbery of Syrian oil. There is
a Turkish occupation. There are operations designed
to change the demographics of some areas along the
border between Syria and Turkey. There is terrorism in
Idlib perpetrated by terrorist groups that are publicly
supported by their sponsors. Certain Governments,
some of which are unfortunately represented here in the
Council, are encouraging separatist groups in Syria in
a process similar to what their clumsy policies led to in
Iraq. There are Governments that are refusing to take
back their terrorists from Syria. Some are choosing
to ignore the big raging elephant in the room. All
they care about is moving forward with the extension
of the mandate in resolution 2165 (2014) on cross-
border operations. The attempts to renew that mandate
reflect a sad reality in the Council, however. In other
words, the Council is not seeking to implement its own
resolutions, which all stress respect for the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria. We will come
back to this point later on. My delegation would like to
affirm the following points.

First, all Member States, inside and outside the
Council, must commit to respecting the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic, pursuant to the principles of international
law, the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and the Security Council's resolutions on Syria, which
number approximately 25.

Secondly, the Security Council must assume its

responsibility to end the illegitimate presence of foreign
forces in my country. It must compel the Governments
of known States to end their attacks, their support of
terrorist groups, their sponsorship of separatist militias
and their collusion with those militias to loot the assets
and resources of Syria, including Syrian oil, even
while some believe themselves to be the guardians and
brokers of that oil, in Violation of the international law
and the Charter. It is essential to support the efforts
of the Syrian Government and its allies to combat
terrorism, pursuant to the relevant Council resolutions,
at a time when certain members of the Council are
doing everything they can to undermine the efforts
of the Syrian Government and its allies to combat the
terrorism of Al-Baghdadi's Da'esh and Al-Julani's
Al-Nusra Front in Idlib governorate.
Some countries have boasted of carrying out an
alleged operation in Idlib that led to the death of the
leader of Da'esh and a number of other leaders. That
alleged operation reaffirms what we and the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to
resolutions and 1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015) concerning
ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities have said, which is that terrorist
groups control Idlib. They are using its residents as
human shields. It is therefore our obligation as a State
to free our fellow citizens there from the control of
those groups. There are some on the Council who
have been hypocritical enough to present themselves
as heroes who killed Al-Baghdadi. At the same time
they have ignored the fact that they filled the halls of
the United Nations with indignation and mobilized the
Organization's mechanisms against the Syrian State
when my country sought to eradicate that terrorist and
his group, as well as Al-Julani, the head ofthe Al-Nusra
Front, and others in Idlib. The same people targeted the
Syrian Arab Army as it was attempting to reach areas
to the east of the Euphrates River in order to eradicate
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, as has happened
at Al-Tharda Mountain in Deir ez-Zor, the area of
Al-Hajeen and elsewhere. Notice the link between
Al-Baghdadi, Al-Julani and Mr. Le Mesurier in Idlib.

Fourthly, there must be an immediate lifting
of the unilateral coercive measures imposed on the
Syrian people; those measures constitute an act of
economic terrorism. They are a collective punishment
against the Syrian people. They themselves rebut
the allegations and lies of those who imposed them
claiming that they had done so to benefit Syrians.
What kind of humanitarian act deprives Syrians of
milk, food, medication, medical equipment, health-
care requirements or even wheelchairs for the disabled?
Those are all very important things that Mr. Lowcock
does not see.

Fifthly, it must be recognized that the efforts of the
Syrian State and its humanitarian action partners, such
as the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, are the main factor in
improving the humanitarian situation despite the many
challenges they face. It must also be recognized that
United Nations and its agencies would have failed had
it not been for the cooperation, facilities and conditions
of safety and security that were provided to them by the
Syrian Government.

Sixthly, an end must be put to promoting the
violation of Syrian sovereignty through useless
cross-border operations and offices that are hostile to
Syria, such as the Gaziantep Office, whose continued
work represents a reward to Erdogan for sponsoring
terrorism, occupying Syrian territory and continuing
to blackmail and threaten Europe and the world. There
must be engagement with the Syrian Government within
the framework of an ethical, realistic and credible legal
relationship, including cooperating with it as a key
partner in the humanitarian and development fields, free
from any political preconditions, dictates or attempts at
blackmail aimed at undermining reconstruction efforts
and the return of displaced persons.

Artificial terrorist groups must no longer be
qualified as humanitarian groups, as is the case with the
White Helmets terrorist group. European and American
newspapers two days ago reaffirmed that the founder of
the White Helmets, James Le Mesurier, was a British
intelligence officer. We have stated that fact time and
again, but some have tried to cover it up. The promotion
ofinformation campaigns spreading lies concerning the
use of barrel bombs and chemical weapons got under
way, and shortly thereafter followed the appearance of

the White Helmets. Iraq had been invaded and Baghdad
had been occupied, and shortly thereafter Al-Baghdadi
appeared. Some States deployed Al-Nusra Front
terrorists across the line of separation in the occupied
Syrian Golan, and shortly after that Al-Julani appeared.
Notice this sophistic link: the occupation of Iraq and
the invasion of Baghdad, and then we got Al-Baghdadi.
Terrorists are deployed in the Golan, then Al-Julani
appears. Claims are made of the use of barrel bombs
and chemical weapons, and shortly thereafter a British
intelligence officer named Le Mesurier appeared. All
of them are connected to Idlib.

