Mr. Spatafora (Italy): As this is the first time
that I am taking the floor in this Chamber under your
presidency, Sir, I want to express my most sincere and
warm congratulations to you on your assumption of the
presidency for this month. I am sure it will be very
successful, and you can count on our full support.

At the same time, I offer my very warmest
congratulations to Ambassador Sawers, now co-leading
the mission in Africa, and the United Kingdom
delegation on having so effectively and fruitfully
conducted their presidency.

Let me also join other speakers in thanking
President Pocar and President Byron, as well as
Prosecutor Brammertz and Prosecutor Jallow, for their
presentations to the Council.

Italy commends the tangible progress made in
pursuing the completion strategies through the strong
commitment of the Tribunals, their judges, their
prosecutors and their staffs. I should like in particular
to congratulate Prosecutor Brammertz, who took office
on 1 January and is appearing before the Council in
that capacity for the first time today.

We endorse and fully support the statement that
will be delivered later by the Permanent Representative
of Slovenia on behalf of the European Union. I will
therefore limit myself to making some additional
remarks.

With increasing concern, we note that
cooperation with the Tribunals in securing the arrest
and surrender of the remaining fugitives has not
improved. Cooperation is now more crucial than ever.
It is imperative that pending arrest warrants be
executed promptly to avoid further delays in the
completion strategies. The mission of the Tribunals to
help bring lasting peace to communities ravaged by
heinous atrocities necessarily means bringing
perpetrators to justice. The message must not be sent
that time plays in favour of the culprits.

On the future of the completion strategies, Italy
believes that the Council must be vigilant in avoiding
undue delays in the administration of justice. The
ability of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) to respect the schedule presented in
December has run into some impediments. I am
pleased to note that a new schedule has been prepared
and, although the task is daunting, I hope that the ICTR
manages to meet the Council's expectations that the
schedule will be respected.

Of course, in pursuing the completion strategies,
the Council should avoid giving the impression that it
intends to promote expeditiousness at the price of
fairness. Fairness must be the overriding concern of
any judicial institution, the ad hoc Tribunals being no
exception. I am confident that the Tribunals will make
every effort to finalize the numerous pending cases as
efficiently as possible, continue the referral of
intermediate and lower-ranking cases to competent
national jurisdictions, and facilitate the judicial
activities on appeal.

On the other hand, it is also essential to increase
capacity-building activities in the countries most
directly impacted, in terms of both the judiciary's
proceedings and of outreach, which could have an
enormous impact on the civilian population and on the
future of those States. Any support from the
international community for that process, including by
strengthening the judicial capacity of the relevant
States to conduct criminal trials for international
crimes, is thus more than welcome.

In that regard, Italy commends the assistance
extended to the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) by the United Nations Interregional
Crime and Justice Research Institute and the

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
as recalled in the report of the President of the ICTY.
Concerned mainly with the dissemination of best
practices in judicial and prosecutorial activities within
national courts, such assistance will contribute
substantially to consolidating at the local and
international levels the achievements of international
judicial institutions in the field of international
criminal law.

Finally, Italy would like to recall that the
Tribunals' legacy is under serious consideration by this
Council. There have been numerous meetings of the
informal working group on international tribunals,
chaired by Belgium, and many delicate issues have
been or are being discussed. I am confident that, with
the active contribution of the entire Council, important
decisions will soon be made to reaffirm the purpose for
which the Tribunals were established - to punish
those responsible for the most heinous international
crimes in the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda.

