The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Fedotov and Mr. Djinnit for their statements.

This meeting is being held just after the Elysee
Summit for Peace and Security in Africa, organized
by France, and enables us to send a strong message to
the States in the region. Drug trafficking in the Sahel
and West Africa is a threat to peace and stability.
The Security Council has taken stock of this issue.
The initiatives taken by the States of the region must
therefore be supported by the United Nations.

I would emphasize three points: the threat, France's
commitments and the role of the Security Council.

First, let us assess the situation. Without repeating
the statistics provided to us this morning, it is clear that
drug trafficking is a threat to the Sahel and West African
countries and their security, stability and development
and, beyond that, to international peace and stability.
West Africa and the Sahel, as we have heard, have
become hubs for the transit of cocaine, while cannabis is
perennial and heroin and synthetic drugs are emerging.
The drug trade's links with various criminal groups
and, on occasion, the funding of terrorist activities fuel
rebellions and destabilize existing Governments, as we
have seen in several countries in the region, in particular
Mali and Guinea-Bissau. As a zone for the transit - and
now for production and consumption - of drugs, the
States of the region face disastrous consequences in
terms of corruption, illicit economic activity and public
health. Faced with this emerging threat, the States of
West Africa and the Sahel have alerted the international
community and seek support for their initiatives. The
Secretary-General, in several ofhis reports, has relayed
those concerns.

Secondly, France has committed itself to
responding to that request. At the Elyse'e Summit,
held in Paris on 6 and 7 September, Heads of States
and Government expressed their shared determination
to curb the production, processing, consumption and
trafficking of drugs on the two continents, combat
illegal financial flows, and enhance legal and security
cooperation. France will continue to lend its support
to the security and safety of African maritime waters
and border areas, following the Yaounde summit and
Rabat conference. France has also committed itself
to bringing these issues to the heart of the European
Union, in particular by calling for the adoption of a
European Union maritime safety strategy in the Gulf
of Guinea to deal with the cross-cutting challenges
affecting those waters.

Finally, on the role of the Security Council,
Council members have shown, through this debate,
their commitment to fighting drug trafficking and
transnational crime. In the presidential statement
adopted today (S/PRST/2013/22), the members of
the Council support the initiatives undertaken by the
States of the region and ask the United Nations to help
with their implementation, particularly within the
framework of the Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, in
cooperation with other relevant organizations, such as
the European Union. They call in particular for concrete
measures to be taken to facilitate maritime interception
operations, surveillance of border areas, prosecutions,
trials and sentencing of traffickers, fighting corruption
and money-laundering, and, lastly, for the adoption
of health-related measures aimed at combating the
demand for drugs.

Beyond that, the Security Council should have a
better understanding of the impact of drug trafficking
and organized crime on the situations on its agenda.
That is why in the presidential statement the Council
asks that it be kept better informed about such threats
by UNODC, particularly when it is considering the
mandates of peacekeeping operations and political
missions. It also urges UNODC and the Department of
Political Affairs to include, in their regular briefings
to the Council, information on the work of the United
Nations system task force on transnational organized
crime and drug trafficking as threats to security and
stability. France will continue to provide support, in
its national capacity, within the European framework
and through the Security Council, to the initiatives
of its friends in the countries of West Africa aimed at
combating the scourge of drug trafficking.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Antonio.

