Ms. Keita: I would like to start by thanking Japan
for convening this meeting today.

The adoption of resolution 2378 (2017) in
September clearly demonstrated the Council's strong
commitment to strategic force generation as a core
element of peacekeeping reform. It is one of the ways in
which we can achieve the Secretary-General's vision to
help to ensure that the United Nations is more nimble,
pragmatic and flexible in its ability to plan, launch and
manage a range of operations.

As the Security Council has noted, United Nations
peacekeeping missions must be resourced with the
right capabilities, delivered at the right time to meet
the challenges that they face today and those that lie
ahead. We must continue to strive to ensure a diverse
mix of contributors that provides the right capabilities.
However, ultimately, we remain dependent on the
capabilities that Member States are Willing to provide.

Regional and subregional organizations, including
the African Union and the European Union, can also
play an integral role in filling gaps, especially during
the start-up and surge phases of missions. We work
closely with such organizations and their member States
to ensure that United Nations peacekeeping standards
are understood and observed. We work together on
efforts to better plan the start-up of future missions
and mission transitions. The capacity-building and
training efforts of United Nations troop-contributing
countries in Africa are also intricately linked to those
of the African Standby Force, and more comprehensive
information-sharing in that regard is required.

The Security Council has an integral role to play
in defining and in helping us to fulfil the current
and future capability gaps in our missions, including
through training and capacity-building assistance.
Council members have hosted high-level meetings,
pledged and prepared new capabilities, offered
training and capacity-building support and provided
direct financial and political support to our strategic
force generation and training efforts. That momentum
continued at the United Nations Peacekeeping Defence
Ministerial Conference in Vancouver last month, where
49 new pledge announcements, including more than 20
training and capacity-building pledges, were made.

To assist Member States in deciding where and how
to provide training, the Department of Field Support
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
will continue to provide advice and technical support.
We encourage Member States to ensure that their
training and capacity-building assistance is focused on
developing sustainable national training capacities and
that their engagement is for the medium- to long-term
rather than being a one-off event.

In order to adapt to the evolving operational
realities and to address the changing threats, missions
require different capabilities at different periods in
their life cycle. The mission concepts of operations
will be continually reassessed and force compositions
and operational plans will need to be adjusted. In
that context, troop- and police-contributing countries
must remain flexible and adaptive with regard to the
capabilities that they provide and the time period for
which they provide them. The generation of capabilities
for United Nations peacekeeping cannot focus solely
on the type of equipment or the number of personnel
being sought. Instead, we must increasingly focus on all
the aspects that make a capability perform effectively,
including agility, training, equipment, technology,
doctrine, leadership, discipline, interoperability,
welfare, mindset and gender balance, as well as the
absence of caveats.

Deploying forces that meet our operational
performance and conduct standards is a critical
component of filling capability gaps. This begins
with proper basic skills training and United Nations-
specific training that needs to be refreshed regularly.
Critical training, such as e-learning programmes on the
prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse, should be
further supported by Member States and included as part
of mandatory predeployment training for all uniformed
personnel. Equipment, too, cannot be sustained without
appropriate systems for maintenance, repair and the
acquisition of spare parts.

To this end, Member States themselves should
continue to invest in more sustained training initiatives
and better equipment to maintain United Nations
standards and adapt to new operating environments.
One-off training just before deployment and the
provision of equipment for one unit will not deliver
self-sufficient capacities. The constant turnover of
personnel should be addressed by directing both United
Nations and bilateral training support as far upstream
as possible in order to build self-sustaining national
training capacity.

Opportunities for successful matchmaking between
providers and recipients to fill capacity gaps have
proven to be best realized through targeted engagement
to develop partnerships around specific missions and
countries and to address specific capabilities. These
initiatives are Vital to the success of missions, but new,
creative ways of generating and sustaining the required
capabilities are also needed going forward.

Mission-specific force generation events for
missions with persistent capability gaps will continue
and evolve based on the lessons learned from the
force generation conference for the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali. Capability-specific capacity-building efforts must
also continue. For example, the triangular partnership
project should be expanded to include additional
geographic regions, additional enabling capabilities
and francophone countries. Furthermore, ongoing
work on medical standards should be further buoyed
through a partnership of interested Member States.
Coordinated by the Secretariat, these Member States
provide funding, expertise, convening and training to
help improve engineering, signals, medical and other
capabilities deployed to peacekeeping missions.

Ensuring that every United Nations peacekeeping
mission is supported by properly trained, equipped, led
and motivated troops and police, rotation after rotation,
is a significant challenge that will require more
partnership, resources and time to overcome. Much
progress has been made over the past few years, but
much work remains to be done. The Secretariat, for its
part, will further enhance its ongoing work on strategic
force generation and targeted training support. To that
end, we will establish a light coordination mechanism to
bring Secretariat entities involved in training, capacity-
building and force generation together with relevant
Member States involved in order to allow Member
States with resources to contribute. This coordination
role would better direct those resources to troop- and
police-contributing countries or missions.

A more flexible and responsive mechanism is also
required to support a Wider range of initiatives and meet
multiple and sometimes unforeseen capacity-building
and training needs. One such mechanism proposed is a
pooled, multi-donor grant as part of the existing DPKO
Trust Fund to augment existing resources to coordinate
and deliver additional targeted and sustained training
support for troop- and police-contributing countries.
It would allow us additional flexibility to quickly
respond to priority emerging issues and support more
sustainable strategic engagement with troop- and
police-contributing countries.

Despite the substantial progress made in recent
years to strengthen our approach and develop
partnerships with Member States to fill capability gaps,
there are inevitable limitations and some capability
gaps remain to be filled. Therefore we will need to
continue to enhance our collective efforts and be
creative to fill some of our most pressing gaps. This
will, of course, require troop- and police-contributing
countries themselves to invest in more training and
better equipment to maintain United Nations standards
and adapt to new operating environments.

Security Council members also have a strong
leadership role to play in ensuring that mandates are
matched by appropriate resources and by continuing to
support the Secretariat in its strategic force generation
efforts. The Secretary-General's recommendations,
contained in his letter to the Council, highlight
an assortment of ways to move forward in this
effort together.

