Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to warmly thank Cote d'lvoire for
organizing this important debate, presided over by the
Ivorian Minister for Foreign Affairs, whose presence
and statement I welcome. The successful experience
of Cote d'Ivoire - which is in many ways exemplary,
as you have just recalled, Sir - certainly imbues your
message with particular weight as regards our work.
Allow me also to thank you for the warm words you
have just pronounced regarding my country. Better
coordination between the United Nations, regional
organizations and States is essential to meeting our
common goal of improved conflict prevention and
resolution.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
the Chairperson of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) for their
presence, their important briefings and their exemplary
commitment.

Today, I will deliver three principal messages on
behalf ofFrance. The first is a call to further strengthen
the necessary synergy between the United Nations
and regional organizations. The second emphasizes
the absolutely strategic nature and importance of
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union. The third is a message of support for
African peace operations.

My first message is a call to pool our efforts to
better prevent and resolve conflicts. France fully
supports the vision of the Secretary-General. We must
do more upstream by investing in conflict prevention,
and downstream by supporting peace and reconciliation
processes. France once again commends the efforts
of the Secretary-General and his team to strengthen
the prevention and mediation capacities of the United
Nations.

To better prevent conflicts, it is imperative to go
beyond the silo approach and to decompartmentalize
our interventions. In that sense, the humanitarian-
development-peace nexus must be given practical
expression on the ground in order to provide
comprehensive and consistent responses to crises. That
is not a conceptual issue; it is a question ofthe necessity
of efficiency and, I would say, common sense. It is a
response to the challenges on the ground that must
be given with respect to institutional or bureaucratic
considerations, and not the other way around. That
is why we need to strengthen the exchange between
United Nations agencies and among bilateral and
multilateral actors in order to make the best use of
resources and skills. For the same reason, we must as
a matter of necessity promote synergies between the
United Nations and regional organizations.

This is not about a political game or trying to please
any particular person. It is a question of being more
effective together in the service of our shared goals.
Regional and subregional organizations have assets that
the United Nations does not have. They are closer to the
action, more often have a more in-depth knowledge of
what is happening on the ground, and have invaluable
human networks. We must therefore work together
and in a spirit of trust, share information and analysis,
and carry out joint initiatives. It is together, hand in
hand, that we can advance peace. We are convinced
that the partnership between the United Nations and
regional organizations is one of the keys to the success
of multilateralism, in which we believe now more than
ever. In that regard, I wish to commend the efforts of the
Peacebuilding Commission, which is cooperating ever
more closely with regional organizations in the context
of the so-called country-specific configurations. That
is a step in the right direction that should be continued
and expanded.

The State is also indispensable of course. National
authorities, but also civil societies, especially women's
organizations, must be fully involved in international
efforts to prevent or resolve conflicts. We all know that
ownership by the actors concerned is the prerequisite
for lasting peace.

My second message concerns the special
importance of the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union. France is of the View
that the partnership between the United Nations, the
African Union and African subregional organizations
is of absolutely strategic importance today. That
is why we are resolutely committed to supporting
its development, which in our view has immense
potential. We welcome the important progress made
under the joint leadership of the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
especially since the signing of the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security in April 2017.

That partnership is manifest today in a very
concrete and operational way on the ground to prevent
crisis and conflict situations. To name just a few of
many examples, the case of The Gambia is an example
worth following. The combined efforts of the United
Nations, the African Union and ECOWAS have helped
to prevent the post-electoral crisis from turning into a
conflict of which the people would have been, as always,
the main victims. More recently, Madagascar has also
seen the success of joint prevention efforts led by the
African Union, the Southern African Development
Community, the United Nations and the European
Union, also making it possible to avoid a major crisis
surrounding the organization of presidential elections.

We further welcome the efforts undertaken by
the African Union and its member States, as well as
by African subregional organizations, to prevent and
respond to crisis situations on the continent, thanks
in particular to the Silencing the Guns by 2020
initiative, which we fully support. The African Peer
Review Mechanism is also a valuable tool for conflict
prevention in Africa.

My third message is a call to support African peace
operations. As Council members know, France fully
supports the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel, and we will continue to plead resolutely for the
widest possible support from the United Nations to the
Force, which embodies the commitment of the States of
the Sahel to their own safety.

As I recalled yesterday in the presence of President
Alassane Ouattara (see S/PV.8413), France fully
supports the initiative, led by the African Union and the
three African members of the Security Council, aimed
at adopting an ambitious draft resolution on African
peace operations by the end of the year. Such operations
will enable intervention as early as possible before
crises degenerate and destabilize one or more States
in the long term. They testify to the African Union's
desire to become more deeply involved in the security
of the African continent, as Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cote d'Ivoire so
resolutely and eloquently recalled today.

Let us all stand alongside our African partners
in support of their efforts. It is in our interest and
corresponds to the flow of history.

