The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Martin
for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my national capacity.

At the outset, allow me to express my sincere
appreciation to all Member States that will be
participating in today's open debate. I would also like to
welcome the valuable briefing made by Mr. Ian Martin
at the beginning of this meeting.

The development and improvement of the
working methods of the Security Council are critical
to shouldering its responsibilities in maintaining
international peace and security. Over the past
25 years, many improvements have been introduced
in its working methods, especially after the end of the
Cold War. They include communication between the
Council and non-member States, as well as between
the Council and other United Nations organs, such as
the General Assembly; the flow of information from
and to the Council; the marked increase in the number
of formal and thematic and other meetings that involve
the participation of non-governmental and civil society
organizations; and the circulation of Council documents
to non-member States before their adoption.

These improvements are critical and cannot be
underestimated. Credit for them goes to the Security
Council, especially its non-permanent members,
and to a number of groups of States that launched
many initiatives as part of the intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform. Although
these improvements are important to ensuring the
transparency of the Council, they remain insufficient.
There is still room for more improvements that would
enhance the Council's role in carrying out its tasks
and responsibilities as stated in the Charter of the
United Nations.

The participation of Member States in the
decision-making process within the Council remains
weak as a result of its working methods and the
lack of transparency under the pretext of ensuring
effectiveness, efficiency and quick decision-making.
However, we believe that it is important to engage all
Member States, especially States particularly affected,
and to consult with them within an agreed framework
before making any decisions, in accordance with
Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter.

While we stress the importance of implementing
Article 25 of the Charter with regard to Member States'
implementation of the Council's resolutions, the Council
must also comply with other Articles to ensure the
transparency and credibility of its decisions, especially
when it comes to issues related directly to the security
and stability of Member States, such as imposing
sanctions and establishing peacekeeping operations.

We are aware that the General Assembly, as part
of the intergovernmental negotiations, is currently
discussing comprehensive reform of the Security
Council within the five issues set out in its decision
62/557, including improving the working methods
of the Council. However, we reaffirm the need to
address another critical issue, namely, the veto. Many
challenges remain in addressing that issue. The abuse
of the veto by some of the five permanent members on
many occasions has undermined the credibility of the
decision-making process and has prevented the Council
in some cases from carrying out its responsibilities
and from taking the necessary measures to maintain
international peace and security. Some permanent
Council members have used the right to the veto on
some occasions during past years to protect their own
national interests and the interests of their allies.

I would like to note that the State of Kuwait is
among the signatories of the code of conduct of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
whereby members of the Council pledge not to vote
against any draft resolution intended to prevent crimes
against humanity, genocide and war crimes, especially
in the Security Council. We also welcome the French-
Mexican initiative, which calls for voluntarily
refraining from using the right to the veto in cases of
crimes against humanity. We hope that we will be able
to reach an agreement to restrain the use of the veto on
humanitarian issues, including the urgent delivery of
humanitarian assistance to civilians in need, medical
evacuation and the imposition of a humanitarian truce.

The State of Kuwait, as Chair of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, attaches great importance to
the role of Member States in improving the Council's
working methods. We have chosen to organize this
open debate - the first on this topic since July 2016
(see S/PV.7740) - to allow all Member States to
express their views on the working methods and to
make concrete proposals for their improvement. We
look forward to hearing their opinions on improving
the working methods of the Council and to building on
the lauded efforts of our predecessors.

We cannot address progress in improving the
working methods of the Council without referring to the
noteworthy efforts made by the previous Chairs of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, especially Japan, which played a
pivotal role as Chair of the Informal Working Group in
the adoption of the revised note S/2017/507 in August
2017. The note has become a useful reference for all,
especially the newly elected members. In that regard,
I would like to shed light on a number of substantial
elements of note S/2017/507 that we consider very
beneficial, especially as newly elected members.

First, under paragraph 140 of the revised note, the
Security Council invites the newly elected members of
the Council to observe all meetings of the Council and
its subsidiary bodies and the informal consultations of
the Whole for a period of three months, from 1 October
immediately preceding their term of membership. The
Council also invites the Secretariat to provide all the
relevant Council communications to the newly elected
members during that period.

I would also like to bring up another important
point pertaining to the appointment of the Chairs of
the subsidiary bodies. The members of the Council are
required to consult informally with the newly elected
members on this issue. Such consultations should
be informal, undertaken in a balanced, transparent,
effective and comprehensive manner and concluded
before the month of October. These practices have
proven to be useful not only for the newly elected
members, but for the Council as a whole, allowing it to
work coherently and effectively from the beginning of
the year.

The State of Kuwait has only just begun its
membership on the Council. However, we have spared
no effort to ensure the transparency and inclusivity
of our work. As Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kuwait organized
the first meeting, on 26 January, in an open format,
allowing all States concerned to attend so as to increase
transparency and inclusivity.

I also welcome the convening ofinformal briefings,
which has become a common practice over the past
several years. Accordingly, Kuwait intends to convene
a wrap-up session at the end of this month to highlight
the main landmarks of our presidency, and I look
forward to the participation of all Member States, both
from the Council and the general membership.

While the revised text of note 507 is comprehensive
and balanced, we stress the need for the Council
to review progress periodically and ensure its full
and effective implementation. In that regard, the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions intends to assess all gaps
in the implementation of the note to ensure the full
implementation of the practices recommended therein,
and to consider proposals made by Member States
today in an attempt to ensure transparency, inclusivity
and interactive exchanges in the work of the Council.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.

