Mr. Ahamed (India): At the outset, I would like
to convey our deep condolences to the Government and
the people of Saudi Arabia on the passing away of His
Royal Highness, the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia,
Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud. I would also like to
convey our solidarity with the Government and the
people of Turkey in dealing with the aftermath of the
devastating earthquake.

First of all, I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this open debate on the
Middle East, a region witnessing momentous
transformation. I also would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his comprehensive
briefing on developments in the region.

Clearly, the issue of Palestine has taken a
decisive turn in the history of the Middle East conflict
after President Mahmoud Abbas filed an application
with the Secretary-General on 23 September for
Palestine's full membership to the United Nations.

Speaking on 24 September 2011 - a day after
President Abbas filed the application - my Prime
Minister, Manmohan Singh, said in the General
Assembly that India has been steadfast in its support
for the Palestinian people's struggle for a sovereign,
independent, viable and united State of Palestine with
East Jerusalem as its capital, living within secure and
recognized borders side by side and at peace with
Israel, as per the relevant resolutions of this
Organization, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
Road Map. The Prime Minister added that we look
forward to welcoming Palestine as an equal Member of
the United Nations (see A/66/PV.22).

India recognized the Palestine Liberation
Organization as the sole legitimate representative of

the Palestinian people in 1975, and its Office in New
Delhi was accorded full diplomatic recognition in
1980. India was the first non-Arab country to recognize
the State of Palestine, in 1988. We have maintained
diplomatic relations with Palestine for over two
decades now. It is also pertinent to note that Palestine
has been recognized by more than two thirds of the
membership of this Organization.

Obviously, the State of Palestine fulfils all
criteria mentioned in Article 4 of the Charter for
membership to this Organization. We therefore support
Palestine's application and hope that the process will
be concluded expeditiously.

During my long political career, I have had the
honour to work closely with Palestinian leaders. I met
the undisputed leader of the Palestinian people, the late
President Yasser Arafat, on 17 September 2004 at
Ramallah, just a few months before he left his earthly
abode. At that meeting, I had the opportunity to
reiterate India's solidarity with the Palestinian people
and support for their cause. He warmly recalled his
close relations with Indian leaders, particularly
Mrs. Indira Gandhi and Mr. Rajiv Gandhi, and
appreciated India's unwavering support for the cause of
the Palestinian people. We have continued our
interactions with the Palestinian leadership under
President Abbas. He paid state visits to India in 2008
and 2010.

As the world's largest democracy and arguably its
most diverse country, India recognizes the democratic
aspirations of all peoples, including those in the
Middle East. The call of the international community
for democracy and respect for fundamental rights will
sound hollow if the present impasse continues and the
Palestinians are denied their aspirations.

It is also our firm conviction that lasting peace
and security in the region can be achieved only through
peaceful dialogue, not through the use of force. In this
context we take note of the Quartet statement of
23 September, and we hope that the timelines indicated
in that statement will be realized.

The biggest stumbling block to direct
negotiations between the Israelis and the Palestinians
remains continuing settlement activity in the occupied
Palestinian territories. We call upon Israel to stop
settlement activities. That would facilitate the
resumption of negotiations, in which all final status
issues should be addressed.
We cannot, however, make Palestine's
membership in the United Nations conditional upon a
peace agreement, for that would be legally untenable,
even while we support the resumption of direct talks to
resolve the outstanding issues.

We welcome the recent agreement between Israel
and Hamas on the exchange of prisoners. We hope it
will ease tension and build confidence. We also hope it
will pave the way for an early and significant easing of
restrictions on movement of goods and people into the
Gaza Strip, thereby addressing the dire humanitarian
situation there.

India, for its part, has continued its development
support to the Palestinian Authority. From the year
2009-2010, we enhanced our annual contribution to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to $1 million, in
addition to a special contribution of another $1 million
to UNRWA in response to a flash appeal in 2010.

During the past two years, India has also
contributed $10 million annually as untied budgetary
support to the Palestinian Authority. We are offering
100 slots to the Palestinian Authority for capacity-
building and human resource development under our
technical and economic cooperation programme. With
our IBSA partners Brazil and South Africa, we have
also undertaken joint projects in Palestine, with a
sports complex having just been completed.

While the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the most
serious one in the region, we need to be mindful that
resolution of that conflict by itself may not result in the
achievement of a comprehensive and durable peace in
the region. Other issues relating to Arab lands that
remain under occupation are equally important.
Progress on the Lebanese and Syrian tracks of the
Middle East peace process is therefore necessary for a
comprehensive and lasting peace in the region.

Developments in the Middle East since February
this year underline the need to reinvigorate the search
for this comprehensive peace, while the countries in
the region undertake inclusive political processes and
implement reforms to meet the legitimate aspirations of
their people. It is important that the grievances of the
people be addressed through dialogue and negotiations
rather than resort to arms.

It is the responsibility of all countries to create
conditions that enable their people to freely determine

their pathways to development. That is the essence of
democracy and fundamental human freedoms. No
action should be taken from outside that exacerbates
problems and gives space for the rise of extremism.
The international community should stand ready to
assist countries in their efforts while respecting the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
all countries. As my Prime Minister said in the General
Assembly on 24 September, societies cannot be
reordered from outside through military force.
Observance of the rule of law is as important in
international affairs as it is within countries.

Guided by these principles, India stands ready to
play its role in our collective endeavours to achieve a
just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

