Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by expressing my thanks to the
delegation of France for convening this debate under
its presidency. Allow me also to reiterate the
importance of such meetings, which facilitate
interaction between the Security Council and
non-member States. I would also like to welcome the
valuable briefing given this morning by the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs.

Ten years ago, this Council held its first open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
At the time, it was hailed as a milestone in the
Council's work. Since then, the work of both the
Security Council and the United Nations as a whole
has witnessed some advances and various difficulties
in implementing policies intended to ensure the
protection of civilian populations in armed conflicts.

As noted by the Secretary-General in his most
recent report on this subject, Within the Council the
normative framework for the protection of civilian
populations in armed conflict has been fine-tuned,
beginning with resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1296
(2000). This has been reflected in the adoption of a
number of resolutions that emphasize the protection of
women and children in armed conflict and has been
bolstered by the adoption of resolutions 1674 (2006)
and 1738 (2006). That normative progress has been
complemented by the inclusion of activities pertaining
to the protection of civilians in the mandates of
existing peacekeeping operations. That illustrates how
the Council has gradually modified its focus on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Notwithstanding the progress made, Uruguay
notes with particular concern that, despite the reduction
in the number of conflicts throughout the world, as
pointed out in the latest report of the Stockholm
International Peace Research Institute, civilian
populations continue to experience acts of brutality and
degradation as a result of being in the wrong place at
the wrong time or being deliberately selected as
victims of atrocities in an environment of almost
complete impunity. Unfortunately, in recent days we
have witnessed the unfolding of actions whose result
has been aggression against civilian populations and
the obstruction of crucial humanitarian assistance to
the victims of those actions.
09-20856
Uruguay has demonstrated its unwavering
commitment to international humanitarian law, as
illustrated by our adherence to and implementation of
all the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their
Additional Protocols; the Rome Statute, which
established the International Criminal Court; The
Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Conflict and its
Protocols' and the Convention on the Prohibition of
Military or Any Other Hostile Use of Environmental
Modification Techniques. All those instruments
constitute the essence of international humanitarian
law.

On the ground, Uruguay, one of the largest troop
contributors to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, has demonstrated its unequivocal
commitment to the protection of civilians. In the
various peacekeeping operations to which Uruguay has
contributed, including those in which my country is
currently participating, Uruguayan contingents have
escorted and protected United Nations agencies, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and non-
governmental organizations providing humanitarian
assistance. They have helped refugees and internally
displaced persons return to their homes. They have
neutralized the harmful potential to civilians of anti-
personnel mines. Uruguayan military and civilian
personnel have also initiated reconstruction efforts in
countries devastated by conflict, including in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Haiti.
Uruguayan personnel deployed in the field have also
carried out humanitarian campaigns to mitigate the
harm suffered by civilians in countries afflicted by
natural disasters.

Uruguay's experience on the ground has also led
us to voice a crucial concern. On numerous occasions,
Uruguayan contingents have warned of the
impossibility of carrying out expanded humanitarian
assistance and civilian protection efforts due to the fact
that destabilizing forces in a given region were several
times greater in number than the personnel of
peacekeeping operations. We believe that such
situations give rise to the need, at the time that a
peacekeeping mission is established or renewed, for
Security Council mandates to envisage the necessary
strategic and logistical provisions to address the
implementation of those tasks as best as possible. As
pointed out earlier, in addition to clear and specific
mandates, it is essential that United Nations forces
09-20856
have at their disposal the essential means and
capabilities to effectively protect civilians. That
imperative need is both a great challenge and a
responsibility for the Organization and all its Member
States.

Uruguay shares the Secretary-General's view
with regard to the four challenges that the international
community must address with regard to the protection
of civilians, namely, the need to ensure access to
civilians so that they can be provided the assistance
they need to survive; combating and eradicating the
heinous practice of sexual violence in armed conflict;
the need to more systematically address the effects of
conflict on homes, land and property; and the
importance of putting an end to the unacceptable
humanitarian consequences of cluster munitions. In
connection with those challenges, Uruguay would like
to reiterate its position, which we have previously
stated in other forums, that the activities of the United
Nations in providing humanitarian assistance must be
carried out in accordance with the principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality, independence,
respect for international humanitarian law and security
for personnel on the ground - all the while bearing in
mind that the primary responsibility for the protection
of civilians lies with States.

The twentieth century witnessed atrocities and
abhorrent acts of aggression against innocent civilians
that had an impact on entire peoples. Sadly, the final
years of that century and the early years of the twenty-
first century have also produced events that have
shaken and disturbed the conscience of the
international community. Fortunately, the development
of the international community has provided us with an
excellent concept by which to make the world a more
humane place. In accordance with the provisions of
international humanitarian law, the protection of
civilians is a legal imperative. However, it is also an
ethical imperative that reflects the long evolution of
humankind towards civilizing norms that place respect
for life and human integrity and dignity at the core of
its values.

Lastly, I would like to highlight that, on
27 January, the delegations of Uruguay and Australia
will organize an open workshop to address the issue of
implementing the protection of civilians in the
mandates of peacekeeping operations. It will be an
opportune moment to better define the concept of the
protection of civilians as it contrasts with the concept
of the responsibility to protect. It will also be an
opportunity to analyze the challenges that must be kept
in mind from a practical point of view in implementing
the mandates of peacekeeping operations that include
protection of civilian components, as well as to become
aware of the experiences of the main troop contributors
and of the Secretariat.

