Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Let me congratulate
you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month.

We also welcome Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon to his first meeting with the Security Council.
We wish him well and we are among the delegations
that are very delighted that he has chosen Ms. Migiro
of Tanzania as his Deputy. He has claimed one small
victory for gender balance in this Organization very
early in his term, and we thank him for that.

Despite the theme of today's debate, the reality is
that we come today to discuss the mandate of this
Council, which according to the Charter is that of
maintaining international peace and security. More
than 60 years ago, when the founders of the United
Nations bestowed that responsibility upon the Security
Council, the world faced different kinds of threats,

mostly emanating from inter-State conflicts. Today we
are challenged by complex, multifaceted and
interconnected threats that go beyond the mandate of
this Council. For example, there is the fundamental
threat of poverty and underdevelopment that is at the
root of most conflicts that find their way to the agenda
of this Council. In fact, evidence has shown that even
threats posed by terrorism and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction have a common thread
linking them to poverty and underdevelopment. Yet,
the mere existence of nuclear weapons is itself a threat
to international peace and security.

There is little doubt that poverty alleviation is the
most effective tool for conflict prevention. Of course,
the dilemma we face in this Council is that the issues
of poverty and underdevelopment should not and must
not be left to an organ, such as ours, of such a limited
membership. The General Assembly, which enjoys
universal membership, remains the central multilateral
forum for addressing the pressing global issues and
challenges presently confronting all States. The
responsibility for managing and achieving worldwide
economic development and social progress, as well as
for responding to threats to international peace and
security, must be shared among all States and exercised
multilaterally through the United Nations.

All principal organs of the United Nations,
including subsidiary bodies such as the Human Rights
Council, have a role to play in developing and
implementing a more effective collective security
system. A common approach to collective security is
legitimate only if it is in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
The active participation of each and every principal
organ of the United Nations is crucial in the exercise of
its respective functions and powers, without upsetting
the balance established by the Charter. A range of other
multilateral institutions, such as the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nations
Development Programme, and including the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, also have an
important role to play in addressing the threats we
currently face.

The challenge for the United Nations is to use its
resources in a balanced manner that addresses
development, security and the protection of human
rights. Therefore, the Security Council as presently
constituted is limited in how to deal with the threats of
the twenty-first century. While we welcome the effort
by the Council aimed at enhancing the approach to
addressing the threats we face, we would prefer to do
so within the mandate given to us. In carrying out its
primary responsibilities, the Security Council should
not encroach on the jurisdiction and responsibility of
other principal organs of the United Nations.

The United Nations Charter has placed a
significant responsibility on the Security Council for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Needless to say, that responsibility gives the Council a
far-reaching impact on the lives of many people in the
world.

In recent years, the Security Council has been too
quick to threaten or authorize enforcement action in
some cases, while being silent and inactive in others.
For example, the Palestinian-Israeli issue is a
legitimate agenda item for this Council. However, it
has become quite noticeable how this Council has
failed to act even in the face of the most shocking
contraventions of international law.

Instead, the Council has increasingly resorted to
taking up issues that do not fall within its mandate.
Often, the Council has resorted to Chapter VII of the
Charter as an umbrella for addressing issues that may
not necessarily pose a threat to international peace and
security, when it could have opted for alternative
provisions of the Charter to respond more
appropriately, utilizing other provisions of the same
Charter. Chapter VII should be invoked, but as a last
resort.

My delegation wishes to reiterate our long-
standing position on the importance of a closer and
effective cooperation between the Security Council and
regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. We are particularly
encouraged by the institutional relationship between
the African Union and the United Nations with regard
to collective efforts aimed at resolving African
conflicts. Similarly, we express our appreciation for all
efforts to promote sustainable peace, development and
stability on our beloved African continent.

In the matter of United Nations peacekeeping,
respect for the basic principles of peacekeeping -
such as the consent of the parties, impartiality and the
non-use of force except in self-defence and in the
defence of a mandate authorized by the Council - is
essential to its success. My delegation recognizes the
role of the Peacebuilding Commission in addressing

the special needs of countries emerging from conflict
and its assistance in the areas of recovery, reintegration
and reconstruction. We look forward to an inclusive
debate on strengthening the role of this important body.

Finally, let me once again reiterate South Africa's
desire to cooperate with Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and his team. Also, my delegation stands
ready to work with other members of this Council in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We thank the Russian presidency for having given us
an opportunity to reaffirm our commitment in a
presidential statement, which we fully support.

