Mr. Holbrooke (United States): I want to express my
deep gratitude to the President of the Security Council and
to the Secretary-General for calling this meeting today
under difficult and controversial circumstances. I had
hoped that my first opportunity to speak publicly before
this great and historic body, in this room in which so
much history has been cast, would be on a less grave and
sombre occasion.

Yesterday, the Security Council heard from Mr.
Bernard Kouchner, the Secretary-General' s superb Special
Representative in Kosovo, about the challenges the United
Nations faces in that part of the world. Those challenges
are immense, but the United Nations is undertaking them
and dealing with them. And they highlight the even
greater difficulties and challenges we face today in East
Timor, where the crisis is even deeper, the need for action
even greater and the dangers at this point larger. Our
responsibility is similarly profound.

The United Nations system is being challenged
simultaneously in Kosovo and Timor, each of which is
arguably as great a challenge as this great institution has
ever faced. The Government I am proud to represent is
deeply committed to this institution, in whose creation it
played such a central role, and we wish to work with all
of you to deal with this problem within the United
Nations framework. Again, I express my personal
commitment and appreciation for the enormously difficult
actions the Secretary-General has undertaken to deal with
this. I also commend the previous two speakers, from
Portugal and Brazil, for their eloquent summations of the
situation, which will allow me not to repeat the facts -
I could not match their eloquence or their precision -
but simply state the Views of my Government.

Indonesia is a country of immediate and enormous
importance to us all. Its fragile, multiethnic balance has
been tested before, most notably and tragically a
generation ago. Today it is being severely tested once
again. On 5 May, the Government of Indonesia made a
courageous decision to resolve the problem of East
Timor - which has been a concern, a legitimate concern,
of this body for over a quarter century - in a manner
consistent with the best traditions of the United Nations
Charter: popular consultation with the people of East Timor.

The international community responded to this
challenge. With the indispensable leadership of the
Secretary-General and the steadfast support of the
Security Council, the United Nations Mission in East
Timor (UNAMET) worked successfully to allow the
people of East Timor to express their will. When given
the opportunity to vote, the people of East Timor made

 

their choice clear. In one act, on 30 August, over 400,000
East Timorese demonstrated dignity and courage, reminding
us again about the vital, central place of the ballot box and
the essential role of the United Nations in supporting and
supervising elections.

But on a day when we should be celebrating the vision
of the Government of Indonesia and the dreams of the
people of East Timor, we are consumed with images of
brutality, violence and mayhem. Almost immediately after
the voting ended last month, militia - clearly backed by
elements of the military of Indonesia - took to the streets
and began a murderous rampage.

In recent days the pace of destruction has been
appalling. Thousands of innocents have been driven from
their homes - including the heroic bishop, Bishop Belo,
the winner of the Nobel Peace Prize along with Jose
Ramos-Horta - and driven to take refuge in Australia.
Hundreds have been killed - perhaps more. I suspect
more. And United Nations personnel have come under
attack in an unconscionable way.

What is happening in East Timor is against everything
this institution stands for. It challenges the spirit and
content that all of us in this room, all of us who have the
honour to be accredited to the United Nations, have worked
for. It violates all we represent. We have a responsibility to
stand up for the moral principles that this institution
articulates and seeks to advance.

The Government of Indonesia should understand that
unless it reverses course immediately it faces the point of
no return in its international relations. No one wants to see
Indonesia, a great nation, become isolated in the world
community. But its actions are driving it in a direction that
is against the interests of it and the people of the vast and
varied archipelago. There are clear indications that the
troops under the leadership and command of General
Wiranto have backed, encouraged, directed and perhaps, in
many cases, participated in the atrocities on the ground.
How can the people of East Timor, the United Nations and
the international community now be expected to entrust
their security to these very same soldiers under the same
leadership?

It is imperative that the international community speak
with a clear and single voice. And our message must be
clear: Indonesia's Government must allow an international
security presence, as proposed repeatedly by the Secretary-
General - and I endorse fully his comments made
yesterday in that regard and again this morning - and as
proposed by the Security Council team so ably led by
Ambassador Andj aba of Namibia, who deserves the praise
and admiration of this entire body. They have proposed
to enter immediately into discussions that will lead to
conditions necessary for the United Nations process to
move forward. They are back in Jakarta; they have landed
just a few minutes ago, and it is my understanding,
indirectly from people who have talked to them, that they
are preparing for their next round of talks at a high level
with the Indonesian authorities. Those talks will be of
critical importance to the process, and I hope that they
will result in what we are seeking.

There are reports that the Indonesian Government
may be prepared to accept such a force. The distinguished
Ambassador from Portugal and the equally distinguished
Ambassador from Brazil have mentioned those. We urge
Indonesia to turn those hints and rumours into a reality
immediately. We are discussing with other delegations
what actions the Security Council will take next and are
awaiting a full report from the mission under Ambassador
Andjaba that has just returned from Dili.

I want to reiterate the importance our Government
attaches to the immediate actions that we have supported.
Already the United States has suspended all bilateral
military cooperation with Jakarta and all military sales
and deliveries. Let me point out in addition that the
situation in East Timor has already had an enormously
damaging effect on the confidence that is essential for
economic stability. If the crisis is not speedily, swiftly
and peacefully resolved, the problem will not be
contained in East Timor and will do irreparable damage
to the economy, the political process and the people of
this entire nation.

The United States wants to work hand in hand with
the Government of Indonesia in its quest for democracy,
prosperity and territorial integrity. But our ability to do so
will be severely constrained if the situation in East Timor
continues to escalate out of control. We have worked
tirelessly - including President Clinton and Secretary
Albright, who are as we speak in New Zealand, talking to
their counterparts about this crisis - to seek a solution to
it.

Today, together, we should renew our call on the
President of Indonesia and his Government, including the
military leadership, to allow immediate introduction of a
multinational force into East Timor.

 

The meeting we are having today will not solve the
problem which we are here to discuss. We all know that.
But I share the hope of the Secretary-General and of the
Ambassadors from Portugal and Brazil that this meeting
will convey to the authorities in Jakarta that they face
international isolation and enduring damage to their
economic and political aspirations if necessary actions do
not take place.

In less than two weeks, the long-held dreams of the
people of East Timor - to have the power to decide their
own fate, asserting their influence democratically - were
both realized and then shattered. We have an obligation to
see that they gain the ability to shape their future in peace,
in accordance with their own wishes.

