The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform members of the Council that I have received
letters from the representatives of Brazil, Canada,
Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Egypt, Finland, Guatemala, India, Liberia, Myanmar,
San Marino, Slovenia, Sri Lanka, Uganda and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the representatives
of the aforementioned countries took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
19 July 2006 from the Charge d'affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Observer Mission of Palestine to the United
Nations, which will be issued as document S/2006/562,
and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council being held
on Monday, 24 July 2006, regarding the issue of
children and armed conflict."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the
2
provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict;
Ms. Ann Veneman, Executive Director of the United
Nations Children's Fund; Mr. Ad Melkert, Associate
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme; Mr. Ian Bannon, Acting Director of Social
Development and Manager of the Conflict Prevention
and Reconstruction Unit of the World Bank; and Mr.
Bukeni Beck, representative of Watchlist on Children
and Armed Conflict.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/389, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/2006/494, which
contains a letter dated 6 July 2006 from France, and
document S/2006/497, which contains a letter dated
10 July 2006 from the Chairman of the Working Group
of the Security Council on Children and Armed
Conflict.

I shall now give the floor to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy.


