Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the delegation of Ukraine for convening this
meeting and you, Mr. Minister, for your personal
participation in leading this debate.
I also thank Secretary-General Guterres for
his detailed briefing, as well as Ms. Schmidt and
Mr. Zannier for their statements.

Uruguay is a country that is firmly committed
to multilateralism, the peaceful solution of disputes
and the validity of international law. We are founding
Members of the United Nations and our continent is
one where 35 countries proudly live in peace and where
one of those countries - Colombia - serves as a true
example to the international community by engaging in
a domestic peace process in which the parties involved
have demonstrated that it is possible to achieve peace
if you have the courage to invest your entire political
capital therein.

From our point of view, conflicts in Europe pose
an ongoing risk given the possibility of their worsening
or transnationalization, to which we must add new
threats such as cybercrime and violent extremism,
among other factors. As the Secretary-General said
just a few minutes ago, the idea of frozen conflicts is
completely erroneous.

Nonetheless, these conflicts also offer an opportunity
to reach negotiated solutions, hence the crucial
importance of the roles of the Security Council and
the Secretary-General and of the follow-up carried out
in various respects by the General Assembly, despite
the challenges and constraints that the Organization
often faces. The interaction between the United
Nations and the various regional monitoring bodies and
mechanisms, as well as international mediation, are
aspects that should be strengthened.

In this regard, it is important to mention the
1995 Dayton Agreement, the Geneva dialogue on the
question of Georgia, the 2015 Minsk agreements and
the work of the Normandy Quartet and the Trilateral
Contact Group, as well as the ongoing dialogue on the
reunification of Cyprus.

On this latter point, I would like to make a slight
digression here to emphasize the importance of the
negotiations conducted by the Cypriot leaders under
the auspices of the Special Adviser, Mr. Espen Eide,
and to highlight once again the firm commitment that
we have seen to date and which we hope will continue,
thereby making it possible to overcome the recent
setback in the negotiations. The Cypriot process, like
the Colombia process, is an example of a situation in
which the parties assume the leadership of the peace
process and display the values enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations.
Sustainable peace can be achieved only through
political solutions. The preventive approach has proved
crucial in order to avoid the high cost of war, and in
this respect it is imperative to prevent bureaucratic
obstacles from arising and achieve greater system-wide
cooperation from a human rights perspective first of all.

In this regard, I would like to emphasize the
importance of the performance of and coordination
among the various mechanisms of the international
human rights system. Uruguay's approach attaches
priority to the human rights of populations in conflict.
We underscore that it is crucial to eliminate any
limitation on free and unrestricted access by the staff
of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights as well as by international agencies, bodies and
organizations, with a view to monitoring, reporting on
and addressing the concerns ofthe populations affected.

Uruguay takes note of reports on cases of human
rights violations, including reports of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Secretary-
General, which stress accusations of killings, arbitrary
detention, torture and ill-treatment, refugee rights,
impunity for crimes of sexual violence, and the need
to clarify cases of forced disappearance, among other
aspects.

My country believes that in all cases the human
rights track should move in parallel and independently
of political negotiations, and that all stakeholders must
impartially and consistently uphold human rights law,
the norms of international humanitarian law and refugee
law, which form the basis of our universal system.

We deem it crucial for the positive development
of conflicts in Europe that all parties refrain from
carrying out any acts that could jeopardize ongoing
negotiations. The primary responsibility for conflict
prevention and the protection of local populations lies
with States themselves, despite the fact that the Security
Council, the United Nations and the international
community, through their close scrutiny and impartial
action, legitimized by the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, also have a role to play that should
continue to evolve. The challenge must be met by every
country and all those who make up the Organization.

