Mr. Holmes: This has been a long debate and I
shall try to be brief, given the lateness of the hour.

First of all, let me say that I am very grateful for
all the comments we have heard today, the interest in
this agenda and the concern for what often appears to
be a deteriorating situation on the ground as far as
protection of civilians is concerned. I also welcome the
strong support expressed by many delegations for the
centrality for this Council of the agenda on protection
of civilians and a point made by the Secretary-General -
its absolute priority.

Many speakers have also supported some or all of
the practical initiatives we proposed - for example, on
sexual violence, on cluster munitions and, in particular,
on access, which encourages us to pursue the ideas and
to try to turn them into the kind of actions which we
seek to pursue in the future.

I will not try to respond to all of the detailed
points that have been made by individual delegations,
but in some cases we will pursue them with those
delegations individually, for example, some of the legal
points raised by the delegation of Israel, with which we
have some difficulty.

Let me simply make one or two general
comments. First, we have noted the calls for more
systematic reporting by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and by myself as the
Emergency Relief Coordinator on the question of
access. We welcome this idea and are, of course, ready
to respond to it in whatever form - written, oral or
both - will suit the Council in particular cases. We
look forward to this increased engagement with the
Council on access issues, particularly in situations
where there are grave access constraints and the
Council may feel a responsibility to focus on them. Of
course, the acid test of this increased reporting and
exchanges would be that they should produce some
concrete changes on the ground in favour of those who
are affected.

Secondly, we welcome the comments from
several speakers in support of the recommendation that
the report makes for the establishment of a working
group of the Council on the protection of civilians.
While recognizing that this support is not unanimous
and that more deliberation and consultation are clearly
needed, let me simply repeat that what we would like
to see is a regular forum for timely and systematic
consultation on concerns related to the protection of
civilians, between the Council as a whole, OCHA and
other relevant departments of the Secretariat. We see it
as a forum that could relay - as I say, systematically
and transparently - information, analysis and possible
language on protection matters to all Council members
for their consideration. We think that would help to
ensure more consistent application of resolution 1674
(2006), the aide-memoire and the other protection of
civilians concerns, where it might be connected with
the renewal of peacekeeping mandates or other
relevant missions or the development of draft
resolutions.

We see the working group is replacing the rather
informal and ad hoc - and sometimes rather incidental
and late - efforts that exist today in this respect. The
idea is to make the exchange more systematic, more
effective and leading to more results on the ground. We
do not see it as necessarily setting a precedent for other
areas. I recognize that that is a concern expressed by
some delegations. We hope that all delegations will
come to see the advantages of what we are proposing.
We will pursue further discussions and contacts to that
end.

Thirdly, I welcome the strong support from many
speakers during the day on the vital need to comply
more fully with international humanitarian law. It
seems to me that reinforcing the implementation of
international norms and the normative framework for
protection is indeed a vital function for this Council
and its resolutions, as so many of the speakers today
have indeed highlighted.

In that context, it is of course vital that the
highest standards are maintained by all those who are
in the field to promote them, not least the humanitarian
workers on the ground. That is why I fully support the
call made by the representative of China to the effect
that humanitarian workers should always be mindful of
their responsibility to act in accordance with core
principles of neutrality and impartiality. The Secretary-
General, I myself and others have, for example,
unequivocally condemned the conduct of one
non-governmental organization acting irresponsibly
and indeed criminally in Chad.
07-60635

However, we should not regard that kind of
behaviour as in any way typical of humanitarian
workers on the ground, and we should remember that
they are there to deliver assistance in often the most
difficult and dangerous circumstances. Their presence
is often the only way of providing some measure of
protection to highly endangered civilians, through their
presence and their ability to offer help and draw
attention to what is happening in particular
circumstances.

At the same time we need to ensure that those
actions - helping the displaced, organizing safe
firewood collection for women, or whatever it is that
they are doing on the ground, and advocating the
protection of civilians, which is part and parcel of
modern humanitarian action as endorsed by this
Council - are not somehow unjustifiably labelled as
violations of local laws and traditions or regarded as in
some way unacceptable political interference in
internal affairs simply because they do not happen to
coincide with the policies or attitudes of particular
parties to a conflict. There are some important
principles at stake here, as well as the safety and well-
being of the committed individuals on the ground
themselves. So we need to look at this with great care.

Finally, let me just thank you again,
Mr. President, for the opportunity for this important,
rich and indeed very well-attended debate. It
encourages us to continue our work with other parts of
the Secretariat to turn the words that we have heard
today into actions on the ground, and to try to help the
many innocent victims of the conflicts of the world. I
thank all those who have participated in the debate.

