Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank you, Minister McCully, for your presence
here today and for the unanimous decision just taken
by the Security Council in adopting resolution 2307
(2016). This is yet another reflection ofthe commitment
of Council members and of the Members of the
United Nations to peace in Colombia. On behalf of
my Government, I should like to thank you for your
invaluable help as well as Ambassador Matthew Rycroft,
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom, and
his team of diplomats for having drafted the resolution
and for the difficult task of coordinating it.

On24August,theleadnegotiators oftheGovernment
and of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia - Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) agreed
in Havana something that many Colombians may
have believed unattainable: final texts for ending the
conflict and building a long-lasting and stable peace in
my country. They will be endorsed through the signing
of the Final Agreement on 26 September, in Cartagena
de Indias - just three days - and thus put an end
once and for all to more than five decades of armed
conflict in our country. We are deeply grateful to and
appreciative of the Governments of Cuba, Norway,
Chile and Venezuela, as guarantors and supporters of
the negotiating process, for their dedication and their
commitment to this difficult undertaking. We are
grateful also to the States members of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States for contributing
unarmed observers to the United Nations mission in
Colombia, and to all the other countries that will be
supporting us through their participation, as, Spain, for
example, just announced it would do.

This negotiating process has been arduous, complex
and fraught. Begun four years ago, it leaves important
lessons for peace for the world and great challenges
with respect to its implementation, as some here have
pointed out. It has been an inclusive process that has
placed at the centre of peace the protection of human
rights, specifically the rights of victims, women,
peoples of African descent and indigenous people,
organizations of farmers and of displaced persons, and
ensured that all minors are removed from the ranks of
FARC-EP and returned to civilian life.

The agreement has begun to bear fruit. Since the
entry into force of the ceasefire, there has not been a
single victim or clash because ofthe conflict. Likewise,
on 10 September, representatives of the International
Committee ofthe Red Cross received the first 13 minors
handed over as part of the commitment to return all
of the children and adolescents who remain among the
ranks of the organization. They and future Colombian
generations, as President Santos has said, will now have
the opportunity to learn about the suffering of the war
only from history books.

With the signing of the Final Agreement on
26 September and the approval of the referendum to be
held by the Government on 2 October, Colombians will
have the opportunity to open the door to a better future,
with a stable and lasting peace that we will have built
with the support of the Security Council and the United
Nations as a whole.

Foreign Minister Maria Angela Holguin Cuellar,
speaking here at the United Nations on 25 January, said
that the international community, with the culmination
of the peace process, will see a Colombia that is taking
off, one that has enormous potential, human capacity
and national resources. That will enable it not only to
forge a more prosperous and just society but also to
better contribute to the development of our Americas
and the world. That was the dream of the thousands
of Colombians whose lives were sacrificed to the
violence and who cannot be here today to witness this
historic event.

The meeting rose at I] am.
