Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Guatemala and its
Minister for Foreign Affairs for having taking the
initiative to convene this Council meeting on the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security, with
a special focus on the interaction between the Security
Council and the International Criminal Court (ICC)
in ending impunity. We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, the President of the ICC and the
representative of the Office of the Prosecutor for their
statements.

Owing to its role and mandate under the Charter,
the Security Council has a special part to play in
strengthening the legal foundation of international
relations. The Council makes an extremely important
contribution to developing the system of international
relations based on the rule of international law. That
means that the Council itself must serve as an example
in strengthening the authority of international law. It
is extremely important that decisions by the Council
rely on the provisions of the Charter and take into
account the rules of international humanitarian law and
universally recognized human rights standards. The
Council cannot afford to take hasty decisions that are
not well founded or to manipulate Chapter VII of the
Charter. It cannot allow irresponsible actions, dictated
by short-sighted interests, to lead to the disintegration
of the entire system ofinternational law.

Since the establishment of the International
Criminal Court in 2002, issues relating to its work
have appeared on the Council's agenda. Today the
Council considers those issues on a regular basis,
recognizing the great potential of the Court in the area
of international justice.

In discharging its mandate for the maintenance
of international peace and security the Council must
address the fight against impunity. It has acquired solid
experience in that area, including its establishment of
ad hoc tribunals and its participation in setting up other
judicial organs having international elements. With
the appearance of the Court, the Council now has a
serious new tool with which to achieve that goal. In that
sense, the Council and the Court must interact within
the framework of their respective mandates and with
mutual respect.

Given that interrelationship, when a situation
is simultaneously before both the Council and the
International Criminal Court, it is particularly important
to achieve a harmonious combination of measures to
restore peace and steps to ensure accountability for
crimes, especially crimes committed during a conflict.
It is no easy task to achieve a proper balance between the
interests of achieving peace and punishing the guilty.
While it is important that the Court independently
conduct its functions in the criminal-legal sphere, its
activities must be carried out in the light of common
efforts to settle crisis situations.

The accumulated experience shows that the Security
Council's referral of a case to the International Criminal
Court often gives rise to serious political and legal
consequences that do not lead to any straightforward
solution.

On the question of issuing warrants, there is a
question of States' cooperation with the Court. In
particular, resolutions 1593 (2005) and 1970 (2011)
did not establish a legal framework for appropriate
obligations of States not party to the Rome Statute.
The resolutions left out the question of the immunity
of high officials. Meanwhile, in the absence of a
direct instruction, Security Council resolutions do not
abrogate the norms of general international law on the
immunity of heads of State in office.

A careful analysis is required on how to choose
the time for the Council to refer a case to the Court.
Moving either too fast or too slowly in this matter can
lead to complex consequences with regard to prospects
for finding a peaceful settlement.

It is clear that persons guilty of particularly serious
crimes under international law must be brought before
the Court. We believe that the primary role in carrying
out that task, in the light of the Court's jurisdictional
complementarity, is to be played by the national
judiciary.

Under the Rome Statute, for a situation to be
transferred to the International Criminal Court, and
for an investigation to be suspended, a decision by the
Council is required under Chapter VII of the Charter.
In that context we note that it is inadmissible to dilute
the fundamental criteria whereby the Council may
exercise its Chapter VII powers only if there is a threat
to the peace, breach of the peace, or act of aggression.

An important matter for the International Criminal
Court is the question of including it its Statute the crime
of aggression. The Kampala compromise is understood
in various ways by States and experts. We have concerns
about the Court exercising jurisdiction with regard to
the crime of aggression in the absence of any definition
of the crime of aggression by the Security Council.
The crime of aggression has a clearly pronounced
political character. It is always committed not only by
individuals, but by political leaders under the power of
their Government. Accordingly, the crime of aggression
cannot occur without an act of aggression by the State.
Under the Charter of the United Nations, which is
the most universal treaty with primacy over all other
international treaties, the power for determining the
existence of an act of aggression belongs to the Security
Council. Unfortunately, the Kamapala compromise
does not fully take into account the powers of the
Council.

The International Criminal Court is young and
needs broad support by States. It must live up to the
trust placed in it. The extent to which it can work in
a mature and balanced way and find its own place in
the international system will determine whether it
can become a truly universal organ of international
criminal justice.

