Mr. Rivero Rosario (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): The
achievements of the Cuban revolution and our country's
commitment to preventing and confronting terrorism,
as well as preventing and combating the various
manifestations of transnational organized crime that
may contribute to terrorism financing, have succeeded
in making Cuba an unappealing place for such activity.
The nature and scope of the terrorism-crime nexus,
which has been recognized by the Council and may
serve as a source of funding or logistical support for
terrorism, varies according to context. In the case of
Cuba, that nexus does not bear a significant reflection
as in other countries and regions around the world.

Our country - for decades a victim of
State-sponsored terrorism from abroad - condemns
all terrorist acts, methods and practices in all forms
and manifestations, whatever their motivation. The
revolutionary Government of Cuba has reiterated that
it has never allowed, or will it ever allow, its national
territory to be used for the realization, planning
or financing of acts of terrorism against any other
State, without exception. As proof of that stance,
Cuba has committed to 18 international conventions
on terrorism. We have put into effect legislative,
institutional, administrative and other measures to
prevent and punish all terrorist acts and activities. We
have developed a specific criminal standard to address
criminal acts of a terrorist nature - Law 93 against
acts of terrorism e as well as criminal legislation
that criminalizes offences of money-laundering and
terrorism financing.

Cuba's determination and institutional capacity to
prevent money-laundering and terrorism financing has
been recognized by the Financial Action Task Force
of Latin America (GAFILAT) on several occasions.
The Mutual Evaluation Report of the Republic of
Cuba, which was carried out within the framework of
GAFILAT, points out that the general risk of money-
laundering in the country is low. It also highlighted
the inter-institutional coordination and cooperation
existing at all levels in Cuba and the updated legal
framework to combat this scourge. As a result, it has
been recognized at the international level that the
work of our country is "substantially effective" in
the areas of supervision, people and legal structures,
confiscation, investigation and prosecution of terrorist
financing, financial sanctions and preventive measures
of terrorism financing.

With regard to the various manifestations of
organized crime, Cuba has also adopted a firm,
principled position and a zero-tolerance policy,
particularly in relation to the production, consumption
and trafficking of drugs as well as human trafficking,
preventing and sanctioning all those illegal activities
in accordance with our national legislation and thereby
preventing, through the adopted measures I mentioned,
the financing of terrorism.

Cuba works hard to avoid its national territory
being used as a site for the storage, stockpiling, transit
or destination of illicit drugs, implementing a strategy
of prevention and combating the illegal use and
trafficking of drugs, while strengthening the level of
coordination among our national institutions with the
active participation of communities and civil society
organizations. As a result ofthose efforts, in 2018 Cuba
seized 2,438 kilograms of drugs, the majority of which
were seized at maritime ports as part of international
drug trafficking operations and were not destined for
our island. Two attempts to introduce drugs into the
country by speedboat were uncovered and thwarted,
resulting in four people being detained. Two other
operations were neutralized within our national waters,
with a further four foreign drug traffickers being
captured. We also neutralized 49 operations organized
by criminal networks attempting to introduce drugs
across our airspace border.

In respect of trafficking in persons, Cuba has in
place a national action plan for the prevention and
tackling of trafficking in persons and the protection of
victims for the period 2017 to 2020. The incidence ofthat
scourge in our country is very low thanks to our social
achievements and citizen security, equal opportunities,
policies and programmes aimed at the empowerment
of women, as well as the political will and prioritized
level of care from the State and the Cuban Government
in preventing and tackling this scourge in all of its
manifestations with a view to protecting the victims.

We reject in the most absolute terms our being
included in the worst category in the 2019 Traficking
in Persons Report of the United States Department of
State. It is well known that that unilateral report, without
any legitimacy or international recognition, aims to
fulfil an objective ofpolitical manipulation as a weapon
to apply pressure against other States and, devoid of
respect, consideration or any attachment to international
efforts to combat trafficking in persons. It deliberately
disregards the exemplary and comprehensive work
carried out by Cuba in the prevention and tackling
of, and the response to, that scourge. It ignores our
country's zero-tolerance policy on human trafficking
and hides the outcomes of the exchanges that took place
between both countries for five consecutive years to
share information and cooperate on those issues.

As has been shown, the defamatory campaigns
against Cuba, which have uncontrollably superimposed
each other, serve to justify the hostility of the current
Government of the United States against Cuba and the
ever-increasing unilateral measures of blockade and
economic coercion aimed at deteriorating the standards
of living of our people, limiting financial flows into
the country, hindering supplies, undermining our
production processes and damaging our social services.
All of that forms part of the relentless economic war
that has been imposed on us over the past 60 years.

The fight against the scourge of terrorism and
organized crime must take place in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. The Security
Council must not undermine the mandate, functions
and prerogatives of other organs in the United Nations
system, which have the capacity to provide effective
and coordinated responses to those scourges. In order
to prevent and combat terrorism and organized crime
in all its forms and manifestations, the Council should
first and foremost fulfil its responsibility to maintain
international peace and security by addressing the
root causes of conflicts. The Council must promote
international assistance and cooperation for the creation
and strengthening of national capacities for States that
request it, as well as the exchange of experiences in the
fight against terrorism and organized crime, based on
mutual respect.

We firmly reject the double standards, political
selectivity and unilateral acts of certain States in
seeking to corroborate conduct and draw up politically
motivated lists that run contrary to international law,
as well as in waving the banner of a supposed fight
against terrorism and organized crime to commit acts
of aggression, undermine national sovereignty and
interfere in the internal affairs of other States.

