Mr. Al-Douri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Mr.
President, at the outset, I would like to thank you for
organizing this open meeting on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. I would like to pay tribute
to the continuous efforts made by the Secretary-
General, who has shown a great interest in this issue
and in disseminating the culture of protection. We trust
that this debate will yield concrete results in helping to
protect civilians in armed conflict, regardless of the
nature of the conflict, internal or external, and whether
it is the result of external aggression or not.

There is no doubt that this question falls within
the context of one of the basic purposes of the United
Nations - to protect future generations from the
scourge of war. The issue has been of concern to the
international community, which has adopted a large
number of international conventions, including the
Geneva Conventions and the Protocols thereto.

In a first report (S/1999/957) of the Secretary-
General, submitted pursuant to a mandate given to him
by the Security Council in February 1999, he produced
a set of recommendations on how to protect civilians in
armed conflict. Then, in a second report (S/2001/33l)
submitted now to the Council, the Secretary-General,
while noting that, unfortunately, only a very few of the
original 40 recommendations have been implemented,
nevertheless submits new recommendations to us. In
our view, unfortunately, the fate of the new
recommendations will probably be no better than that
of the earlier ones. Accordingly, it is our conclusion
that the international community does not have the
necessary capability to protect civilians. We do not
question the capacity of the Council, nor do we
question its interest in this issue; but, because of its
very composition, it is concerned primarily with
protecting the interests of certain member States,
particularly the most influential Members of the
Organization.

Past experience in the Council provides startling
evidence of its double standards in this respect. There
has been some slowness, some hesitation, in what it has
done in Africa, in the Great Lakes region in particular,
while thousands if not millions of innocent people have
died there. However, we all remember how speedily
and enthusiastically the Council took action on other
occasions in other places for reasons that later became
clear - at least in some cases. Some States that are
members of the Council carry out acts of aggression
against other States without mandates from the
Council, on the pretext of protecting civilians or based
on the so-called principles of humanitarian
intervention. However, what these States are actually
doing is pursuing their own political and economic
goals and interests. There are innumerable examples of
this; Yugoslavia and Iraq are only two of them. This is
why the matter before us must be approached
cautiously.

The loftiest, most ideal, most humane objectives
cannot serve as a pretext for intervention in the internal
affairs of a State, infringing on its sovereignty and
political independence or threatening its territorial
integrity. These are basic principles of the international
community. They are the very foundation of peace and
security in the world. Respect for and strengthening of
these principles will ensure protection for all peoples.
This is why it is necessary for the "culture of
protection" mentioned in the Secretary-General's report
to take into account these principles, so essential to
development, stability, progress and peace. Violation of
these principles gives rise to conflict and war.

It is ironic that at a time when the Council is
dealing with the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, the Palestinian people living in the
occupied territories are victims of the most offensive
form of oppression, perpetrated by the occupying
Israeli authorities. That oppression has spared neither
persons nor material goods. Nor has it spared values.
Terrorism is accompanied by the murder of children,
who represent the future of Palestine. The destruction
of houses and property is also taking place, along with
great flows of displaced persons and refugees and
flagrant violations of international humanitarian law
and of human rights. All of this is perpetrated daily by
the occupying forces, while nothing is done to deter
them.

Members of the Non-Aligned Movement, which
represents about two thirds of the peoples of the world,
have for six months now attempted to convince the
Security Council to adopt a resolution containing a
provision to protect Palestinian civilians. But that
effort is constantly opposed by the United States of
America. I can only express my surprise here at the
absence in the report of the Secretary-General of any
reference to the suffering of the Palestinian people,
although a number of examples are given in the report
pertaining to the issue of the protection of civilians.

At a time when the Council is considering the
matter of protection of civilians in armed conflict, two
of its permanent members - the United States and the
United Kingdom - are flouting the basic provisions of
such protection by carrying out daily military action in
the so-called no-flight zones in the northern and
southern parts of my country, Iraq. They are doing this
without any mandate from the Security Council and
without any basis in the Council's resolutions.
Hundreds of civilians have fallen victim to that
aggression. The economic and developmental
infrastructures of our country have been destroyed. But
the Council has done nothing, even though the Iraqi
Government has submitted an average of a letter a
week to the Council and to the Secretary-General in
which it describes the activities carried out against it
and refers to the political and legal aspects and calls for
compensation. Those letters have also referred to the
humanitarian and environmental devastation resulting
from the 1990 war and, in particular, to the use of
depleted uranium.

We must also recall the sanctions that have been
imposed against Iraq since 1990. Iraq is suffering not
only from economic sanctions, but also from a
complete and total embargo that affects every aspect of
our lives. This is just one side of the war being waged
against Iraq by those States that insist on keeping
sanctions in place. We must remember that the
devastating impact of sanctions on children and infants
has been documented by agencies of the United
Nations itself and has been reported to the Security
Council. No one can fail to be aware that civilians,
women and children in particular, are the first to fall
victim to this silent war. All this is taking place while
the Council itself is silent. When it does speak, it
merely manifests the interests of some of its permanent
members.

In conclusion, let me say that dealing seriously
with the issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict in a positive and concrete way would entail
going to the very heart of the matter, namely, the
causes of conflict. The principal causes of conflict
include poverty, underdevelopment, disease, uneven
distribution of wealth, hunger, the exploitation and
looting of resources, the instigation of ethnic and
religious conflicts, the imposition of others' values and
interests, aggression and embargoes. All of these things
are being carried out by certain influential States that
are permanent members of the Security Council. If we
do not face up to these problems and essential issues, I
do not believe the international community will be able
to deal effectively with the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
