Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this briefing on
the establishment of the constitutional committee in
the Syrian Arab Republic and thanks Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, for his informative briefing.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the meeting on 24 October
between the Special Envoy and the Syrian Foreign
Minister, leading to a communique from the Office
of the Special Envoy, which reported a very frank
and very intense exchange of views concerning the
constitutional committee and the political process in
general. In that regard, my country calls on the Syrian
parties to choose the path of dialogue by resolutely
joining the Geneva and Sochi processes with a view to
effectively overcoming the remaining obstacles to the
establishment of the constitutional committee.
C6te d'Ivoire also welcomes the holding of
the upcoming four-party summit among Germany,
France, Russia and Turkey in Istanbul on 27 October,
which will serve as a framework for reflection on a
political solution to the crisis, under the auspices of the
United Nations, and on the situation in Idlib in north-
western Syria.

Cote d'Ivoire sincerely hopes that the dialogue
among all the stakeholders will continue with a view
to ensuring a peaceful end to the crisis in Syria - the
key to lasting peace and stability - irrespective of the
conclusions of the talks between Mr. Staffan de Mistura
and the Syrian authorities, on the one hand, and the
four-party summit planned in Istanbul, on the other.

We therefore call on the parties to the conflict
to respect the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015),
which sets out the road map of the political process
in Syria. We once again urge Council members to
restore the unity that has always enabled them, in
difficult circumstances, to overcome the challenges to
international peace and security.

As Mr. Staffan de Mistura prepares to step down,
Cote d'Ivoire would like to reiterate its deep gratitude
to him for his sustained commitment and for his work
to restore lasting peace in Syria.

Mr. Lewicki (Poland) At the outset, let me join
other delegations in expressing my deep appreciation
for the Special Envoy's tireless efforts to find a political
solution to the crisis in Syria. I would also like to assure
him of Poland's strong support for his ongoing work
and for the United Nations-led political peace process
in Syria.

As there can be no military solution to the conflict
that can bring sustainable peace to Syria, we should
aim at reaching an intra-Syrian framework political
agreement. Furthermore, we strongly believe that the
Idlib ceasefire agreement could be an opportunity
for a resumption of the political process under United
Nations auspices in Geneva as soon as possible. In
that regard, we fully support Mr. De Mistura's efforts
to establish a constitutional committee as soon as
possible. As we spent a great deal of time last week
discussing women and peace and security here in the
Chamber (see S/PV.8382), it is worth recalling Mr. De
Mistura's appeal for ensuring women's participation in
the constitutional committee, since there is a very clear
link between women's participation in the peace process
and the durability and quality of peace agreements.
Setting up the constitutional committee should now
be a priority, to be swiftly followed by further steps to
enable a negotiated political transition process, which
requires the full and constructive engagement of all the
parties to the conflict. There is a special role in this for
the Syrian authorities, which should participate in the
negotiations in good faith and without preconditions.
This is for the Syrians themselves to negotiate. Only
a real, tangible political process ensuring that the
Syrian people are genuinely represented, can lead to
the establishment of a timetable and procedures for
drafting a constitution and conducting free and fair
United Nations-supervised elections.

In conclusion, I want to underline that any
political solution must be brokered in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex).

