Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to join those who have expressed their gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for having organized this discussion. I would
also like to thank Mr. Annabi for the information he has
given us, which enables us to make an up to date appraisal
of the situation in East Timor.

The information is generally positive, and this is
obviously a source of satisfaction for the members of the
Security Council. Ambassador Fonseca has rightly recalled
that it was Brazil that, in April, began alerting Council
members to the evolution of the situation. I think, in
hindsight, we can see that the past months have for once
given us an example of effective and positive action by the
Security Council. The credit goes to one of the members of
the Council, Brazil, and obviously to the effective action
taken by Portugal, and then, through the crisis of doubt in
September, to the efforts of successive Presidents of the
Security Council - all of this, I think, should be recalled.

Today the indications regarding the functioning of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET), I repeat, lead us to be rather optimistic. All of
this no doubt is attributable to the clear-cut objectives of
the Special Representative, in particular his emphasis on the
idea of national reconciliation. I believe that when a senior
official of the United Nations shows such a commitment,
when he engages the efforts of the entire fine staff he has
been able to put together, positive results are guaranteed.

Thus, we are seeing meetings between militia chiefs
who were considered opposed to independence and the
current leaders of the Timorese pro-independence
movement. We are seeing such meetings being organized,
we are seeing institutions of all sorts established, including
both administrative and judicial institutions. We are seeing
the achievement of national pacification and reconciliation,
a goal of United Nations missions, both here and in other
situations throughout the world. I believe that given these
developments a most sincere tribute should be paid to
Mr. Vieira de Mello and to the team he has put together.

Positive results can already be seen. I believe one such
positive result was already seen at the donors meeting. The
international community is witnessing an undertaking that
is succeeding, and it is responding generously to the
appeals that are being made. The donors conference that
was held recently in Tokyo produced results that
exceeded expectations.

This is clearly for the good, and I also believe that
here for once we can make a comparison between the
situation in this Asian region and what is happening in
Europe. People often talk about a double standard, a
disproportionality between what is done for Europe and
what is done for the rest of the world. I believe that what
we should bear in mind is the generosity that has been
shown as regards Timor, assistance that has come not
only from the European Union but also in the form of
bilateral aid from a number of countries of the region -
I am thinking of Japan, of Australia, of Thailand; in fact,
I am thinking about almost all the countries of Asia,
which have responded to the appeal with most generous
bilateral assistance. I would hope that such generosity
could also be shown as regards another region, Kosovo,
which certainly has need of financial support from the
international community if we wish to give the United
Nations Mission there the same chance of succeeding as
that of the current mission in Timor.

Positive results are also being seen in the return of
refugees, although we are aware that there are still several
tens of thousands of refugees who have not been able to
return. In this regard, I would like to ask Mr. Annabi if
these statistics can be explained either by the fact that
refugees are of their own will refusing to return or by
other reasons. In spite of the security conditions in East
Timor, in spite of the will to achieve national
reconciliation that has been confirmed by UNTAET and
by the Timorese leaders who have come together around
Mr. Vieira de Mello - in spite of all this positive news,
are there some refugees who are of their own will
refusing to return to East Timor, or is it because of
logistical problems, the conditions of roads, transportation
problems, and so forth.

The second positive piece of information is clearly
the rapid transformation of an operation that in the
beginning was authorized by the Security Council, but of
an intergovernmental nature, into a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. In this regard, I must note my
complete endorsement of the ideas so forcefully presented
by the Canadian representative. He was without doubt
correct in stressing that this operation must be a United
Nations operation.

As in this case, the reality is often that in order to
act rapidly we are sometimes led to use the formula of

 

giving Security Council authorization for a multinational
force. In this case Australia is deserving of the praise it has
received for taking the principal responsibility for the
burden of this operation and for assuming the costs that
have already been rightly noted by Ambassador Fowler.
Again, this is explained by the urgency of the situation and
by the need to act quickly. This has not been our only
experience with such a case. We have seen similar cases in
Africa, as well as in Europe, with operation Alba.

Nonetheless, the members of the Security Council who
emphasize that our objective should be the deployment of
a genuine United Nations operation with obligatory
financing are right. This is why I, like Ambassador Fowler,
can only be pleased that in the very near future the
transformation of the mission in East Timor will take place
and that we are going to undertake a peacekeeping
operation.

The only question that I would like to pose to Mr.
Annabi in this regard is whether the high figure that has
been projected - more than 8,000 men just for this
operation, with all the costs entailed - is it possible that at
some future date this figure could realistically be reduced,
while ensuring, of course, that the security conditions are
maintained.

Here again, we have a situation that seems to be
progressing satisfactorily on the ground. Bearing in mind
the importance of maintaining the processes under way to
promote human rights, which are linked to the
strengthening of national reconciliation, is it not possible
that the size of the military part of the operation could be
reduced? It is up to the Secretariat to provide us
information in this regard.
I repeat, the total cost of the operation is large. It is
perfectly justified. It is producing positive results. Let us
keep this in mind when we consider the situation in
Kosovo, where the international community's financial
involvement is, unfortunately, not so great.

