Ms. Haq: Allow me to express my appreciation for
this opportunity to address the Council on the subject
of inter-mission cooperation. I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for the role you are playing as the Chair
of the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations.

In my remarks to the Security Council today, I will
focus on inter-mission cooperation from the perspective
of mission support. Inter-mission cooperation in that
context is all about ensuring that troops, civilian
personnel, and military and other assets can be
redeployed to another mission at short notice, sustained
while in a temporary site due to a mission start-up or
crisis, and ultimately returned to their original location
and intended use.

Troops that need to be redeployed must also be
provided with adequate shelter. For every contingent
we send unexpectedly from one mission to another,
its life-sustaining requirements must be met. And
for every helicopter or fixed wing aircraft effectively
shared between missions, logistical support in terms
of fuel and maintenance must be anticipated and made
available.

The past year has provided stark testimony to the
diversity of mandates that characterize peacekeeping
missions today. Troops and civilian personnel are
being deployed in situations where time is truly of the
essence. The interval between the approval of a Security
Council mandate and the establishment of the mission
is increasingly seen as having strategic importance.
In that light, delays in establishing a field presence
can have a negative effect on the mission's chances to
successfully implement its mandate.

In that context, in Syria earlier this year the
establishment of the United Nations Supervision
Mission in Syria (UNSMIS) provided useful lessons
in terms of the potential for inter-mission cooperation
to play a critical role in expediting mission start-up.
For one, neighbouring missions can play a useful role
in providing personnel and assets to ensure timely
mission start-up. Support from other missions in the
Middle East, including from the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF), was critical
for the rapid build-up of UNSMIS, which reached
operational effectiveness within one month of mandate
approval. The handling of procurement and banking
services and managing the freight forwarding activities
of UNSMIS were possible only because of assistance
provided by those two missions.
Care was taken to ensure that inter-mission
cooperation in support of UNSMIS had minimal
impact on the capacity of UNIFIL and UNDOF to
implement their own mandates. Events in Syria have
since tragically eclipsed the timely roll-out ofUNSMIS,
but the start-up would not have been possible without a
rapid infusion of support from nearby missions.

With regard to crisis response, the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations has
referred to inter-mission cooperation as a temporary
"tool of necessity, not of choice". I share the view that
such cooperation should never be seen as anything
more than a stop-gap. It is certainly not meant to serve
as the source of long-term solutions.

At the same time, it is also true that inter-mission
cooperation works best as a short-term reaction to crisis
when arrangements are already in place that allow for
flexibility and inter-mission exchange. For example,
many commercially contracted aircraft in support of
United Nations peacekeeping operations today have a
contractual provision that allows them to be used for
inter-mission support when needed. That is part of
the Department of Field Support's fleet optimization
efforts that are designed to consolidate and conserve
resources for greater operational efficiency.

In response to the Haiti earthquake in 2010,
for example, heavy cargo aircraft based in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic People's Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) ended up providing logistics support
to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
Last January, in response to the crisis in Cote d'Ivoire,
MONUSCO aircraft once again helped transport 300
tons of rations for the troops of the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, as well as 100,000 litres
of additional fuel from the United Nations Mission in
Liberia. Over the past year, the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) has used air assets
of the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan (UNMISS) to support rations delivery.

That flexibility in the use of air assets during crisis
is reflected in the exchange of civilian personnel as well.
After the disaster in Haiti struck, a special recruiting
team was deployed from the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic and Chad to expedite
the arrival in Haiti of qualified personnel who could
get to the task of helping the injured, moving essential
supplies and restoring stability. The United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste, where I was Special

Representative of the Secretary-General, deployed 34
staff members, covering such areas as security, finance
and stress counselling. In fact, civilian personnel from
virtually every field mission arrived to fill critical
staffing shortfalls after the Haiti earthquake.

These examples of successful inter-mission
cooperation underscore the primary objective of mission
support writ large. The aim is to achieve successful
mandate implementation through the provision of
support to military, police and civilian personnel in the
field. Inter-mission cooperation should, in that context,
be seen as a means to address the short-term needs
of our troops and colleagues in the field. Sometimes
that requires overcoming natural obstacles, such as
disasters or inhospitable terrain. Collaboration among
missions in the Sudan has allowed critical support to
reach troops despite long-entrenched customs and visa-
related obstacles.

The needs of UNISFA, which I observed last month
when I visited, are still acute. But progress in meeting
them is under way due to inter-mission cooperation with
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) and UNMISS. For example,
drawing from available assets, UNAMID has provided
heavy engineering vehicles to UNISFA on loan for
the construction of much-needed and long-overdue
accommodation for the Ethiopian troops in Abyei.

Decades of experience in peacekeeping have
created as yet untapped potential to improve the quality
of mission support while simultaneously reaping
efficiency gains and savings. The goal of responding to
the exigencies of peacekeeping operations in a timely
way, with high-quality support and in a cost-effective
manner, lies at the heart of the global field support
strategy. Its basic premise is that peacekeeping should
be seen not as a series of independent missions but as
a global enterprise with which the United Nations can
leverage its presence and bring about efficiency gains
and synergies for the benefit of missions and their
personnel.

Two core elements of the global field support
strategy - the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe
and the Global Service Centre at Brindisi - attest to
the importance of putting in place the institutional
architecture that allows inter-mission cooperating to
succeed. Both are important components of a global
network of assets and expertise that can be drawn from
when necessary in order to fulfill critical mission start-
up and sustainment needs.

I would like to thank you once again, Sir, for the
opportunity to address the Council on the subject of
inter-mission cooperation. Supporting the peacekeeping
troops and civilian personnel who confront tremendous
risk in our shared pursuit of the vision manifested in the
United Nations Charter is the ultimate objective of our
deliberations. We can never lose sight of the centrality
of their wellbeing, a fate that is shaped by the decisions
and support of this august forum.

