Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the
information provided by the Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun,
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov, and Ambassador
Mauro Vieira in his capacity as Chair of the Guinea-
Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.

It is almost three years since the beginning of
the crisis in Guinea-Bissau, which had to do with
the adverse political context. Today we have great
expectations as we see the country's difficulties being
overcome, thanks to the appointment of a consensus
Prime Minister through a compromise deal that
has revitalized the implementation of the Conakry
Agreement, which remains the basic framework for a
peaceful settlement of the crisis and the quest for lasting
and sustainable peace. We are also closely watching the
development and adoption of a Government programme
that will help to establish the Government's parameters
and structure.

We once again call for consolidating those accords,
which will enable all stakeholders to continue to
advance the implementation of a lasting political and
social settlement based solely on the best interests of
the people of Guinea-Bissau in strict respect for their
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. In
that regard, we believe that within the framework of the
road map of 10 September 2016, inclusive dialogue must
continue to be one of the main tools for enabling the
holding of elections to the legislature during the current
Administration and presidential elections in 2019.

Despite the far-reaching implications of the
political progress that has been made, Guinea-Bissau
is facing various challenges that must be dealt with as
effectively as possible. First, in the short term, both the
Government and the Parliament are in need of technical
and financial support so that they can begin registering
voters and consolidating the mechanisms needed for
holding the parliamentary elections. Cooperation among
the relevant regional and subregional organizations is
essential to that, and we therefore acknowledge the major
efforts of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and its Mission in Guinea-Bissau, as
well as the contributions of the European Union and the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries, and
the important work of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
aimed at bringing together the parties to the conflict
and encouraging dialogue.

We welcome the efforts and outstanding work
of former Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Modibo Toure, whom we wish every success
in his future assignments. We also welcome the
appointment of the new Special Representative and
Head of UNIOGBIS, Mr. Jose Viegas Filho, who
we are confident will perform his duties with the
utmost professionalism. We believe that the work of
UNIOGBIS must be strengthened and focused on
initiatives that will continue to provide opportunities
for dialogue. We are sure that such factors will help
to form an inclusive Government and consolidate the
upcoming electoral processes.

With regard to the work of UNIOGBIS, we are
eagerly awaiting the strategic review of the mission
and its proposed reconfiguration. We also commend
the work of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, ably chaired by Brazil,
and we emphasize the importance of strengthening
links related to cooperation and information-sharing
between the mission and the Security Council. We also
encourage the initiative of the Women's Leadership
Forum on Peace. In Guinea-Bissau, the work that
women are doing in the quest for a political solution
shows how essential a gender perspective and female
participation in mediation and dialogue are.

With regard to the stabilization of the country
and security matters, combating drug trafficking and
transnational crime must continue to be a priority. The
role of the United Nations through the country team and
the United Nations Development Programme must be an
integral part of fostering development and reinforcing
the rule of law, with the goal of decreasing exposure
to drugs and crime by strengthening the various
components of the justice system. The international
community must also provide Guinea-Bissau with the
assistance needed to improve its control ofits coasts and
airspace and to train the police to investigate organized
crime and drug-trafficking activities.

In conclusion, we want to emphasize the progress
that has been made so far through synergies between
all the parties. We reiterate once again that in times
of political, institutional and social crisis, ensuring
the well-being of the population, especially the most
vulnerable sectors, must be the overriding interest
guiding our efforts to achieve definitive stabilization
in Guinea-Bissau.

