Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
the President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Theodor Meron, and the
Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, Mr. Serge Brammertz, for their
reports (see S/2018/347 and S/2018/47l) and for their
informative and comprehensive briefings.

We would also like to warmly welcome Her
Excellency Ms. Nela Kuburovic', Minister of Justice
of Serbia, as well as the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Rwanda.

Kazakhstan is committed to combating impunity
and supporting international criminal tribunals. My
delegation notes with satisfaction the successful
continuation of the Mechanism's work related to the
fulfilment of a number of functions of international
criminal tribunals, such as enforcing sentences,
protecting victims and witnesses, managing archives
and smoothly and effectively transitioning to the
Mechanism the remaining functions of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. We greatly
appreciate the leadership of President Theodor Meron
in successfully accomplishing that task.

Kazakhstan welcomes the fact that despite the
difficulties the Mechanism has faced owing to the
reduction in its budget for the current biennium, it
has made significant progress in establishing itself
as a small, temporary and effective structure. We are
pleased with the expenditure reduction plan that it has
developed and implemented.

We welcome the Mechanism's development of rules,
procedures, and policies that are harmonized and based
on the best practices ofboth Tribunals, as well as its own
practice. This will ensure that it can fulfil its mandate
effectively and as well as possible. We consider the
code of professional conduct that has been formulated
for the Mechanism's judges as a progressive step
towards strengthening the principles of accountability
and transparency in its functions. However, we believe
there is always room for improvement and urge the
Mechanism to take all necessary measures to build
transparent and accountable partnerships with all
the stakeholders involved. Given the paramount
importance of ensuring that Member States work with
the Mechanism in order to see international justice
done, we call on all States to cooperate fully with it. In
the context of the Mechanism's priority task of seeking
the arrest of eight fugitives, we are pleased to note the
Prosecutor's efforts in that regard and hope that they
will be arrested and brought to trial as soon as possible.

I would like to mention the work that the
Mechanism is doing with regard to the archives of both
Tribunals, which are truly priceless for both practical
and research purposes. We welcome and appreciate the
Mechanism's development and implementation of an
integrated system for managing archives and records.
Considering that, we hope that the Mechanism's
reduced budget will not affect the preservation of that
heritage in any way. Kazakhstan greatly appreciates
the Mechanism's role and place in the administrative
system of international justice and in helping to
preserve our faith in international law and ensure that
those guilty of committing grave crimes will not go
unpunished. Lastly, we affirm our firm commitment to
strengthening the rule of law and promoting justice in
the world by supporting the Mechanism in every aspect
of its work.

