Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Let me begin by
thanking, as previous speakers have done, the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, for his briefing and the Secretary-General for
his report.

My delegation also thanks the Permanent
Representative of the United States for his statement
on behalf of the Multinational Force in Iraq.

We would also like to acknowledge and welcome
the presence of the Permanent Representative of Iraq at
today's meeting.

In the past few years, Iraq has achieved notable
progress. We welcome the continuing work of the
democratic institutions in the country and the
International Monetary Fund's projected gross
domestic product growth rate of 7 per cent in 2008.
This achievement is, of course, attributable to the hard
work of the people and Government of Iraq, as well as
to the support of the international community.

Yet, at the same time, serious challenges continue
to cloud the security situation and stability in Iraq. The
recent spiral of violence in various parts of Iraq, which
has caused hundreds of fatalities and more than 1,000
casualties, is a clear indication of the continued
importance of national consensus and unity through
political dialogue and reconciliation.

It is a reconciliation that upholds such values as
peace, justice and equality, freedom, tolerance,
balance, and consultation.

We welcome, in this regard, the continued efforts
of the Government of Iraq in promoting dialogue and
reconciliation. The convening of a national
reconciliation conference in Baghdad on 18 March
2008 was also a welcome step.

We recognize the reconciliation potential of a
number of legislative measures in Iraq. In this regard,
we welcome the adoption by the Council of
Representatives of a package of laws on 13 February
2008, which could help achieve a national consensus
on the sharing of power and resources. We also attach
great importance to the agreement on a hydrocarbon
law, which in our view, is critical, not only to national
unity, but also to the prosperity of the people of Iraq.

In spite of an increase in the national capacity of
Iraq, the need for regional support and international
assistance will remain critical. We, therefore,
welcomed the convening of the third expanded meeting
of neighbouring States of Iraq, held on 22 April 2008,
in Kuwait and we are pleased about the upcoming
high-level meeting of the International Compact for
Iraq, to be held on 29 May in Stockholm, Sweden. The
diplomatic initiatives of the Government of Iraq with a
view to strengthening ties with neighbouring countries
are also a welcome step.

Making Iraq a home for its own people is a
daunting challenge. Violence in Iraq has caused serious
human displacement. More than 2 million Iraqis have
fled to neighbouring States, particularly Syria and
Jordan. My delegation welcomes the intention of the
Government of Iraq to develop a national strategy to
address the question of Iraqi internally displaced
persons and refugees. We believe that a regional
partnership could help Iraq to tackle this issue.

In this regard, Indonesia welcomes the launching
of a major fund-raising and public awareness campaign
by the League of Arab States, in partnership with
United Nations and other agencies, in Cairo in January
2008.

My delegation is hopeful that the 2008
consolidated appeal for Iraq, which was launched in
Baghdad on 12 February 2008, will receive wide
response. The appeal is important for the financing of
both humanitarian activities and reconstruction
programmes in the country.

The role of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Iraq (UNAMI) will remain critical. We
welcome the continued expansion of its activities in
accordance with resolution 1770 (2007).

UNAMI's support for the Government of Iraq in
promoting reconciliation is commendable. The
extensive meetings between Special Representative
Staffan de Mistura and various religious and political
leaders are an important part of the support.

We also welcome the engagement of UNAMI
with the legislative body of the country through its
constitutional support activities and with the
Independent High Electoral Commission of Iraq
through its electoral assistance.

Finally, my delegation wishes to reaffirm our
support for the independence, sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of Iraq as well as for the principle
of non-interference in the internal affairs of the
country.

