Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to offer our warmest wishes for success to you, Sir, and
your team as you assume the presidency of the Security
Council. You can depend on our full support.

I also thank and commend the delegation of China
for its conduct of the presidency last month with utmost
probity and professionalism.

As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru has
said in an official communique, we offer our deepest
condolences over the passing of former United States
President George H.W. Bush.

We appreciate the convening of this meeting and
the important briefing delivered by Mr. Karim Khan.
We welcome his appointment and express our support
for the vision, priorities and initial actions of his
management.

Peru, a sponsor of resolution 2379 (2017), by
which the Council established the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, considers it essential to support Iraq in its
efforts with a view to guaranteeing access to justice
and contributing to reconciliation in that country.
We stress the importance of the Investigation Team
being recognized as an impartial and independent
actor, and that its action be guided by the Charter of
the United Nations and international law, including
international human rights law.

We also stress the need to make available to the
Investigation Team the resources necessary for, among
other aspects related to the fulfilment of its mandate,
the physical and technological infrastructure required
to preserve the evidence it has been collecting. In that
connection, we stress the Special Adviser's intention to
establish a specialized unit for the protection of victims
and witnesses, which we consider to be essential for the
fulfilment of his mandate.

We consider it important that the Investigative
Team, the Iraqi authorities and civil society maintain
fluid cooperation, in line with the terms of reference
approved by the Council and with an eventual
headquarters agreement, and that they continue to
be assisted by the United Nations Office of Legal
Affairs. Moreover, we consider it necessary for the
work of the Investigative Team to be consistent with
the various entities of the United Nations system,
including the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, as well as with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. We highlight the support of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, which last
October facilitated the deployment of the Investigative
Team in Baghdad.

We must remember that, despite the evident
progress in the fight against Da'esh, the threat it
represents is still latent in new modalities. The work
of the Investigative Team in promoting the rule of law
and the fight against impunity is essential in order to
confront that threat more effectively. In this regard, in
addition to highlighting the progress made in the current
phase of gathering evidence, we note the desirability
of the Council's promoting the cooperation required so
that the competent authorities of other countries and
supranational bodies can also enjoy access to them in
order to guarantee access to justice.

