Mr. Ali (Malaysia): Mr. President, let me first
congratulate you on your presidency of this Council
and, secondly, align myself and my delegation with the
statements by the representatives of Egypt and Syria,
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, respectively.
Thirdly, I would like to extend our condolences to the
People's Republic of China for the loss of life and
damage caused by the most recent earthquake.

By constructing thousands of new illegal
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories,
Israel is killing off whatever hopes there are for peace
in the Middle East. In so doing, Israel has put itself
firmly on the wrong side of history, whereas everyone
else around the world has moved or is moving towards
peace. These actions have also subjected it to
unprecedented and unanimous condemnation by the
entire international community, at a level of ferocity
hitherto unprecedented.

Israel has found itself completely isolated. But
most disturbingly, Israel's intransigence in building
these settlements is another example fitting a general
pattern of behaviour proving its general unwillingness
to undertake any measures that may lead to peace,

which first and foremost requires compromise. Other
examples include the building of the separation wall,
which snakes into Palestinian territory; the eviction of
Palestinian families and the demolition of Palestinian
homes; the revocation of residency rights of Palestinian
inhabitants of East Jerusalem, forbidding them to live
in the city of their birth; the new Israeli military order
which will give the Israeli occupying forces the power
to deport Palestinians in the West Bank who are
deemed to be infiltrating the occupied territory; and,
incessant attacks on Palestinians by illegal Israeli
settlers, and the lack of law enforcement by Israeli
authorities to stop or even prevent such attacks.

It is apparent that such behaviour defies
numerous Security Council resolutions, which call
upon Israel to cease and desist and to comply with and
abide by international law and the Fourth Geneva
Convention. Above all, it pre-empts the viable
two-State solution by changing the facts on the ground.
Hence, the international community, including the
Security Council, must hold Israel accountable for its
illegal actions and put an end to this occupation.

The blockade imposed by Israel in war-wrecked
Gaza is a form of collective punishment forbidden by
international law. It has forced 1.5 million Gazans to
live in deplorable conditions. We urge Israel to lift this
inhumane blockade in order to allow the movement of
essential goods, including construction materials. In
addition, it is imperative for the parties concerned and
the relevant United Nations bodies, including the
Security Council, to undertake actions in accordance
with General Assembly resolutions 64/10 and 64/254 in
order to ensure accountability by bringing the
perpetrators identified in the Goldstone report
(A/HRC/12/48) to justice.

Resolving these issues requires the international
community to focus all its energy and efforts on
restoring comprehensive peace in the region and the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including
their right to an independent State of Palestine. This
requires, inter alia, the political will of this Council to
bring into effect the Council's very own resolutions.

