Mr. Al-Ansari (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
for presiding over the Security Council for this month
and thank you for organizing today's important debate
on a matter that concerns basic human rights.

Unfortunately, trafficking in persons has become
a global phenomenon, especially in countries suffering
from conflicts. I would also like to thank Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres; Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC); Ms. Maria Grazia Giammarinaro,
United Nations Special Rapporteur on trafficking in
persons, especially women and children; and Mr. Sma'il
Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, for their valuable briefings.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/939)
on trafficking in persons in armed conflict pursuant
to Security Council resolution 2331 (2016) includes
important information and recommendations that we,
as members of the international community, must
take into account in our efforts aimed at combating
the phenomenon of human trafficking, especially in
countries and regions in conflict. The indicators in the
report show an increasing number of victims of that
heinous crime, especially women and children. We must
therefore intensify our efforts to meet the obligation set
forth in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
not to leave anyone behind.

As stated in the report of the Secretary-General,
the phenomenon of trafficking in persons has become
increasingly more dangerous, owing to the fact that
terrorist groups are using young victims to perpetrate
terrorist acts and are diverting the proceeds of
trafficking to finance such acts. The State of Qatar
is committed to international law and believes in
the importance of enhancing and protecting human
rights and upholding human dignity. We continue to
contribute to international efforts aimed at combating
that heinous phenomenon.

The State of Qatar focuses its efforts on addressing
the root causes of human trafficking, whether they
be social, economic, cultural, political or ideological,
or the result of the absence of the rule of law. The
State of Qatar is also working on enhancing the
complementarity and cooperation among concerned
entities working on drafting and implementing national
plans and strategies to combat terrorism and corruption,
provide humanitarian relief, and combat and eradicate
human trafficking at the national, regional and
international levels.

At the national level, the State of Qatar has
implemented a number of legislative and executive
measures that criminalize human trafficking in all
its various forms, punish perpetrators and provide
protection, rehabilitation and reintegration into society
for its victims. We have established a national committee
on combating human trafficking to coordinate the
efforts of State institutions and civil society aimed at
dealing with that horrific phenomenon. At the regional
level, we have supported the Arab initiative to build
national capacity in combating human trafficking in
Arab States in cooperation with the UNODC and the
League of Arab States. At the international level, the
State of Qatar contributes effectively to the efforts of the
Group of Friends United to Combat Human Trafficking.

The State of Qatar has been one of the largest
donors to the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for
Victims of Human Trafficking, Especially Women and
Children, since the Fund's establishment. We are also
one of the biggest supporters of UNODC, which is the
United Nations focal point for combating the crime
of human trafficking. In addition, in 2015, we hosted
the thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice, where a comprehensive
approach to fighting human trafficking, based in part
on the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons, was adopted in accordance
with the Doha Declaration. We also recently facilitated
negotiations, together with Belgium, on the political
declaration on the implementation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons (General Assembly resolution 72/ 1), adopted on
27 September at the tigh-level meeting of the General
Assembly on the appraisal of the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons.

In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm that the
international community continues to be unable to
reach fair settlements to conflicts, which contributes to
exacerbating the phenomenon of human trafficking. We
must put an end to that crime through concerted efforts
and by addressing the root causes of human trafficking
and armed conflict. We will make every effort to assist
the international community and the Security Council
in eradicating human trafficking and providing peace,
security and welfare to all.

