Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We
thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting. I would
also like to thank the representative of the United
States for his presentation of the quarterly oral report
of the multinational force and the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs for his comprehensive
briefing on the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI).

This is the first meeting to be held since the
adoption of resolution 1770 (2007), which constitutes a
turning point for the presence of the United Nations in
Iraq. Following reduced United Nations role in Iraq in
recent years, the time has come for the international
Organization to play a more effective part in assisting
the people and Government of Iraq in the process of
achieving security, stability and development.

The United Nations provides valuable assistance
to Iraq in several areas, such as constitutional support,
electoral assistance, reconstruction, development,
humanitarian assistance, human rights and other areas
that will help to speed up Iraq's extrication from its
current situation, regain its natural position as a stable,
prosperous and active State in the international
community, and enable its people to benefit from its
enormous wealth. There is no doubt that the United
Nations can make a more effective contribution not
only in those areas, but in other areas as well, such as
encouraging the implementation of the International
Compact with Iraq and taking action to promote the
constructive role of the neighbouring countries in order
to serve the interests of Iraq and the Iraqi people.

The United Nations can also play a bigger role in
stimulating national dialogue in Iraq among the various
groups, given its comparative advantages and the
prevailing conditions in Iraq. We agree with the
Secretary-General that there is a need to seize this
opportunity. As time passes, we are becoming
increasingly convinced of the importance of national
reconciliation in Iraq among the various groups of its
people, and that this accord constitutes the most
important precondition for emerging from the current
difficult situation.

In order to succeed in their efforts to restore
stability to Iraq, build its national institutions and
reinvigorate its development, the Government of Iraq,
UNAMI and the multinational force need to make
concerted efforts and cooperate effectively among
themselves.

With regard to the issue of refugees and internally
displaced persons, the situation is deteriorating by the
day and, given its humanitarian dimensions, constitutes
a threat to stability. The Government of Iraq therefore
needs to resolve the problem, with the help of the
international community, and necessary assistance
must be provided to the neighbouring countries that are
bearing the brunt of the situation.

Another cause for concern is the issue of the
accountability of private security companies for their
violations of international humanitarian law and the
need for them to be held accountable for their crimes.
No violation of human rights in Iraq must be
overlooked and due process in dealing with detainees
must be ensured. All who commit such violations must
be held to account.

Ensuring the stability of the security situation
remains at the top of Iraq's concerns. In our View, it is
essential to address the issue of stability through an
integrated approach that includes the continuous
strengthening of the Iraqi security forces, the
rehabilitation of former combatants from the armed
groups, and solving the humanitarian and socio-
economic problems that negatively affect the welfare
of the Iraqi people. National reconciliation should also
be supported and Iraqi leaders need to act in a spirit of
responsibility in that regard.

Steps are currently being taken to strengthen
UNAMI so that it can carry out its mandated tasks
pursuant to resolution 1770 (2007). Ensuring the safety
and security of the Mission's personnel should be a top
priority, especially in View of the lack of security in
Iraq.

Finally, we wish the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Iraq and all the personnel
of UNAMI success in their difficult task.

