Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Mr. Jean Arnault for his briefing,
which supplements the report of the Secretary-General
of 12 August 2005 (S/2005/525).

I would like to make a few comments in my
national capacity to supplement the statement made by
the representative of the United Kingdom on behalf of
the European Union.

First, I would like to stress the importance of the
legislative and provincial elections that will be taking
place in a little more than three weeks' time. That will
be a crucial phase, which should make it possible to
finalize the political process. Many challenges remain
to be overcome, and we will all need to pool our efforts
with a view to ensuring the success of the elections. I
would like to say, in my national capacity, that we are
providing 1 million euros to help bridge the funding
gap for the elections. We will also be strengthening our
military contingent, since security is, of course, a
crucial element in that respect.

Secondly, we must ensure that after 18 September
the elected authorities are properly established. It is in
that context that we are undertaking efforts - as the
Ambassador of the United Kingdom pointed out - to
coordinate support for the establishment of the Afghan
parliament. We will be providing 2.5 million euros for
that objective, and, together with our partners in that
undertaking, we intend to train 150 parliamentary
officials.

Thirdly, we are pleased to note that the Afghan
Government has confirmed its wish to continue to
benefit from the support of the international
community once the parliamentary elections have been
held and the Bonn Agreement process has been
completed. Naturally we support continued action on
the part of the international community, and we
endorse the principles outlined by the Secretary-
General in his two recent reports on the modalities for
and the principles governing international assistance in
the new phase that will then commence.

Finally, we would like to stress again, as
colleagues have done, our concern about the insecurity
that continues to prevail in the country, despite the
major efforts that we are making in that area. A high
price has been paid by some countries in terms of
soldiers' lives, including by the United States and
Spain. 1 should like here to pay special tribute to the
Spanish soldiers who recently gave their lives in
fulfilment of their courageous commitment to the
country. We express our condolences to the people and
the Government of Spain.

In conclusion, the threats to security and the
attacks and risks that continue to undermine the
stability of Afghanistan must stiffen the resolve of us
all and help us to move forward on all fronts: security,
combating the drug trade, disarmament, training the
Afghan army and police force and combating terrorist
groups.

Like other speakers, we would like to say that we
support the draft presidential statement.
