Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me start by
thanking very sincerely Under-Secretary-General
Vladimir Voronkov and Assistant Secretary-General
Michele Coninsx for their briefings and ongoing efforts
to work with Member States on strengthening counter-
terrorism. We also thank the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team for its contribution. It
is as pleasing as ever to hear from both of them how
closely they are working together. We welcome that
very much. I thought that the example that Michele
Coninsx provided with regard to the Lake Chad basin
was comprehensive and very valuable.

The United Kingdom is proud that, as a leading
member of the Global Coalition, it has made a key
contribution to the progress made against Da'esh.
However, Da'esh is still the most significant terrorist
threat to the United Kingdom, and therefore it remains a
top counter-terrorism priority for my country. Even with
the prospect of losing all territory, Da'esh continues to
pose a threat to international peace and security around
the world. While it has transitioned into a more diffuse
and networked structure, Da'esh retains its leadership
and capacity to inspire and encourage others to do
great harm. The group's attacks not only take innocent
lives, but threaten the safety and cohesion of all of our
communities. I echo what the Russian Ambassador
said about the importance of cutting terrorists off from
sources of finance.

We know that this is a threat that moves fast and
takes on different forms. Returning and relocating
foreign terrorist fighters, frustrated travellers and
individuals or small groups perpetrating attacks with
little centralized direction all mean that we must ensure
that our prevention measures and responses are tailored
to the current threat. No State can do that alone. We
have previously mentioned to the Council that we have
invited the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) to conduct an assessment of the
United Kingdom. That is not only because we hope
that we have a good story to tell and good practices
and experiences to share, but also because we value the
opportunity to learn from other States and engage in
dialogue. We would encourage others to do the same
and invite CTED to carry out assessments.

In the United Kingdom, we have a new counter-
terrorism and border-security bill going through our
system, which aims to ensure that law enforcement and
intelligence agencies have the powers that they need
to help keep the country safe from the threat posed
by terrorism and hostile State activity. We are seeing
increased concerns about violence perpetrated by groups
ascribing themselves to extreme right-wing ideologies.
In 2016, National Action became the first right-wing
group to be proscribed in the United Kingdom. At that
time, the Home Secretary said that National Action was
a racist, anti-Semitic and homophobic organization that
stirred up hatred, glorified violence and promoted a
vile ideology. It has absolutely no place in a Britain that
works for everyone. We have also seen the disruption
that unmanned aerial systems, or drones, can cause,
and we are ramping up our efforts to ensure that our
responses and the tools we have at hand keep pace with
the evolving challenges.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/103)
highlights the roles of women. We have seen in many
places women exploited to carry out attacks, taking
advantage of cultural and gender stereotypes and
operational loopholes. Women are also victims of
horrific acts of terrorism, including, infamously, sexual
violence at the hands of Da'esh. The Council has made
efforts to ensure accountability for Da'esh through
resolution 2379 (2017). At the same time, women have
also been key partners in prevention and response. We
know that many women's organizations are on the front
line doing important work in the areas of early warning,
building resilience and rehabilitation and reintegration.

We were pleased to contribute to the recent report
of the United Nations Development Programme and the
International Civil Society Action Network, entitled
Invisible Women: Gendered Dimensions of Return,
RehabilitationandReintegration.Allofthatunderscores
the importance of integrating gender as a cross-cutting
issue. In the United Kingdom, our national action plan
on women and peace and security includes strategic
targets pertaining to preventing violent extremism,
and we have a cross-cutting counter-terrorism gender
strategy. At the United Nations, we encourage both
CTED and the United Nations Office of Counter-
Terrorism (UNOCT) to focus on concrete actions in
that regard, as outlined in resolution 2242 (2015), the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
CTED's recent mandate. I just want to reiterate that
that is in response to a real threat and is therefore about
delivering real-world counter-terrorism effectiveness.

The Council's counter-terrorism framework lays out
a carefully negotiated set of obligations and mandates
to ensure that States can most effectively prevent and
counter the threat. Member States, of course, bear
the primary responsibility to do so, and many of the
obligations fall to national actors, but where additional
capacity-building is needed, we need CTED to identify
gaps and UNOCT and other United Nations partners
to support efforts to fill those gaps. In doing so, they
should work closely with civil society, the private
sector, experts and specialized United Nations agencies
and partners, taking advantage of respective expertise
and capability. It is very important that all work closely
together. Once again, let me welcome the personal
leadership of Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and
Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx in this area. It
is also important, however, that there be no confusion
with regard to mandates in the eyes of Member States.

We welcome the active United Nations responses
to the threat outlined in the report and would also like
to take the opportunity to thank the Office of Counter-
Terrorism for its work in developing the multi-year
appeal and the comprehensive and detailed information
shared with Member States on capacity-building
activities. We all have a complicated task before us. We
have just agreed on a very interesting and substantive
programme of work and list of activities for the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, and we know that it is key that
we remain responsive to emerging trends and dynamics.

Let me reiterate our support for Executive Director
Coninsx and her determination to ensure that CTED
continues to fulfil its mandate, conferred upon it by
the Council, in a comprehensive manner that takes
into account the full spectrum of counter-terrorism
issues, including prevention, human rights and gender,
for example, as well as legal, law enforcement, border
security and other such matters. As terrorism adapts,
so too must we ensure that our responses reflect
contemporary realities. Let me also express my support
for what Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx said
about not only the importance of the Madrid guiding
principles in and of themselves, but also the way in
which they were developed in an inclusive fashion
with a range of actors. Of course, that is very pertinent
to UNOCT through its strategy, as endorsed by the
General Assembly.

We have much in common. We all want to protect
our countries, peoples, communities and values, all
of which terrorists threaten. That threat requires a
multidimensional response. It requires us all to work
together, and we must use and improve all of the tools at
our disposal to meet our responsibilities and obligations.

