Mr. Billingslea: First, I thank France for its
leadership on the critical issue of countering terrorist
financing. As the Under-Secretary-General just
mentioned, resolution 2462 (2019), which was just
adopted, meaningfully advances the work of President
Macron's high-level International Conference on
Combating the Financing of Da'esh and Al-Qaida, held
in Paris last year on the theme "No money for terror",
in which you, Sir, played a key role. We look forward to
this year's follow-up conference in Australia, and thank
you for inviting the Financial Action Task Force (FATF)
to speak at the adoption of resolution 2462 (2019).

Terrorism remains a threat to international peace
and security from which no region is immune. Terrorist
groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), Al-Qaida and their affiliates continue to obtain

funding from a wide range of sources; they use this
funding to conduct terrorist attacks, but they also use
it to maintain and grow their terrorist organizations
as a whole. Combatting all these aspects of terrorist
financing is top priority shared by the Security Council
and the Financial Action Task Force. I am pleased that
the resolution recognizes the FATF's central role in
setting global standards to combat money-laundering,
terrorist financing and proliferation financing.

The FATF was founded in 1989 by the Group of
Seven to combat money-laundering by drug trafficking
and organized crime networks, and we have since
expanded our focus to counter both terrorist financing
and the financing of the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs). Now, more than 190 member
jurisdictions of the FATF and the Global Network
of Counter-Terrorism Centres have committed to
implementing and being evaluated for compliance with
those standards, which include specific requirements to
give effect to Security Council resolutions, including
the one just adopted, to counter the aforementioned
threats. In this way, the FATF and the Security Council
work hand in hand to strengthen Member States'
response to these critical threats to international peace
and security.

As the FATF moves towards its thirtieth
anniversary in the coming days, we have focused our
presidency on pressing for action on three crucial
challenges. Specifically, we are prioritizing efforts,
first, to address the illicit financing risks associated
with virtual currencies and related assets; secondly, to
take further action to strengthen international efforts
to combat the financing of terrorism; and thirdly, to
enhance our work in proliferation financing matters.
I was particularly pleased to see that the resolution
highlights the progress that the FATF has made on the
first priority, welcoming the recent work to amend our
standards and to adopt an interpretive note that clarifies
how all nations must regulate and supervise activities
and providers of virtual assets, and the importance of
the effective prosecution of terrorist financing.

Additionally, as the resolution conveys, it is critical
for all States to recognize where they may be vulnerable
to terrorist financing and then use that understanding
to mitigate those risks properly. I appreciate the
invaluable information that the Under-Secretary-
General and his Office provide, as well as the reports
of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da'esh) Al-Qaida and associated individuals groups
undertakings and entities. We also prepare confidential
reports on ISIL and Al-Qaida funding sources and
methods, as well as counter-measures that may be
adopted. We work, through the mutual evaluation
process, to ensure that all countries are accurately
assessing their financing risks and adequately and
effectively responding to those risks.
We should all recognize that terrorist financing
risks extend well beyond the banking and financial
sectors. States need to identify all sectors - including
those of non-financial services such as construction,
commodities and pharmaceutical trafficking and
others - that are being exploited for terrorist purposes.
For example, the typology reports that our member
nations compile reveal multiple different methods of
terrorist financing that rely on disparate schemes of drug
trafficking and even the used-car trade. Groups such
as Hizbullah, the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia and Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb have
all benefitted from intermingling funds from criminal
and otherwise legal trade for the purpose of funding
terrorist attacks.

FATF reports also identify - and the resolution
adopted today further amplifies - the use of
kidnapping for ransom as a prominent and sometimes
even primary source of terrorist revenue. The resolution
rightly prompts all States to do their necessary part in
breaking the vicious cycle and to prevent payments that
fund terrorist operations associated with kidnapping,
and further recognizes that payment of ransoms
incentivizes additional crimes. States must not allow
hostage-takers and terrorists to benefit from ransom
payments. That is crucial, particularly as kidnapping for
ransom has become the major funding source used by
the remnants of Da'esh around the world. More broadly,
States need to address the underlying contextual issues
that create environments conducive to terrorism and
terrorist financing. Corruption or weak and ineffective
governance and a lack of respect for the rule of law
are problems that lead to regional instability and render
economies vulnerable to terrorist exploitation.

The resolution also includes an important focus on
the adequate criminalization and effective prosecution
of terrorist financing. We must criminalize not only
financing that is itself linked to a particular terrorist
act, but also the provision of funds to terrorist groups or
terrorists for any purpose, whether it be for their travel
or their general operations. Under France's leadership,
the resolution brings United Nations obligations into
line with FATF recommendation 5 and the FATF
guidance on this matter. Through our assessments,
we will continue to encourage more than 50 countries
to pass new legislation to counter terrorist financing.
More is urgently needed.

Nearly two thirds of our FATF assessments around
the world show that States are not effectively prosecuting
terrorist financing. We are using the evaluation and
follow-up process to strengthen prosecution efforts,
and under my presidency of the FATF, we have driven
capacity-building workshops, most recently in the State
of Israel. I am pleased that all five permanent members
of the Security Council, including some individuals
present here today, participated in the workshop that
took place last week.

But I must underline that fewer than one fifth of
the countries around the world that we have assessed
to date are effectively applying the targeted financial
sanctions and prosecutions that are necessary in line
with the resolution just adopted. More is urgently
needed by all States Members of the United Nations,
and we in the FATF will continue to support the work
done at the Security Council and to drive adoption of
and adherence to FATF standards.

Finally, in conclusion, we need to bolster
inter-Agency coordination and information-sharing,
much as the Under-Secretary-General has mentioned,
both among and within States. States need to need
to exchange more information among all relevant
authorities, such as financial-intelligence units, law
enforcement and intelligence services. We also need
to work very closely with the private sector. New
developments in public-private partnerships give
significant benefits in terms of greater and faster
access to information. Large banks often have access to
significant amounts of data that can assist in countering
these terror operations.

Likewise, Governments need to provide relevant
information to financial institutions in return. A
number of FATF member nations, including my own,
the United Kingdom and others, have put in place legal
frameworks that foster the sharing of specific-threat
information with and by financial institutions. We
would encourage nations to consider additional ways
that we can work closely with our financial sector.

I congratulate the French Republic on its leadership
on this matter, on the adoption ofresolution 2462 (2019).
This vital resolution prompts all nations to "up their
game" in countering the terrorist-financing business.
We will continue to use our assessment processes to
reinforce the critical work that the Security Council is
now undertaking.

