Mr. Hassouna (Spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month.

We are meeting here today to discuss an
extremely important matter, the implications of which
require a great deal of objectivity and transparency in
our dealings with it. That is precisely what the
international community in general, and the Arab world
in particular, are expecting.

The situation in Iraq has reached a stage at which
we are required to address it urgently and effectively.
This situation cannot persist and we must confront it in
order to prevent its further deterioration and to end the
suffering of the Iraqi people, which has been under the
yoke of this regime for almost a decade. The time is
ripe for reaching an urgent solution, in accordance with
the declaration issued by the Arab leaders at their
recent summit in Amman, Jordan, on 27 and 28 March
2001, in which they called for the sanctions imposed
against Iraq to be lifted.

They also called for action on the humanitarian
issues in connection with prisoners of war and missing
persons - be they Kuwaiti, Iraqi or from third
countries - proceeding from the principles of our
national, religious and human heritage, in accordance
with Security Council document S/2001/342.

The principles and fundamental provisions of the
Charter of the League of Arab States require
compliance with the following principles: respect for
the independence and sovereignty of all its member
States; non-intervention in their internal affairs; the
non-threat and non-use of force; and the settlement of
conflicts by peaceful means through dialogue,
negotiation and conflict-resolution mechanisms.

Thus respect for the sovereignty of Iraq and the
sovereignty of Kuwait is an extremely important matter
in arriving at a comprehensive settlement of the
situation between Iraq and Kuwait.

The League of Arab States calls for the lifting of
the sanctions against Iraq and for an end to the
blockade. It would like also to underscore the
importance of Iraq's respecting the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Kuwait within
its internationally recognized borders. We are therefore
not only calling for the lifting of sanctions against Iraq,
but also stressing the need to guarantee Kuwait's
security and stability.

We believe that any solution to this question
should be based on the principles of international
legitimacy and respect for all relevant Security Council
resolutions. However, this does not mean that the
sanctions imposed on Iraq will continue forever or
even for a long period of time, or that they will not be
reviewed. We therefore call for the use of dialogue as a
means of dealing with the current crisis. This is a
means we utilized in the past with respect to the
Memorandum of Understanding between Iraq and the
United Nations, and it is the same means we are using
today in our discussion. Perhaps the time is ripe now
for the Secretary-General to pursue his dialogue with
the Iraqi Government, as begun last February.

Respect for the principles of international law
require us also to put an end to all actions and
measures that violate Iraq's sovereignty or threaten its
security, especially those that are taking place outside
the purview of relevant Security Council resolutions.

The League of Arab States calls for an end to
pending issues relating to weapons of mass destruction
and means of monitoring and controlling them through
dialogue and negotiation between Iraq and the Security
Council, in conformity with relevant Council
resolutions.

We would like also to see the implementation of
paragraph 14 of Security Council resolution 687
(1991), which highlighted the need to rid Iraq of
weapons of mass destruction. That would represent a
step forward, within the framework of a comprehensive
plan in this regard, towards the goal of making the
Middle East a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction. Of course, this also includes all weapons
of mass destruction, especially nuclear weapons,
owned by Israel, in order to avoid any double standards
and to enshrine the principle of dealing with States on
an equal footing.

Finally, we are hopeful that the Council will take
steps to ensure the settlement of all pending matters
under the agenda item "The situation between Iraq and
Kuwait", on the basis of the principles enshrined in the
United Nations Charter and in accordance with
internationally binding resolutions. The Council's
success in achieving this goal will be a tangible
contribution that will build confidence and quiet
between Iraq and its neighbours and will enable us to
ensure a bright future for the countries of the region on
the basis of robust and stable relations.

