Mr. Benitez Versen (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba firmly supports the statements made by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and by the representative of Argentina on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.

Climate change is undoubtedly one of the most
serious and imminent dangers threatening the survival
of humankind. Paradoxically, the States most affected
and in the worst position to adapt to the negative
consequences of climate change, in particular small
island developing States and African countries, are the
least responsible for the problem. On the contrary,
developed countries' emissions account for 76 per cent
of greenhouse gas emissions, which continue to grow.
One billion people in the first world wastefully
consume half the planet's energy while 2 billion poor
people lack electricity. Thirty countries consume 80 per
cent of the fuel that the world produces. Developed
countries therefore bear the main responsibility for
repaying the debt historically owed to our planet's
ecosystem.

The relevant powers and functions of the various
bodies within and without the United Nations must be
duly respected. We are seriously concerned about the
Security Council's growing interference in the
functions and responsibilities of the other principal

 

United Nations organs. Climate change is an issue that,
by definition, should be discussed under the
sustainable development cluster. In the United Nations,
therefore, it should be addressed, as has been the case
in recent years, by the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council and their relevant
subsidiary bodies, in particular the Commission on
Sustainable Development and the United Nations
Environment Programme.

Cuba understands the legitimate concerns of
some of the small island States, which have brought
this issue to the attention of the Security Council. They
are driven by a pressing need to find solutions to a
problem that poses a serious threat to their security and
physical integrity as territories and nations. If the
Security Council, despite its limitations and lack of
jurisdiction in this area, wishes to demonstrate any
seriousness in reviewing this issue of universal concern
and making a meaningful contribution to the search for
solutions, it should begin by making a statement that
includes the following basic points.

First, it should emphasize that the principle of
common but differentiated responsibilities is the
cornerstone of a just and lasting solution to global
climate change.

Secondly, it should underline how important it is
that developed countries meet their international
development commitments, including those relating to
the Millennium Development Goals, official
development assistance, Agenda 21, the Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation, the Barbados Programme of
Action and the Mauritius Strategy, helping developing
countries to take the actions needed to adapt to climate
change.

Thirdly, it should call on industrialized countries
to undertake a second commitment period under the
Kyoto Protocol, with measurable and more ambitious
goals for emissions reduction. In that regard, the
Council should recognize that the emissions reduction
goals being announced by some of the major developed
countries go far beyond the range necessary to stabilize
the rise in global temperature at a level that will
prevent irreversible catastrophe.

Fourthly, the Council should emphasize that the
goals for reducing greenhouse gas emissions by the
countries of the South cannot be formulated in such a
way as to obstruct their right to development, but
should be done on the basis of voluntary, non-binding

 

mitigation actions, in accordance with the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.

Fifthly, the Council should recognize that the
main cause of global climate change is the
unsustainable production and consumption patterns
that prevail in developed countries.

Sixthly, the Council should press for concrete
commitments on funding and technology transfer on
preferential terms to developing countries, making
small island States and least developed countries a
priority, as well as allocate new and additional
resources for implementing adaptation actions.

Allow me to conclude by emphasizing that
climate change is a global threat that requires global
solutions that are just, equitable and balanced. Only
respect for the principles and commitments enshrined
in the Framework Convention and the Kyoto Protocol
can help us solve this problem. At the seventeenth
Conference of the Parties, the world will have a new
opportunity that must not be wasted. The way in which
we deal with climate change today will have a direct
impact on the development prospects of many
countries and humankind's very survival.

