Mr. Fernandez de Soto Valderrama (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank you, Sir, for convening
this second meeting on the issue at hand, which is of the
utmost importance to Colombia and my region. We also
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for
her briefing.

Our presence in the Council is a reaffirmation
of an essential principle underpinning my country's
international relations - our belief in multilateralism
to uphold the values of the Charter of the United
Nations and the Inter-American Democratic Charter.
Let there be no doubt about that. The meeting of the
Lima Group that took place yesterday in Bogota is an
excellent example of the validity of multilateral action.
More than 50 nations of the world recognize interim
President Juan Guaido and the legitimate authority of
the National Assembly and agree on the need to recover
freedom and democracy for Venezuela.

The serious situation in that brotherly country is
one of the most intense in the history of Latin America
and the Caribbean. It is marked by massive human rights
violations, a deep economic recession, an erosion of the
separation of powers and an unprecedented humanitarian
and migration crisis that has spilled beyond its borders
and affected Colombia. According to statistics from the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and the International Organization
for Migration (IOM), food shortages, lack of medicine
and medical supplies have led 3.4 million Venezuelans
to abandon their homes. Likewise, according to the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, in Venezuela the prevalence of hunger almost
tripled between 2010 and 2012 and between 2015 and
2017. An estimated 3.7 million Venezuelans, like those
I just mentioned, were undernourished between 2015
and 2017. Those statistics are from the organizations
Ijust mentioned and are contained in sobering reports
issued to the world.

Given the increasing flow of migration from
Venezuela to the countries of the region, in September
2018, at the request of the Colombian Government
and convinced about the urgent need to provide the
Venezuelan people with humanitarian aid and the good
offices of the Secretary-General, UNHCR and IOM
announced the appointment of Mr. Eduardo Stein as
Special Representative for Venezuelan Refugees and
Migrants, in order to meet the needs caused by the
mass exodus. As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia noted yesterday,

"with the support of the Lima Group, several
countries made a considerable effort to facilitate
the operation of a humanitarian channel, provide
basic international assistance and alleviate, even
partially, the serious humanitarian situation
affecting so many Venezuelans".

Since its first declaration in August 2017 - and
not just recently - the Lima Group has pointed out
the need for humanitarian aid and repeatedly asked the
dictatorial regime not to impede the entry and transit
of humanitarian aid to Venezuelans. Those are the
facts. The response of the illegitimate regime that has
imposed the tyranny of fear, repression and violence
as a mechanism of intimidation, and has organized
collectives of armed civilians, is known to all. Despite
the insistent appeals of the international community,
they have blocked access to the assistance offered, even
going so far as burning aid that had managed to cross
the border.

While thousands of Venezuelan citizen volunteers
tried to deliver aid to improve the lives of their families,
the dictator celebrated with indifference to the agony,
anguish and despair inflicted on his people. That
merely reiterated what was already clear to everyone.
The dictatorship stopped thinking about its people
years ago and its actions on the weekend have sealed its
moral and diplomatic defeat.

I have with me the protocols of the operation that
took place on Saturday. I invite the Security Council
to look at the information with us. I would like the
Security Council to delve deeply into the protocols
that clearly reflect what was done hour by hour. An
additional report issued by the General Secretariat of
the Organization of American States, which assisted in
the operation, is also available. It would be very easy
to write a novel about what happened on Saturday. As
one eminent Colombian has said, if you lie and lie some
more, something will stick. I invite Council members
to look at the protocols and compare them to the
information Mr. Arreaza provided here today.

I too have photographs that I could pass around in
the Security Council but, out of respect for colleagues
who have not yet spoken, I will not do so. The facts are
surprising. The entire world saw them. It is very easy
to twist and manipulate the facts, including the memory
of Bolivar, but there can be no doubt about the fact that
Colombia, too, has information about the events as they
occurred minute by minute. We are ready to submit
that information and share it with the Security Council
so that members know that what has been said is the
absolute truth and reality.

The coordination effort of the Lima Group has
shown the usurping regime that its dictatorship is
increasingly isolated as a result of its deliberate actions
against the Venezuelan people. The Lima Group, with
the presence of President Juan Guaido at its meeting,
will continue with his consent to provide humanitarian
aid, guided by the responsibility of the international
community, use diplomatic and humanitarian means
to support the population in need, achieve democratic
transition, call free elections, restore constitutional
order and achieve institutional, economic and social
reconstruction in Venezuela.

That firm conviction is contained in the historic
declaration issued at the 11th meeting of Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of the Lima Group, which states
that the transition to democracy must be spearheaded
peacefully by Venezuelans themselves, within the
framework of the Constitution and international law,
supported by political and diplomatic means, without
the use of force. The members of the Lima Group know
that very well and the international community knows
it too. One fundamental principle is that we decided
to share this experience to strengthen and rescue
democracy for the benefit of the Venezuelan people.
Within multilateral forums, we will of course continue
working to ensure that the relevant resolutions and
sanctions are adopted and complaints lodged following
the events of 23 February.

Colombia has endured violence. We understand
very well the suffering of our people and are working
tirelessly to ease it. The Ambassador of Russia made a
few observations that are truly surprising because, with
the help of the Council and the various organizations
and agencies of the United Nations, we are making
progress with the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia. The President of Colombia has also made
a genuine commitment to implementing and advancing
the goal of stabilization in the peace agreements signed.
Colombia recognizes, and its President has confirmed,
that legality, the rule of law and democracy are the
forms of coexistence that ensure peace and the future
of citizens. The Security Council cannot fail to heed
the demands of Venezuelans who aspire to live with
freedom, well-being and democracy.

Allow me to take a few more minutes, but obviously
the events that have transpired in my country oblige me
to do so. I will address two or three aspects.

The preliminary report to which I referred clearly
indicates that, at noon, four trucks arrived carrying
humanitarian aid, with almost 50 people in each truck.
The Bolivarian National Guard immediately began
launching tear gas towards the convoy, and most of
those affected were on the Columbian side, causing
a temporary retreat. The Organization of American
States directly observed that more than 30 people were
injured, most of them from the organizing entities.

At 1:45 p.m., the first and second aid convoys
were seen ablaze on the Venezuelan side, with no
confirmation of the facts of the incident. Throughout
the day, shots were heard constantly on the Venezuelan
side, and at some point tear gas was launched and
pellets were fired, leading to an undetermined number
of people being injured, in addition to the uneasiness
and fear of the population.

Four trucks with humanitarian aid arrived at the
Simon Bolivar International Bridge and were stuck at the
crossing. They made several attempts to enter, although
that was not possible. In the afternoon, given the order
for the vehicles to return and the bridge to be closed, a
strong opposition was mounted by Venezuelans, who
continued to prevent the implementation of that order
until the publication of this report.

Colombia fully complied with the protocol to receive
the humanitarian aid that it was given. It is very easy to
claim that a novel could be written about what happened
in the span of those days, but I would recommend that
Mr. Arreaza write such a story, because it is nothing
more than fiction - a make-believe story that seeks
to manipulate the truth of what happened. Everyone
can draw their own conclusions about what has been
said here. Colombia is willing to share information in
that regard.

On 21 February, Ms. Mogherini stated that what
is happening in Venezuela is a multidimensional crisis
that is increasingly affecting Venezuelans, and ofcourse
it is the obligation of the international community, as
demonstrated throughout time in the classical theories
on international humanitarian law, to fulfil its duty and
show solidarity by helping to ensure that the people
receive due care and attention.

I will end my remarks on that note. I apologize for
being emotional, but in the defence of the legitimate
interests of Colombia and the region we must always
ensure that we place the proper emphasis so that there
is no doubt as to the reality and the good faith in which
my country has acted.

