Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Let me
at the outset join the other delegations in welcoming
Judge Jorda, Judge Pillay and Chief Prosecutor Del
Ponte. I thank them for their very detailed statements
on the situation and the activities of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR).

Judge Jorda told us that the priorities of the
Tribunal should be rethought and proposed a few lines
of thought that we find very interesting, especially as
regards the new international dynamic in favour of the
joint struggle against terrorism in all its forms and, of
course, regarding the huge amount of work before the
Tribunal and its capacity to double the number of trials
in order to complete the proceedings of the Trial
Chamber by 2007.

You have made this conditional, Judge Jorda,
inter alia, on increased cooperation by the States of the
region. These are important problems that you have
raised - problems that have also been raised by
Prosecutor Del Ponte. In this framework, we need to
think about the means that could possibly be used to
encourage the States of the region. This also applies to
Judge Pillay regarding the Tribunal for Rwanda. We
need to think of how States might be encouraged to
increase their cooperation with these Tribunals.

Judge Jorda also proposed that national
reconciliation commissions could play a role in this
framework. We agree with this, but it should be
emphasized here that these commissions must not
replace the action ofjustice, which is the only way to
reconciliation. We have experienced the positive
effects of justice on efforts for reconciliation, which
themselves remain very important, throughout the
missions on which the Security Council has
embarked - in Timor, Rwanda, Burundi, Kosovo and
elsewhere.

The relocation of certain cases will require
judicial systems to be brought up to standard in the
States of the former Yugoslavia, as you yourself
emphasized, Judge Jorda. Do you believe that they
could be brought up to standard by 2007?

In Rwanda as in the Balkans, our objective is to
achieve peace and reconciliation while giving pride of
place to justice. We think, however, that it would be
dangerous if trials were to be unduly prolonged. We
consider it necessary that all those who have been
accused be brought to justice without excessive delays.
It is important to ensure the reliability and quality of
trials. President Pillay proposed in her report that the
Council envisage creating, as the ICTY did, a group of
ad litem judges that would make it possible to expedite
judicial proceedings and to alleviate the Tribunal's
workload. Judge Jorda indicated to us yesterday that
the addition of 27 ad litem judges for the International
Criminal Tribunal for Yugoslavia will make it possible
to double the capacity of the Tribunal. We think that a
similar solution could also be the right answer for the
problems of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda.

