Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to thank France, and Foreign Minister Le Drian
in particular, for convening today's open debate on
a critically important issue. France continues to be
a leader in the fight against terrorism financing, and
we applaud the new resolution 2462 (2019), which was
adopted earlier today. The United Arab Emirates was
proud to co-sponsor the resolution, and France can rely
on our continued support in this area, but as Foreign
Minister Le Drian said this morning, it is a strong
political, not an end in itself, and much work remains to
be done by the international community.

As we have heard today, terrorism has no religion,
race or nationality. It occurs everywhere, as we saw two
weeks ago when 50 Muslims were viciously murdered
and another 50 wounded during Friday prayers in
Christchurch, New Zealand. The victims included four
children, one of them just three years old. Despite the
tragedy, the response of New Zealanders is an example
for us all of how to remain resilient in the face of such
abject horror.

Fighting terrorism requires a multi-pronged
strategy. It requires efforts to curb the hate that fuels the
spread of extremist ideologies to individuals, such as the
terrorist in New Zealand, or to groups, such as Al-Qaida
or Da'esh. It requires action to dismantle the terrorist
networks and support systems - whether offline or,
increasingly, online in the digital sphere - that allow
terrorists to organize. Crucially and most relevant
to today's discussion, it requires constant vigilance
and monitoring of financial networks to prevent
terrorists from acquiring weapons, recruiting fighters
or launching attacks. Member States must therefore
tackle the abuse of financial institutions and non-profit
organizations for terrorist-financing purposes.
The United Arab Emirates fully understands this
obligation, especially given that our country is a trade
and financial services hub in the Gulf. We have taken a
number ofpractical steps to secure our financial system
that I would like to share with Council members today.
These steps include strengthening our existing legal
frameworks to combat terrorist financing, as we did in
2018 by implementing the latest Financial Action Task
Force (FATF) recommendations; providing our financial
intelligence units with the equipment, resources and
training they need to analyse and investigate suspicious
transactions; monitoring financial transactions and
charitable activities with private and non-profit actors,
which are required under United Arab Emirates law to
continuously identify, evaluate and document the risk
of misuse of their services for criminal and terrorist
activity; raising domestic awareness through various
media platforms to prevent domestic funding of
terrorism; and implementing laws and regulations to
freeze terrorists' funds, in accordance with resolution
1373 (2001).

Despite our best efforts, the threat of terrorist
financing remains, and there is more to work we can
do in learning about and collaborating with partners to
counter this threat.

First, certain Member States continue to support
and finance terrorist activity, undermining the Security
Council's efforts to maintain international peace and
security. That has forced us and other concerned States
to take sovereign measures.

Secondly, there is a growing link between organized
crime and terrorism. For example, Da'esh, Al-Qaida and
other affiliated terrorist groups have looted, smuggled
and sold cultural artefacts to finance their destructive
operations. To combat this threat, the United Arab
Emirates worked with France and UNESCO to establish
the International Alliance for the Protection of Heritage
in Conflict Areas. Through that organization and other
such programmes, we are working to rebuild and
restore the invaluable cultural heritage of Mosul, Mali
and other places where terrorists have sought to erase
the very history of tolerance and inclusion that they
so despise.

Terrorism is a transnational threat that requires
international and coordinated action. The United Arab
Emirates is a member of the Middle East and North
Africa Financial Action Task Force, and we are working
diligently to implement the FATF recommendations
after each evaluation. The United Arab Emirates'
Anti-Money Laundering and Suspicious Cases Unit is a
member of the Egmont Group and has signed more than
45 memorandums of understanding with national and
international counterparts.

These efforts, however, are just one step and
part of a bigger picture. As combating terrorist
financing requires constant international vigilance and
improvement, we think that the United Nations system
itself could strengthen its efforts by taking the three
following steps.

First, it must hold Member States accountable for
their financing of terrorism when it occurs, especially
when such actions violate relevant Security Council
resolutions and their obligations under the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism. Secondly, it should provide training to
Member States when the Security Council adopts
resolutions that create new obligations to curb terrorist
financing. Thirdly, it should explore ways to curb the
financing of extremism, particularly media platforms
that spread hateful messages and create an environment
where terrorist ideologies can thrive.

The United Arab Emirates once again reiterates that
it is committed to upholding its obligations to combat
terrorist financing under international and regional
treaties, as well as Security Council resolutions. We are
ready to strengthen our global partnerships in this area
and we will continue to share our expertise with our
partners, and we very much look forward to learning
from their experiences and best practices.

