Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): On this last day
of your presidency, Madam President, I would like to
thank you for your wise stewardship of the Security
Council during the month of August.

I would like also to join my delegation's voice to the
condolences that have been expressed with regard to
the tragic death of the Force Commander of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, to his family
and to all those who knew him and will suffer that loss.

I shall try to touch upon two thematic issues that
link both the July and the August activities of the
Council: the aspect of prevention and the aspect of
accountability.

While the work of the Council is often constrained
by mandate cycles, and most of the open debates that
we organize are held on a certain number of important
issues, New Zealand's open debate (see S/PV.7499)
on the peace and security challenges facing small
island developing States (SIDS) was, in my opinion, a
welcome breath of fresh air. We hope that the Council's
engagement with SIDS regarding the specific security
challenges those countries are facing will continue, that
it will include follow-up and that the rare opportunity
for preventive action will not be missed by the Council
on such crucial challenges as managing the effects of
climate change, climate-induced displacement and
illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons,
among others.

A sharper focus on prevention is more urgent than
ever. The Council's close monitoring of the situations in
Guinea-Bissau, Burundi, Burkina-Faso and Myanmar
goes in that direction. While not all of our signals
have been heard by the political actors on the ground,
the very fact that the Council follows such situations
closely puts it in a better position to react quickly and
effectively, if and when needed. However, that is not
enough. The Council should take advantage of more
opportunities, and more substantive steps need to be
taken in prevention in general. I look forward to that
issue being developed by the presidencies that will
follow until the end of the current year, and beyond.
Although we will no longer be members of the Security
Council in 2016, Lithuania will of course follow with
keen interest issues relating to prevention.

At the beginning of this month, the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2235 (2015), which
establishes the Joint Investigative Mechanism in
Syria of the United Nations and the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, which will be
mandated to identify those responsible for attacks
involving chemical weapons. That is an important step,
albeit only the first, towards establishing accountability
in that country. That is indispensable if we are truly
committed to stamping out the use of chemical weapons
everywhere once and for all. We thank the Secretary-
General for his recommendations with regard to the
establishment of the Mechanism, and we urge the
Council to go ahead with full support for that body and
its activities.

Besides that particular mechanism, however,
impunity certainly reigns elsewhere. Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bangura's
briefing on sexual violence in the Middle East (see S/PV.7428) reminded us of that in the starkest possible
terms. Justice and accountability cannot be relegated to
some time later, because, for many ofthose affected, that
"some time later" may never come. Tackling impunity is
crucial, be it in Syria, Darfur, South Sudan, the Central
African Republic, Iraq, Yemen or any other conflict
area where crimes against humanity, war crimes and
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law have been perpetrated. Whoever
the perpetrators may be, holding them to account
would contribute to reconciliation and healing, build
stronger foundations for peace and ensure justice for
the Victims. Importantly, it would also send a strong
deterrent message to would-be rapists, marauders and
murderers.

In that respect, my delegation was profoundly
disappointed with the outcome of the votes last July on
the draft resolutions on Srebrenica and on establishing
an international tribunal on the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-l7. Vetoing resolutions that address
the issue ofjustice and accountability is an affront to
the memories of the victims of those crimes and to
the pain of their families. It also, dangerously, sends
a very wrong signal on how we deal with issues of
accountability and impunity.

On the other hand, the situation in July concerning
those two vetoes only highlights the urgency of
addressing the Council's use of the veto. Today,
other delegations preceding me spoke about that. We
appreciate the fact that the New Zealand presidency
organized an informal discussion on the topic in July.
Lithuania supports such efforts, the political statement
on the suspension of the veto in case of mass atrocities
presented by France and Mexico, as well as discussions
on a code of conduct developed by the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group.

On the issue of accountability, the Council should
certainly remain strongly and continuously engaged on
the problem of sexual exploitation and abuse committed
by peacekeepers. If ignored, such abuses will continue
undercutting the credibility of United Nations
peacekeeping, and of the United Nations itself. The
problems certainly did not start with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic. It keeps reappearing ever
so often. If we remember, back in 2006, in the wake ofa
sexual exploitation scandal in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the former Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Jean-Marie Gue'henno, said,

"We dishonour these brave men and women
when we fail to prevent or punish those from
within their ranks who victimize the very people
peacekeepers are meant to protect and serve."
(S/PV5379, p. 3)

Several thousand peacekeepers have died in the
line of duty over the years - let us remember that.
Peacekeeping missions are becoming more and more
complex and dangerous. Manypeacekeepers and civilian
staff serve in truly difficult conditions, of which I had
a glimpse myself last week during a trip to the Central
African Republic. To serve under such conditions takes
endurance and commitment. It is therefore even more
imperative that justice be done, in the interests of those
thousands of peacekeepers and mission staff who serve
with dedication, by going with full force after those few
transgressors who have used a peacekeeping mission to
transform it from its role of protector to that of predator.
While the United Nations does not have the authority
to prosecute crimes of sexual abuse and exploitation
committed by peacekeepers, it can certainly do more
to promote a climate of accountability in other ways by
building a durable, pervasive culture of accountability
from top to bottom and from bottom to top.

We welcome the strong position that the Secretary-
General has taken on the matter, and we hope that a
zero-tolerance policy, which we so often preach, will
finally become a fact rather thanjust a mere expression.
We also hope that the Council does not have to meet
again to debate the shameful behaviour of a few
peacekeepers 10 years from now.

