Mr. Valle (Brazil): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having
convened this important meeting. The oral reports of
the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and the presentation of the Committee's
quarterly programmes of work are opportunities for the
membership of the Organization as a whole to be
informed of the relevant work being carried out by the
CTC in the fight against terrorism. This meeting
acquires particular relevance, as the Security Council
will shortly be taking up the question of the reform of
the CTC. The open debate convened today provides an
excellent opportunity for learning what the broad
membership of the Organization has to say about an
issue of such magnitude.

I would like to commend Ambassador Inocencio
Arias, not only for his work as Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, but also for his efforts
in promoting the proposal for the reform of the
Committee. Without his determined commitment, it is
unlikely that we would be in a position to discuss a
concrete proposal for reform. We further extend thanks
for his comprehensive presentation on the work of the
Committee in the last quarter of 2003 and on the
programme of work for the current trimester. The main
issue in this debate, however, will undoubtedly be the
proposal for the reform of the Committee. In this
regard, I fully associate my country with the statement
to be delivered later by the Permanent Representative
of Argentina on behalf of the Rio Group. I would like
to add a few remarks in our national capacity regarding
the main issues involved in the creation of a new
structure for the CTC.

To begin with, the Brazilian Constitution provides
that our foreign policy should be guided by the
repudiation of terrorism in all its forms. Therefore,
Brazil has signed all the relevant conventions and
international instruments in the field of combating
international terrorism, and actively participates in
negotiations and initiatives on the subject.

The first issue to be addressed is the creation of
the new structure itself. The purpose of the report
presented to the Council (S/2004/124, annex) is the
restructuring of the Committee in order to correct
possible imbalances in its current structure and to
allow for a refocusing of the work of the CTC in
coordinating the capacity-building efforts of Member
States in the fight against terrorism. The main proposal
to that end is the creation of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate. As pointed out in the
report, the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee remains as defined in resolution 1373
(2001) and the subsequent ministerial declarations of
the Council annexed to resolutions 1377 (2001) and
1456 (2003).

As the Council considers the issue of the reform,
it is of particular importance that the alterations
proposed to revamp the Counter-Terrorism Committee
be strictly of a procedural and operational nature, and
that the decisions adopted in this regard be consistent
with such an approach. The Brazilian Government
understands that the fight against terrorism must be
carried out in strict accordance with international law,
in particular the commitments assumed in the area of
human rights and humanitarian law. The preservation
of the rule of law, of individual liberties and of
democratic principles and values is, itself, one of the
main objectives in the struggle against terror. Any
concession in this regard would clearly benefit those
who, through their dastardly acts of terrorism, show
nothing but contempt for human life.

The second point I would like to highlight is the
proposal for the appointment of an Executive Director.
The creation of that post addresses main areas of
concern. It allows for a better coordination of work
within the executive structure of the Committee itself
and better interaction between that structure and the
Committee, more precisely, the Member States
represented in it. During negotiations on the report,
Brazil attached priority to clearly establishing the
duties of the Executive Director in terms of reporting
and informing the Committee on the work of the
Directorate.

The appointment of an Executive Director will
also allow for better coordination of work with other
bodies - in particular the 1267 Committee of the
Security Council and the relevant branch of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to name only
two - resulting in the multiplication of synergies and
a greater capacity to offer assistance to States in the
combat of international terrorism. We expect such a
task will be carried out by the Executive Director in
full coordination with the Chairman of the Committee.
A third consideration related to the Executive Director
is that the centralization of duties should make it easier
for Member States to have access to the Committee.

Finally, I would like to express my Government's
satisfaction with the fact that the reform proposal
contained in the report of the Committee clearly
establishes that one of the functions entrusted to the
new structure is to establish a liaison with the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and other
relevant human rights organizations in matters related
to counter-terrorism. That is a most positive step in
ensuring that measures adopted at the national level are
in strict accordance with the extensive body of
international legislation dedicated to the protection and
promotion of the most basic human rights. In order for
that function to be carried out adequately, we favour
the appointment of a specialist in the field of human
rights on the staff of experts assigned to the
Committee.

The issue now ahead for the Council is to
adequately translate this proposal into a resolution
capable of reflecting all the improvements we want to
incorporate into the structure of the Committee, while
fully respecting the Charter of the Organization. We
reaffirm our continued and full commitment to the
achievement of that lofty goal.

