I commend the Security Council presidency for the month of November for convening this open debate. Noting that the contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity are increasingly of a political, socioeconomic, health and environmental nature, we are confident that this debate will serve as a platform to exchange views on the security implications of contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity, as well as the role of the Security Council in fostering an integrated and coherent whole-of-system response approach. The Charter of the United Nations envisions a preventive diplomatic strategy that would require the Security Council to work in coherence with the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, under Chapter IV, Article 11 and Chapter X, Article 65, respectively, to enable "the creation of conditions of stability and well-being which are necessary for peaceful and friendly relations among nations". Consequently, for the Council to effectively fulfil its mandate, it is necessary to consider the relevant economic, political and social dimensions of conflict. The various briefings given earlier have further reminded us that building and keeping peace is a shared responsibility. They underscored the need for strengthened coherence and collaboration among the Security Council, Governments, subregional and regional organizations, local peacebuilders, civil society and academia in order to ensure the sustainability of peace, security, development, human rights, the rule of law and justice. In keeping with the spirit of African-owned and -led peacebuilding efforts, my delegation particularly welcomes the Council's engagement with the African Union Development Agency, which continues to identify development and peacebuilding priorities and coordinate regional projects under Agenda 2063. With regard to development, peacebuilding and _ sustaining peace, underdevelopment and insecurity are intricately linked, particularly in developing countries. We therefore appreciate the Secretary-General's ongoing three-track call for reform in greater collaboration across the United Nations peace and security pillar, the development system and management. Indeed, the three founding pillars of the United Nations system - peace and security, human rights and development -recognized that these elements were mutually reinforcing and envisaged an operational strategy, whereby addressing the root causes of conflict would take a comprehensive approach, including the eradication of poverty and building resilient and inclusive governance institutions with tangible results for the people on the ground without leaving anyone out. The year 2020 inaugurates the Decade of Action to accelerate our delivery on the Sustainable Development Goals. In Kenya, we continue to integrate the Sustainable Development Goals in various sectors inter alia, the formulation of our national action plan on women and peace and security, and peace operations training curricula. With regard to pandemics, peacebuilding and sustaining peace, global health emergencies, such as the Ebola crisis, have had significant adverse impact on social cohesion, food security and economic development, leading to a reversal of gains made in peacebuilding processes particularly in West Africa and the Sahel. Although the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has affected big and small economies, there has been a greater impact on the work of local peacebuilders and peacekeeping missions particularly in regions already experiencing fragility and conflict, as well as in refugee and internally displaced persons camps. The Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and the Council's unanimous adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) were an important step in recognizing that conditions of violence and instability in conflict situations can exacerbate the pandemic and that inversely the pandemic can exacerbate the adverse humanitarian impact of conflict situations. In Kenya, we saw the value of collectivizing the response to the impact of the pandemic through the pooling of resources and working with multiple levels of stakeholders to address those challenges. Our COVID-19 national task force consists of a team of experts cutting across the fields of health, law, safety and security, not to mention economists and communication experts. Concerning climate change, peacebuilding and sustaining peace, studies have shown that the majority of regions impacted by climate change also host a substantive number of multilateral peace operation missions, including the Sahel and the Horn of Africa. In the Horn of Africa, pastoralist communities have become increasingly vulnerable to climate variability - a situation that has proved to be both a root cause of and exacerbator to conflict within the context of dwindling pastures and reduced water sources. With rising sea-levels, climate change constitutes an existential threat among small island and developing States, as it touches on the very existence of statehood and territory. The Council needs to show its commitment to addressing the impact of climate on security through drawing relevant advice and specific data from key international and regional instruments, including the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the Paris Agreement and the United Nations Environment Programme. In the area of climate action, the Government of Kenya has established policies and legal climate-change frameworks, including the National Climate Change Action Plan, to mainstream climate actions into our development planning processes. T9/NIS
