Mr. Llorenty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): First and foremost, Madam
President, I should like, on behalf of my delegation, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council and pledge our full support to you. I,
too, wish to congratulate the delegation of Sweden for
having so successfully and professionally guided the
work of the Council last month.

My delegation would like also to express its
appreciation for the briefing by the Special Envoy for
Yemen, Mr. Griffiths, and reiterates its support for his
efforts to bring about a peaceful solution to the conflict
in Yemen. We are also grateful for the informative
briefing delivered by the Director of the Coordination
and Response Division ofthe Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Ging.

Our delegation has consistently stated in the
Council its belief that there can be no military
solution to the conflict in Yemen. We are concerned
by the increase in violence in various cities around the
country, in particular in Al-Hudaydah governorate. As
Mr. Griffiths stated so eloquently,

(Spoke in English)
"the pace of war has increased".
(Spoke in Spanish)

Moreover, Mr. Ging's report made clear the fact that
the humanitarian situation is unravelling. According to
a UNICEF report of 31 July, the incidents that affected
civilians during the military campaign in Al-Hudaydah
governorate have led to the displacement of more than
121,000 people, who lost their means of subsistence
and now depend completely on humanitarian assistance
to survive.

Moreover, according to a report by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
dated 31 July, the indiscriminate attacks on the districts
of Al-Tuhayat and Zabid, in Al-Hudaydah governorate,
resulted in more than 59 civilian casualties during the
first half of the month of July. Unfortunately, 50 per
cent of the incidents were caused by airstrikes, followed
by shelling.

The impact in the short and medium term of an
attack against or an interruption in Al-Hudaydah port
operations delivering humanitarian assistance and
imported goods could be devastating for the more than
20 million people who need such assistance in order to
survive. As the country is on the verge of famine, an
attack against or the closing of Al-Hudaydah port would
mean condemning those people to die of starvation. As
we heard in the briefing, Al-Hudaydah is the centre of
gravity of the war.

We express our deep concern at and condemn the
indiscriminate air strikes and bombings carried out in
the past month against civilian and medical facilities
throughout the country. Today, as other members of
the Council noted, there were attacks against a market
and a hospital in the city of Al-Hudaydah, which
killed many people and wounded a number of others.
We are particularly alarmed by the structural damage
caused to health-care, water and sanitation facilities
in At-Tuhadat, Zabid and Saada. That damage and the
possible interruption in water and sanitation services
increases the threat of a massive cholera outbreak, with
devastating humanitarian consequences.
We therefore reject and condemn any indiscriminate
attack against the civilian population, including the
launching ofmissiles, the laying ofanti-personnel mines
and air strikes against civilian infrastructure, including
public spaces, health-care facilities and residences.
We call on the parties and actors involved to comply
with the provisions of resolution 2286 (2016), on the
protection of civilians and medical personnel in armed
conflict, and refrain from using the civilian population,
humanitarian personnel and health-care facilities as
military targets. All parties must meet their obligations
under international humanitarian law and ensure the
safe and unimpeded access of humanitarian assistance.

It is vital that the parties abide by the presidential
statements of 15 June 2017 (S/PRST/20l7/7) and
15 March 2018 (S/PRST/2018/5) and fully implement
resolution 2216 (2015), without any preconditions,
in order to ensure the resumption of dialogue, the
immediate cessation of all hostilities and a good-faith
commitment to a negotiation process leading to a
political solution that meets the needs and aspirations of
the Yemeni people, in the framework of respect for their
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.

We reiterate to all parties the importance ofensuring
that ports and airports and the access routes thereto
remain fully operational, especially Al-Hudaydah and
Saleef ports and Sana'a airport, as they are lifelines for
the survival of the population.

Finally, my delegation, after hearing the report of
the Special Envoy, reiterates, as our other colleagues
have done, its fullest support for his efforts at mediation
and the promotion of dialogue, and, of course, our firm
support for the convening of the conference to be held
in Geneva in September.

