Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank Ambassador Sacha Llorentty
Soliz for his briefing on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004),
which contributes to ensuring transparency in the
Committee's work. We are also pleased that a Latin
American country is currently chairing the Committee.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and the increasing risk that they may fall into the hands
of non-State actors are issues of major concern. The
growing threat of terrorism and the possibility that
non-State actors could acquire, develop, use or traffic
in nuclear, chemical or biological weapons could have
unpredictable and devastating consequences - hence
the need to design early-warning systems for threats to
international peace and security.

The principal legally binding instrument currently
available to us to combat that threat is resolution 1540
(2004), adopted unanimously more than a decade ago.
The resolution's preventive role and the Committee's
efforts in the four areas of its work - implementation,
assistance, cooperation, transparency and
dissemination - are fundamental. My delegation can
testify to the 1540 Committee's intense efforts last
year during the comprehensive review process and the
subsequent negotiation and unanimous adoption of
resolution 2325 (2016), which was sponsored by a very
large number of States.

We were pleased that the Chair of the 1540
Committee reported today on the Committee's current
activities and proposed schedule for the next few
months, demonstrating its commitment to strengthening
and improving the resolution's implementation. In
that regard, we encourage it to continue promoting
opportunities for dialogue and activities involving the
participation of all Member States.

My delegation would also like to reiterate that it is
essential to improve assistance to States and cooperation
among them if we are to combat the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, as well as to increase
the coordination of national, subregional, regional
and international efforts, as appropriate, in order to
strengthen our response to this serious challenge.
It is also incumbent on all States to take appropriate
measures that accord with national and international
law, and to scrupulously respect their obligations under
international law and the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations.

Lastly, as we pointed out in December, Uruguay
is continuing its work on developing a national action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
and in that regard we are currently preparing for the
visit to Montevideo by the Committee's experts in the
next few months.

