Mr. Jessen-Petersen: I shall try to be brief so as
to wrap up the debate. I want to thank all the members
of the Council and the other speakers for their
expressions of very strong support for our
comprehensive integrated strategy, our proposed way
forward and our proposed timetable.

I was asked why I am more optimistic at this
stage than my predecessors. I am not optimistic that
there is a change, I am hopeful. Why? Many of you
have referred to the March events. We all agree that
they were deplorable, regrettable, and clearly must not
be allowed to happen again. March was a setback for
Kosovars, the international community, indeed for all
of us, but I believe that March was also a turning point
since we all understand, the political leaders on the
ground, the people on the ground understand we cannot
allow this to happen again. But it also brought home to
us clearly that we also cannot continue to manage
Kosovo as a holding operation. The very uncertainty is
unhelpful for stability not only in Kosovo, but in the
entire region. That is why we decided to put an
emphasis on priorities in the standards. What went
wrong in March were all the issues linked to the
interests of the minorities, of multi-ethnicity, so we
have decided to focus on all the relevant minority
issues. They have been mentioned here very often and
strongly supported: security, freedom of movement,
return of displaced persons, protection of minorities
and decentralization.

By focusing on those very priorities of direct
relevance to the minorities, we are drawing a link
between March and the review of mid-2005. We are
saying that only if there is demonstrable, visible, clear
improvement in all those areas, will we move towards
a positive assessment of progress on standards. We are
thus also saying that we can neither maintain Kosovo
as a holding operation, nor reward violence, because
we need to see action on everything that went wrong in
March. That's why I believe that there is today a clear
understanding on the part of all political leaders but
also the people of all ethnicities in Kosovo, of what
needs to be done now.

I am also hopeful because we have introduced
regular technical assessments on progress. Those
technical assessments, of which the first is in front of
you, will allow us to do two things: first to try and
push the process forward, and, secondly and equally
important, to manage expectations. In other words we
have to make sure that there is sufficient progress, but
also be ready to point out if it is insufficient. Our
technical assessments will be realistic and honest, as
was our first, which pointed out that progress has been
uneven. It is also very clear that it is only in the case of
a positive assessment of sufficient progress that we
will be able to embark on a process leading towards
status talks.

To make sure that we do not fail, accountability is
very important. It has been referred to and I welcome
the many statements here supporting my initiative now
to focus on accountability. We have drawn up a policy
on the ground in order to make sure that we conduct
this policy in a clear, consistent and credible way. But
we will hold non-performing authorities accountable,
regardless of ethnicity. That is another way to hold the
Government and others accountable for progress in
implementing standards.

Progress in decentralization is one of the
priorities. I welcome the strong statements of support
for decentralization. I believe decentralization is one of
the most important ways to bring in the minorities and
to address their legitimate concerns for security and
necessary institutional protection. That is why it is so
important that the Kosovo Serbs participate in the
working group on decentralization. It is, as much as
anything, their concerns and their interests we wish to
address, not just in words but in action.

Indeed, progress over the next six months
requires that we reach out to the Kosovo Serbs, that the
majorities reach out to the Kosovo Serbs. It also
requires their active engagement in the dialogue, as
well as a regular, constructive and active dialogue with
Belgrade at all levels and on all issues. I must say, I
welcome Mr. Covie's commitment to continue
cooperating with UNMIK. I am also strongly
committed to continuing that dialogue.

The Council today, and I am grateful for that, has
sent a clear message to the Provisional Institutions and
to all the people of Kosovo about what you expect and
what they have to do to move determinedly on
implementing standards and reach out to the
minorities. The Council has also sent a very
encouraging message of commitment and support. In
Kosovo, I think that this message will also be received
as a message of hope that we are on the right track, we
are moving forward and we have a clear goal ahead of
us. We need those strong statements of support. We
have listened very carefully, and I want to thank you,
Mr. President, and the Council for the very helpful and
encouraging words of support and the many relevant
observations. We have listened, we will act upon them,
and I look forward to being back here again, in about
three months.

