Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): Mr.
Minister, we are pleased to see you here in New York,
presiding over this important Security Council meeting
on the situation in Afghanistan, and I would like to
express my delegation's appreciation for the serious
and effective way in which your delegation has led our
Council's work this month.

On behalf of Guinea, I would also like to join
other delegations in conveying our condolences to the
Afghan people and Government following the
earthquake that took place in the northern part of the
country. We would like to thank the Secretary-General
for the presentation of the report and for the additional
information Ms. Louise Frechette, Deputy Secretary-
General has given us.

I would also like to commend Mr. Jean Arnault
and Mr. Nigel Fisher on their appointments as Deputy
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General,
dealing respectively with political affairs and with
humanitarian and development affairs. We wish them
every success in carrying out their mission.

My delegation notes with satisfaction the
successes of the Interim Authority in the
implementation of the political process resulting from
the Bonn Agreement. This shows the Afghan people's
determination to emerge from 23 years of a war that
has left deep scars. We encourage the Afghan
authorities to continue their actions in order to
conclude national reconciliation, democratization,
stabilization and restoration of the country. The back-
to-school campaign has registered significant progress,
with the return of children to schools in Kabul on 23
March. We followed this event with relief, especially
the return of young girls to school.

We would like to thank all of those who in
various forms have contributed to the establishment of
a basis for viable development in Afghanistan. We
expressly convey our gratitude to the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) for the return of calm
to Kabul and its environs, as well as to those countries
that are ensuring training and equipment for the army
and police in order to consolidate the indigenous
security sector.

The success of the political process so
methodically embarked upon depends on the
restoration of a climate of security throughout the
country, for the continuation of acts of banditry and
rivalry among factions trying to achieve power, pockets
of resistance of the Al Qaeda forces and the Taliban
and repeated violations of human rights are all factors
that destabilize and threaten peace.

In my delegation's view, the restoration of peace
and security should enable the Afghan authorities to
embark upon the reconstruction of the country, with the
assistance of the international community. In this
context, my delegation once again appeals to donors to
quickly make good on their pledges of contributions
made during the Tokyo International Conference. The
recovery of Afghanistan will depend largely on this, in
view of the immense and urgent needs felt in all areas.

If some difficulties have been overcome, as is
pointed out in the Secretary-General's report, we still
note that the humanitarian crisis, particularly the food
crisis, remains a concern. In such circumstances, we
still need time and additional financial resources to
cope with this. In this connection, humanitarian
agencies in the field should mobilize further in order to
bring increased assistance to refugees returning from
neighbouring countries, as well as to displaced persons.

My delegation believes that these activities
should go hand in hand with the continuation and
broadening of the mine clearance programme. This
would facilitate the implementation of development
projects that would have a speedy impact to the benefit
of the people.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
encourage the rapid and effective establishment of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
This would be the best way to consolidate our
achievements and to continue the implementation of
the Bonn Agreement in a harmonious and integrated
manner.

My delegation would like to thank Ambassador
Levitte for the draft resolution now being prepared and
would like here and now to express our great interest in
this initiative.

