Mr. Okamura (Japan) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by welcoming Ms. Federica Mogherini,
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, and thanking her for her
very enriching and comprehensive presentation.

(Spoke in English)

Japan and the European Union (EU) are
strategic partners based on common values, such as
democracy, freedom, human rights and the rule of
law. Our partnership is comprehensive in nature and
we cooperate in various fields, including peace and
security, the economy and global issues.

With regard to peace and security cooperation,
Japan and the EU recently conductedjoint programmes
in Africa to improve our security situations. I would like
to take as an example our cooperation in Mali where the
security situation is very unstable. While the European
Union provided training for Malian gendarmerie,
police and national guard under the framework of the
European Union Capacity Building Mission Sahel
Mali, Japan provided assistance for the refurbishment
of existing facilities, the provision of equipment and the
capacity-building of trainers in the security sector in
Mali in order to contribute to the enhancement of the
training capabilities provided by the EU.

Another example is Somalia, which also faces
big security challenges. Japan and the EU have been
jointly providing the salaries of the Somali security
force officers. Another example is the Niger, which is
important in preventing the flow of insecurity in the
Sahel region. Japan provided radio equipment and
vehicles with such equipment to integral command
centres of the Niger, to which the EU provides capacity-
building training. I hope that these cooperation
programmes between Japan and EU will contribute to
better security in the above-mentioned countries and
the entire region.

The Middle East is where both the United Nations
and the EU play in important role. Japan, along with
the EU, is determined to address the causes and
consequences of the ongoing instability in the Middle
East. We have been addressing not only the immediate
humanitarian needs for targeting the mass displacement
brought on by violent extremism, but have lead long-
term efforts for the return and reintegration of refugees
and the building of the foundations for post-conflict
recovery. In this light, on the occasion of the Summit of
the Group of Seven, held in Ise-Shima just two weeks
ago, our Prime Minister announced the provision of
an assistance package of approximately $6 billion for
stability and human resource development in the Middle
East and North Africa region from 2016 to 2018.

Furthermore, Japan reiterates its position that
a political approach is what can enable a durable
solution to the crises of the region and that a military
approach alone is not sufficient. We therefore reiterate
our support for United Nations-led efforts in pursuing
political solutions aimed at the achievement of peace,
security and unity in Libya, Syria and Yemen and the
settlement of other crises in the region.

Finally, Japan values the cooperation between
the EU and the United Nations under the framework
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
I strongly hope that the EU will continue to play an
important role in the field of peace and security.

