Mr. Castaneda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the delegation of Kuwait for
convening this open debate on the working methods
of the Security Council and for the concept note
(S/2018/66, annex) circulated to that end. We trust that
our deliberations will allow us to not only renew our
commitment to continue our advances in improving
the efficiency, transparency and interactivity of the
Security Council, but will also serve as a solid basis
for the effective implementation of presidential note
S/2017/507, to which our delegation attaches great value
and importance.

Guatemala acknowledges the progress made in
some practices and the reinforcement of other measures
included in note S/2017/507, thanks to the commendable
work carried out by the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
which was most recently chaired by the delegation of
Japan. Codifying best practices is an infinite task; at
the same time, it is an extremely useful exercise for the
work of this organ. Also taking into account our own
experience as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council for the period 2012-2013, we believe that there
is always room for improvement. In that regard, we
wish to highlight three issues that are currently relevant
to the working methods of the Security Council.

First, searching for information and understanding
regarding the activities of the Council remains a
fundamental and legitimate request. Although there
has been an increase in the Council's public meetings,
continuing the practice of open debates that promote
greater participation of non-members of the Council
and the holding of numerous Arria Formula meetings
in recent years has allowed the Council to obtain
accurate information that helps it to effectively fulfil
its responsibility of maintaining international peace
and security.

We regret the increasingly irregular wrap-up
sessions and the lack of regular contact with the
Peacebuilding Commission - the Council's advisory
body that plays an important role in preventing the
recurrence of conflicts - and the Chairs of the
Commission's country-specific configurations, as well
as with other United Nations bodies. Nevertheless,
we commend the fact that note S/2017/507 conveys
the importance of maintaining communication
with the Peacebuilding Commission, in its capacity
as an intergovernmental advisory body, and its
configurations. Evidently, that would make it possible
to obtain reliable, first-hand information and specific
advice on the Commission's country configurations.
In addition, such communication would also generate
efficiency in the approach to conflict prevention and in
maintaining appropriate guidance in implementing the
concept of sustainable peace.

Secondly, in the past, the Council has taken
decisions on appointing the Chairs of its subsidiary
bodies in a balanced, transparent and inclusive manner,
which allowed for change; that leads us to believe that
consultations are held around the process, especially
among the newly elected members of the Council.
My delegation hopes that such a practice and trend
will be reinforced in the future. It is also necessary to
ensure that the selection and appointment processes
for the various groups of experts are more transparent
and balanced, in order to create broad geographic and
gender representation, while also bearing in mind the
guidance given in presidential note S/2006/997 and the
provisions of note S/2017/507, which indicates that the
appointment of subsidiary body Chairs must be agreed
upon by 1 October of each year.

Thirdly, Guatemala values the information in
section VIII of the annex of note S/2017/507, as it
shows the importance of holding consultations among
the Security Council, the Secretariat and the troop-
and police-contributing countries, which constitutes
a considerable contribution to increasing the Security
Council's ability to take appropriate, effective and
timely decisions in fulfilling its responsibilities. Such
coordination is of great importance when peacekeeping
operations transition to special political missions and in
the eventual modification of their mandates.

In conclusion, our delegation appreciates the work
to update the Security Council's working methods - a
stance we have firmly held in past years regarding the
issue. We welcome the progress made over the past two
years and are pleased to note that the State of Kuwait
has taken over the chairmanship of the Informal
Working Group on this subject for 2018-2019. Past
practice indicates that elected members, which are
accountable to regional groups and all Member States,
tend to improve their working methods. The best way
to highlight the representative and democratic nature of
the Council is to strengthen its rules of accountability
and transparency. That, in addition to cooperating with
the permanent members, would lead to greater synergy
in the Council around our common goal of improving
its working methods, since Security Council decisions
impact on the membership of the Organization.

