I would like to express Jordan's appreciation to today's speakers and to welcome the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/946) and its recommendations on women and peace and security. Jordan also aligns itself with the statement submitted by Canada on the behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 27). As we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), Jordan reiterates its commitment to the full implementation of all the pillars of the women and peace and security agenda. The women and peace and security agenda is of utmost value to Jordan, and its goals have been introduced and implemented through our national action plan. We have been at the helm of vouching for gender equality, but there is certainly room for improvement, and that begins at the systemic level. As Jordan has outlined in the 2020-2025 Jordanian national action plan, it is imperative to build a culture of peace and gender equality with a particular focus on youth and preventing gender based violence. My country has made major strides towards integrating gender perspectives across all peacekeeping functions, and is committed to further developing best practices on gender mainstreaming in military and police operations, including in predeployment training, as well as supporting the role and tasks of gender advisors deployed in peacekeeping missions. Jordan has increased the proportion of women in senior leadership positions in the Civil Defence Directorate, from a baseline by 4.7 per cent, in 2018, to 5.5 per cent in 2019, and from 1 per cent to 1.6 per cent in the gendarmerie for the same period. My country has also appointed a full-time gender advisor in both the military and security institutions. In 2020, Jordan will also deploy 716 peacekeepers in various missions, 29 of whom are female peacekeepers. The Jordanian national action plan is also committed to providing humanitarian services that are responsive and considerate to gender needs, such as psychological, social, legal and health services, and facilitate safe access thereto, especially among the most vulnerable women, girls and refugees in Jordan. The Jordanian national action plan is also in line with Jordan's response plan to the Syrian crisis, and vocational training has been provided to women as front- line human service providers to equip women with the means to fend for themselves and further community resilience. The Plan has also provided gender awareness within the judicial system, and, according to the Family Protection Department, reporting on domestic violence increased by 41 per cent in 2019 as compared to 2018. Progress has also been made towards strengthening the capacities of community-based organizations and women-led civil society institutions to ensure an inclusive approach both in the preparation, implementation and monitoring of the National Action Plans. Civil society actors, especially women's organizations operating in conflict regions, have the extensive knowledge and expertise needed to build sustainable peace. They can play a central role in conflict prevention, including in early warning and in peace processes. In addition, manipulation of the status and rights of women by extremist movements makes it particularly important that violent extremism be dealt with from the gender perspective; women's organizations have invaluable expertise in such cases. The coronavirus disease has revealed the importance of the women and peace and security agenda in response to crisis. During the lockdown, Jordanian women in the security and health sectors were at the front lines of the response. In addition, local women-led civil society organizations played an important role in responding to local community needs during the lockdown. The Jordanian Government views relations with civil society organizations as core to the success of our efforts aimed at responding to the crisis. It is our goal to ensure that leadership and decision- making positions are among the work opportunities that women are eager to join. The inclusion of women in all political and regional processes is a valuable principle in the fight for peace and security.
