Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
thank President Johnson-Sirleaf for honouring the
Security Council with her presence here today, and for
her stirring presentation this morning. Allow me also to
welcome her back to the United Nations, which she
served with such distinction earlier. I also wish to
congratulate her on being Africa's first female leader.
As our colleague from Ghana has said, what she has
blazed is a path of inspiration for many, not just in
Liberia but across the continent. Unfortunately, that
adds to her many responsibilities. That much is clear,
because if we know one thing about conflict, it is that
women are the ones who suffer most and that the
empowerment of women - and what we set out in the
Council in resolution 1325 (2000) - is really very
crucial. We therefore wish her every success in all
possible directions.

Those who were on the Security Council's
mission to Liberia in June 2003 need no reminding of
the problems that Liberia faces. The President faces the
challenge of rebuilding her country after years of
conflict, an enormous task in every sense. But I think
that all of us want to send today a message of clear
support, not just of the Council but of the entire United
Nations, for the reconstruction of Liberia. In terms of
its security, the humanitarian and economic
development and especially the political processes, we
stand foursquare with Liberia. Let there be no doubt at
all in that regard. Liberia deserves it, Africa and West
Africa need it, and the United Nations must be able to
demonstrate success for what it has already invested
and what more it should invest in that country.

President Johnson-Sirleaf has set out the steps
that she has already taken. We can only congratulate
her on that and admire the rapidity with which she has
done many of those things, especially in relation, if I
may say so, to Government contracts and the whole
question of the forestry concessions. I think we heard
what she said about the Kimberly Process. That is very
much key to lifting the sanctions on diamonds. I think
it is incumbent upon us now to review the sanctions as
quickly as possible, taking into account the steps that
the President has taken.

But she has also shown, if I may say so,
particular courage in her approach to the Nigerian
President, the question of the return of Charles Taylor
to face justice and the challenges against him, a case of
the gravest of human rights abuses and war crimes. The
United Kingdom is strongly of the view that he should
be facing those charges, ending impunity, in the
Special Court in Sierra Leone at the earliest possible
opportunity. We applaud President Johnson-Sirleaf for
the stand she has taken there, and I think we and,
again, all parts of the United Nations have to give her
every support in what is not an easy issue. We
understand that, but I hope very much that the regional
leaders will rally to what she is trying to do.

As she has said, the situation in Liberia remains
fragile. The security situation is difficult. The urgent
need to handle ex-combatants and to put in place their
disarmament, demobilization and, above all,
reintegration is very difficult, as is the training of the
Liberian national police. All that has to be accelerated.
A number of our countries are trying to help bilaterally,
but the onus is clear.

But UNMIL cannot cut and run. President
Johnson-Sirleaf said that she needs UNMIL to
continue. I think our commitment must be clear - it
must stay for as long as it is necessary to do the job
and until the indigenous security forces, police and
military, can take on that responsibility. That is the
pledge that, I think, we have to make very clear to the
President today. The United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) has also, with the other forces in West
Africa, to take account of all the regional aspects so
that we are not actually transferring problems from one
country to another, but are working on the widest
possible basis. UNMIL, I am sure, will be able to stay
and will cope with the situation. That requires, too, the
quick-reaction force component, and the effort of our
Irish and Swedish colleagues there is particularly
important.

May I end simply by saying that we congratulate
President Johnson-Sirleaf and admire what she is
doing. We look forward to what she will do. We wish
her every success, and I think we have to underline the
commitment of the Council and the United Nations to
seeing it through with her to the end she wants for her
people.

