Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): I have the honour
today to speak also on behalf of Belgium, Costa Rica,
Denmark, Germany, Finland, Liechtenstein, Norway,
Sweden and Switzerland, which together form the
informal group of like-minded States. The Netherlands
would also like to align itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Sweden, who spoke
on behalf of the European Union.

We would like to present some additional
considerations regarding the 1267 Committee.

Let me start by very briefly recapitulating the
origins of the informal group of like-minded States,
because today is the first time that this group presents
itself here in the Security Council. The group dates
back to 2005, right after the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document called upon the Security Council

"to ensure that fair and clear procedures exist for
placing individuals and entities on sanctions
lists and for removing them, as well as for
granting humanitarian exemptions" (resolution 60/1, para. 109).

In March 2006, as part of a process instituted by
the Governments of Germany, Sweden and
Switzerland, the Watson Institute for International
Studies released a paper entitled "Strengthening
Targeted Sanctions through Fair and Clear
Procedures". The paper contained several
recommendations and options to enhance far and clear
procedures and was submitted to the Security Council
in the spring of 2006.

The next step was taken in May 2008, when
Denmark, Germany, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands,
Sweden and Switzerland suggested in a letter
subsequently circulated as an official document of the
09-60696

General Assembly and the Security Council (A/62/891- S/2008/428), the establishment of an expert panel
assisting the sanctions Committees in the consideration
of delisting requests and thus addressing concerns
regarding the right to review by an effective review
mechanism. In 2009, Belgium, Costa Rica, Finland and
Norway associated themselves with the informal like-
minded group.

In the like-minded States' view, resolution 1822
(2008) is an important step in the life of the 1267
Committee. The resolution added to the transparency
and enhanced fairness and clarity of the procedures of
the sanctions regime by introducing a number of
important innovations, in particular the review process
of all the names on the 1267 list by 30 June 2010 and
the posting of narrative summaries for all the names on
the Committee's website. However, resolution 1822
(2008) did not remedy one remaining fundamental due
process concern: the absence of an effective review
mechanism that fulfils the requirements of impartiality,
independence and the ability to provide an effective
remedy.

Developments since the adoption of resolution
1822 (2008) have reinforced the need to address this
one remaining fundamental due process concern. First,
recent judgments by national courts worldwide and
regional courts indicate that further steps are needed in
order to guarantee fundamental human rights while
preventing and combating terrorism. In particular, at
stake here are the right of the individuals concerned to
be informed of the sanctions taken against them, the
right to be heard and the right to challenge the decision
taken by the sanctions Committee before an
independent body.

Secondly, a number of recently published
authoritative studies and reports have also addressed
these issues. An example of that is the second report by
the Watson Institute. In our view, this question is a
challenge to the efficiency, legitimacy and credibility
of the entire United Nations sanctions regime, as was
also pointed out in the tenth report of the Monitoring
Team.

The group of like-minded countries therefore
considers it imperative, while maintaining targeted
sanctions as an effective instrument available to the
Security Council, to look at the same time at the
importance of improvements fundamental to due
process. To this end, we have drafted a working paper
7

entitled "Working on strengthening targeted sanctions -
ideas and options", which is annexed to my written
statement. This working paper contains a broad range of
suggestions, including that of a panel that might come
up with possible ways to further strengthen the existing
procedures by building on the listing, delisting, review
and exemption procedures as well as the focal point
process.

It should be emphasized that, although these
ideas and options are primarily discussed in the context
of the 1267 sanctions regime, they should, in our view,
also apply, as appropriate, to the other sanctions
regimes.

The purpose of this working paper is to share
views with Security Council members, and this in
order to constructively contribute to the work of the
Security Council for the purpose of further
strengthening the existing procedures. The informal
group of like-minded States would like to express their
appreciation to the members of the Security Council
for the open exchanges of views on this matter.

I would like to strongly encourage the Security
Council to continue to pursue an open and inclusive
dialogue with interested States, including through its
sanctions Committees, so as to achieve further
improvements in its listing and delisting process,
thereby securing the effectiveness of a sanctions
regime that may otherwise be at risk.

We wish to stress that any decision on listing and
delisting should be taken by the Security Council, thus
keeping decision-making within the realm of the
Council. We firmly believe that the required
improvements to procedures can be achieved without
in any way compromising the authority of the Council.

The new draft resolution on sanctions against
Al-Qaida, Osama bin Laden and/or the Taliban and
their associates will constitute an important step to that
end. We look forward to its adoption by the Security
Council in December.

In conclusion, the suggested changes in our
working paper will not weaken our sanctions regime.
On the contrary, they are needed to secure the use of
targeted sanctions as an effective tool in our fight
against terrorism.

