Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation would like,
at the outset, to express our appreciation to you, Mr.
President, for convening this open formal meeting on this
important subject, which contributes to the further
openness of the deliberations of the Council. My remarks
will be brief.

My delegation would also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Sergio Vieira de Mello for his
comprehensive and informative briefing on the subject of
humanitarian activities relevant to the Security Council in
the context of promoting peace and security. My
delegation welcomes this briefing and future briefings on
this important subject, which has a direct bearing on the
primary responsibility of the Council in the maintenance
of international peace and security as it deals more and
more with the issue of the humanitarian dimensions of
conflicts around the world, especially given the new and
more pernicious forms of conflict in our contemporary
world. This briefing and future briefings on this subject
serve the purpose of highlighting this issue, as well as
sensitizing Council members and the general membership
of our Organization to the need for full observance of and
compliance with existing international laws.

On the question of security of humanitarian
operations and personnel, my delegation shares the
concern of the Secretariat and other members of the
Council over the disturbing increase in the number and
scale of direct, calculated attacks or use of force against
United Nations personnel, as well as those of other
humanitarian organizations. Such actions are reprehensible
and must be condemned wherever and whenever they
occur, and justice must be meted out to those responsible,
without fear or favour.

 

Clearly, the authorities in States in conflict situations
must bear final responsibility for ensuring the safety and
security of these courageous and dedicated workers as they
go about performing their increasingly indispensable work
in the name of humanity. As recognition of their
outstanding work and selfless dedication in extremely
difficult and often dangerous situations, these humanitarian
personnel and organizations should be commended by the
United Nations and other international organizations and
Governments in appropriate ways - as we do, for instance,
in respect of our peacekeepers.

On the issue of compliance with international law, it
is imperative that the Member States of the United Nations
reaffirm and comply with the existing norms, principles and
provisions of international law to ensure the protection of
and assistance to refugees, displaced persons and vulnerable
populations in conflict situations, as well as their access to
international protection and humanitarian assistance.

As regards the mechanisms to ensure compliance with
international law, it is important that the prevailing culture
of impunity be brought to an end and violators of
humanitarian law be brought to justice. Clearly, States have
the primary responsibility in prosecuting perpetrators
through the national justice system or through relevant
international criminal tribunals, when appropriate.

My delegation will be prepared to support, for
instance, the idea of holding combating parties and their
leaders financially liable to their victims under international
law, in cases where civilians are made deliberate targets of
aggression. Appropriate legal machinery will, of course,
have to be established for this purpose.

There are many other aspects of the humanitarian
dimensions of conflict that are of concern to my delegation
and that I would have liked to address, were it not for the
interest of brevity and the fact that they have been
adequately and eloquently addressed by other Council
members, with which my delegation associates itself.

Under-Secretary-General Sergio Vieira de Mello made
a number of suggestions and proposals in his excellent
presentation. We commend them for the serious and early
consideration of the Council. In thanking Mr. Vieira de
Mello for his thought-provoking suggestions and proposals,
my delegation would like to assure him that the Malaysian
delegation will take an active and constructive attitude in
the Council's deliberations on these ideas, as we are
generally in agreement with many of them.

In conclusion, I would like to associate my
delegation with the remarks made by the representative of
China with respect to the need for the Council to also
address the humanitarian dimension of sanctions imposed
by it. In the view of my delegation, the issue of the
humanitarian impact of sanctions is relevant and, indeed,
pertinent in any discussion of the subject of the
humanitarian dimensions of conflict situations.

