This statement is issued on behalf of the Nordic countries - Finland, Iceland, Denmark, Sweden and Norway. We thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2020/366), and Estonia for convening this open debate. Strengthening compliance with international humanitarian law and ensuring accountability for violations must, regrettably, continue to be of great concern to the Council. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic calls for solidarity. The Nordic countries support the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire. Gender equality and women's rights are essential to getting through the pandemic together. The Nordic countries remain deeply troubled by the inadequate respect for international humanitarian law, international human rights law and humanitarian principles shown by parties to conflicts around the world. Not only do violations during armed conflict have immediate negative impacts on individuals and their communities, they also undermine longer-term prospects for reconciliation, reintegration, development and sustainable peace. We welcome the practical measures and steps to increase the protection of civilians in armed conflict presented in the Secretary-General's report. We also find the resolution adopted at the thirty-third International Conference of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in December a very useful tool for all States to ensure the implementation of international humanitarian law. We must continue to fight impunity for violations of international humanitarian law and human rights. First, it is necessary to support national efforts to strengthen States' own capacity to ensure justice in the wake of armed conflict. Secondly, the International Criminal Court (ICC) and other global and regional mechanisms are important tools in ensuring accountability. For instance, we have seen how the ICC has issued important convictions for crimes related to rape and sexual violence in armed conflict. We also welcome the recent decision to include in the ICC Statute the war crime of intentional use of starvation of civilians as a method of warfare, including in non-international armed conflicts. We call upon all States parties to ratify or accept the amendment as soon as possible. The obligation for States parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction and the Convention on Cluster Munitions to clear contaminated areas and destroy stockpiles are concrete and efficient contributions to the protection of civilians after conflict. We are deeply troubled about the effects that the use of explosive weapons with wide-area effects in populated areas have had on the civilian population in many conflicts. We therefore support the development of a political declaration aimed at enhancing the protection of civilians in urban warfare. We need to increase the United Nations capacity to prevent and resolve conflicts. We will continue to strengthen the United Nations mediation efforts and to support its broader political and peacebuilding efforts. United Nations peacekeeping and political missions must have the protection of civilians firmly embedded in their mandates and operationalized on the ground as a mission-wide responsibility, ranging from preventive measures to institutional reform and direct physical protection. This year, as we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we renew our commitment to the women and peace and security agenda. The COVID-19 pandemic exacerbates protection risks for people in conflict zones. Both the Secretary-General's report and the ICRC underline how respect for international humanitarian law is key to ensuring essential services and the legal protection necessary to tackle the crisis. The attacks on health care must end. We call for the implementation of resolution 2286 (2016). We support the efforts of the ICRC and the World Health Organization, in particular to identify best practices to protect health care and document attacks. It is paramount that humanitarian organizations get safe, timely and unhindered access to populations in need everywhere. We need to ensure that sanctions and other restrictive measures, including national COVID- related restrictions, do not hinder the delivery of life-saving assistance. We urge the Security Council to renew resolution 2504 (2020) to ensure that people in need have access to humanitarian assistance and protection throughout the whole of Syria. Sexual and gender-based violence in conflict is widespread and devastating. We support the mandate of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and call for the implementation of resolution 2467 (2019), with a focus on justice, accountability and a survivor-centred approach in the prevention and response to conflict-related sexual violence. At the conference on sexual and gender-based violence held in Oslo last year, an increase in both funding and action was pledged. We urge all States and organizations to follow through on their commitments. Armed conflicts have a disproportionate impact on persons with disabilities. We therefore emphasize the particular needs of persons with disabilities in humanitarian responses. Member States should take all the appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination and marginalization of persons based on disability in situations of armed conflict. Children are particularly vulnerable in conflicts, and we support the mandate of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict. The Secretary-General's report points to the Safe Schools Declaration as a concrete protection tool and calls on all States to endorse and implement it. As we mark the fifth anniversary of the Declaration, we are encouraged that 104 States have endorsed it, the most recent being the current President of the Security Council, Estonia, and Antigua and Barbuda. We are very pleased to see that endorsing States, international organizations and civil society, led by the Global Coalition to Protect Education from Attack, demonstrate commitment to its implementation. We thank the Secretary-General for highlighting the fate of the missing and their families and the need for increased efforts to restore family links. We welcome the resolution at the International Conference of the International Committee of the Red Cross on restoring family links and data protection. Armed conflicts also have significant negative consequences for the environment and the livelihoods of civilian populations in conflict-affected areas. The Nordic countries welcome the increased attention to the environmental impacts of armed conflict, as well as the initiatives to strengthen the legal protection of the environment in relation to armed conflicts. Dialogue with parties to conflict is key to enhancing the protection of civilians. The work done by influential States is important - leading by example is crucial. We would also like to highlight the work done during conflicts by the ICRC, Geneva Call and others to engage armed forces and non-State armed groups in changing their practices, understanding their obligations and acting accordingly. To conclude, we would like to give recognition to the practitioners, humanitarian organizations and civil society members that have taken the lead in some of the most successful practical initiatives and measures taken to increase compliance and protection of civilians in armed conflict.
