Mr. Gambari: I am very pleased and honoured to
address the members of the Security Council for the
second time in less than a month. Unlike my previous
briefing (see S/PV.6318), during which I had the
opportunity to introduce the Secretary-General's report
on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), this briefing is mainly on the
unfolding security situation in Darfur and how it
affects the life of ordinary citizens, as well as its
implications for the work of UNAMID and the
international community. I will also comment briefly
on UNAMID's engagement in the political process on
the ground in Darfur in collaboration with the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel under the
leadership of President Mbeki and Joint Chief
Mediator Bassole'.

On 20 May (see S/PV.6318), I informed Council
members that, during the first week of the month of
May, parts of Darfur witnessed a serious escalation of
hostilities between the Justice and Equality Movement
(JEM) of Khalil Ibrahim and Government forces. It
saddens me to inform the Council that the fighting
between the two belligerent parties is still continuing
and that the security situation in parts of Darfur
remains tense and volatile.

Following JEM's withdrawal from the J ebel Moon
area, JEM. forces are now spread in small pockets in
North and Southern Darfur, notably in the areas towards
Southern Kordofan, engaging Government forces in
offensive and defensive clashes. Of great concern is the
unprecedented increase in the number of fatalities,
resulting largely from the recent clashes: 447 deaths
were recorded for the month of May 2010 alone.

Movement of equipment and the build-up of
troops continue to be witnessed on both sides, and it is
expected, unfortunately, that the military confrontations
may indeed continue for some time unless urgent efforts
to ensure a ceasefire are made by the international
community.

As members of the Council are aware, UNAMID's
core mandate remains focused on the protection of
civilians. In implementing its strategy for the protection
of civilians, UNAMID is continuing to intensify its
military and police patrols through progressive increases
in its medium- and long-range patrols, as well as
strengthening joint civilian and military 24/7 patrolling
of selected camps for internally displaced persons.
New directives have also been recently issued to the
military and police components of UNAMID with
regard to robust patrolling and to a robust response to
attacks on our military and police personnel. This was
reflected in the response of Senegalese police during a
recent attack on them in Western Darfur.

As part of this new strategy, and with a view to
making this activity more effective and efficient,
UNAMID is planning, in collaboration with the
relevant Government of Sudan authorities, to assist in
opening more roads and rehabilitating others in order
to increase access and expand the scope of the
Mission's protection mandate. These actions are being
taken in coordination with other protection actors such
as the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and UNICEF. Meanwhile, UNAMID
continues to provide full assistance and logistical
support to the humanitarian community in order to
expand humanitarian space and access.

The recent upsurge in fighting has created very
serious hindrances to the effective implementation of
UNAMID's protection mandate, as well as to the
provision of humanitarian assistance to those in dire
need of such support and assistance. Since the renewed
fighting began, civilian populations have moved away
from places where the fighting and aerial bombardments
were taking place. From Jebel Moon, they moved
towards the Chadian border and to areas east of Jebel
Moon as well as to some urban centres, including
El Fasher. From the hot spots in Jebel Marra and South
Darfur, they went into hiding in more secure locations
around those areas.

As a result of the denial of access as well as
logistical constraints and security concerns, it has not
been possible to determine the exact numbers, but the
figures for persons displaced as a result of the recent
fighting range between 10,000 and 50,000 in the
region. Of greatest concern is the continuing denial of
access for the humanitarian community to large parts
of Jebel Marra since the onset of fighting there in
February 2010. An assessment mission to the lowlands
of eastern Jebel Marra took place at the beginning of
April, but follow-up has been impossible to date due to
the worsening of the security situation and lack of
access to areas controlled either by the Government of
Sudan or the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdel Wahid
faction. Overall, these new displacements are posing
great challenges in terms of delivery of humanitarian
assistance and provision of basic services to those in
need. However, in the last week, there has been no
fighting reported, and JEM. has in fact signalled its
willingness to release some prisoners.

Meanwhile, UNAMID continues to engage in
ongoing negotiations with the Government authorities
and the armed movements in order to ensure wider
access, including for humanitarian assessment missions,
to the deep field locations where increased violence and
displacements have been witnessed. On 10 June, just
last Thursday, I met with Vice-President Ali Osman
Taha, with whom I raised the very serious concerns of
both UNAMID and the humanitarian community on the
security agencies' restriction of access to areas of
recent clashes, which has prevented access to affected
populations and other displaced and wounded persons
in those locations.

I am pleased to note that, shortly after our
meeting, the Government of the Sudan gave instructions
to the relevant agencies to allow, immediately and

wherever possible, access for both UNAMID and the
humanitarian agencies. It was also agreed at my
follow-up meeting at the Foreign Ministry that a
meeting would be held shortly between UNAMID, the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the national intelligence
and security services to discuss these issues and carry
them further. I have accordingly instructed the Force
Commander to follow up on this immediately. I am
informed that the Government of Sudan has lifted the
ban on helicopter flights, as of yesterday, 13 June 2010.

It is essential for the international community,
and in particular for those States with leverage on the
belligerents, to impress on them the need for an
immediate cessation of hostilities accompanied by
unfettered and unhindered access for UNAMID, the
United Nations country team and humanitarian agencies
to all areas of recent clashes in order to facilitate
delivery of humanitarian assistance to the affected
populations and displaced persons. Only then will the
security situation facilitate and enhance the possibility
for a negotiated settlement through the Doha peace
process, on which my colleague, Mr. Djibril Bassole
will shortly be briefing the members of the Council. It
is essential to reiterate to all concerned that there can
be no military solution to the Darfur crisis and that a
speedy return by all to negotiations is the only viable
option.

Let me now briefly turn to the other issue on the
Council's agenda relating to the complementary political
process in Darfur. One of UNAMID's mandated tasks
is to support and assist the Joint Chief Mediator in his
work to bring the parties and the stakeholders together
to agree on a comprehensive peace agreement. In this
regard, coordination and collaboration between
UNAMID and the Joint Mediation at all levels is going
on smoothly. UNAMID has a key role to play with
respect to the inputs from civil society in the ongoing
talks, the design of ceasefire implementation
mechanisms and the actual implementation of those
agreements.

As part of this collaboration, UNAMID now has
the responsibility to organize and lead, along with the
African Union High-Level Implementation Panel, a
Darfur conference to facilitate public agreement on
issues related to the peace process. The conference
aims to facilitate the achievement of an inclusive and
comprehensive political settlement for Darfur by or
hopefully before the end of this year in advance of the
referendum for Southern Sudan. While coordination in

this regard is currently ongoing with both the
Implementation Panel and the Mediation, UNAMID is
finalizing plans to ensure that all the diverse groups
and populations of Darfur are given the opportunity to
make substantial inputs to the negotiations and to the
outcome of discussions on the future of their region
and the future of their country.

This is where we are at the moment in Darfur. I
hope that, after its deliberations on these important and
topical issues, the Council will provide support and
guidance for our work in our collective efforts to bring
peace and stability to the whole of Sudan - because
Darfur cannot be considered in isolation from the
whole of Sudan. In addition to support and action in
bringing current fighting in Darfur to an end and
encouraging all the parties, including encouraging
those who are still outside the Doha process to join it,
the support of the Council will also be needed to
encourage those Member States that are in a position to
do so to provide critical enablers to UNAMID to
enhance its effectiveness in implementing its core
mandate. This includes but is not limited to the
provision of medium utility helicopters, transport
companies and aerial reconnaissance units. I am sure
we can count on the continuing support of the Security
Council on these matters.

