Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere appreciation
for the tireless efforts of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Libya and Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
Mr. Ghassan Salame, to achieve peace and stability in
Libya and secure a prosperous future for our Libyan
brothers. In this regard, we cannot but highly value the
role of UNSMIL in those efforts.

I also thank the Deputy Permanent Representative
of Sweden, Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni, for her briefing on
the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. I also extend
my thanks for the valuable information provided by
Ms. Hajer Sharief on the vital role of civil society to
restabilize Libya.

In Kuwait's first meeting to discuss the situation
in Libya, I would like to reaffirm our full and firm
commitment to supporting all United Nations efforts to
put an end to the crisis in Libya, and most importantly
to achieve the desired objectives of the United Nations
action plan for Libya, including amending the Libyan
Political Agreement, organizing a national conference,
preparing for the elections and providing and delivering
humanitarian assistance to those in need, especially
at this crucial stage in the history of the sisterly State
of Libya.

At the same time, we appreciate the great efforts
made by the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, during his visit to Libya
last week to consolidate the democratic transition
process. Almost four months have passed since the
Secretary-General presented his action plan. Today, we
are witnessing encouraging signs and important steps
to reinvigorate the Libyan political process. We have
seen that in the detailed and extensive briefing made
by Mr. Salame, which reflects the extent of progress
made in the country since his last briefing before the
Council (S/PV.8104).

We shall spare no effort to ensure the unity of the
Council and to avoid anything that might undermine
the unity of the Libyan people and the prospects
of security and stability in Libya under the Libyan
Political Agreement. We believe that the Agreement
is the best way to achieve a Libyan-led comprehensive
political solution, to reach a political settlement for the
Libyan crisis and to put an end to the deterioration in
the country. In that context, we stress the need for all
Libyans to adhere to paragraph 5 of resolution 2259
(2015), which rejects all attempts to undermine the
Libyan-led political process facilitated by the United
Nations. In that regard, we welcome the important
role of the Presidency Council of the Government of
National Accord and the role of all Libyan leaders in
fostering national reconciliation.

We have been closely following the meetings
of the joint drafting committee of the House of
Representatives and the High State Council through
the rounds of meetings hosted by Tunisia, to which
we are thankful, in order to reform the Political
Agreement. In that regard, we welcome the progress
made in reconciling the positions of Libyan parties and
agreeing on a reasonable and applicable time frame. We
also stress the need for all Libyan parties to complete
the rounds of negotiations in respect of introducing
the necessary amendments to the Political Agreement,
especially since its implementation is considered vital
to the success of the political transition process.

We urge our Libyan brothers to step up their efforts
to revitalize the political process for the sake of ensuring
unified and stable governance with broad representation
under the Political Agreement. That would allow for
the convening of the national conference as a prelude
to adopting an electoral and constitutional framework
that would guarantee the holding this year of general
elections that are acceptable to all Libyans. Those
efforts must include the adoption of a new electoral
law to organize the polling process and to allow for the
High National Electoral Commission to complete the
electoral list and the registration campaign as a primary
factor for the success of the elections.

We emphasize the importance of creating the
right conditions for holding the elections, at both the
security and the technical levels, so as to ensure the
participation of the largest number of Libyans. We urge
the international community and regional organizations
to provide the necessary support for, and supervision of,
the elections in order to guarantee their integrity. We
call on the House of Representatives to finalize the new
Libyan constitution, which will not be achieved unless
national interests prevail over all other considerations.
Any further delay will only prolong the suffering of the
Libyan people.

The State of Kuwait has followed with great

concern the recent violence in a number of Libyan
cities, which claimed the lives of many innocent people.
In that regard, we condemn in the strongest terms the
assassination of the Mayor of Misrata, Mr. Mohamad
Eshtewi, in late December. We therefore call on the
Libyan authorities to bring the perpetrators of such
crimes to justice in order to prevent impunity. We also
emphasize the need for all parties to comply with and
respect the ceasefire agreed on in Paris on 25 July 2017,
and to fully comply with the provisions of international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law. We also condemn all terrorist acts in Libya and
urge that terrorism be combated in all its forms and
manifestations under a unified civilian Government.
Furthermore, we reiterate the importance of unifying
and strengthening the Libyan armed forces, under the
State military institution, to enable them to deal with
such dangers and to prevent them.

There is no doubt that the difficulties facing the
Libyan people are clearly increasing as a result of
the economic situation, which is deteriorating day
by day owing to the political instability. We agree
with Mr. Salame regarding the need for concerted
international efforts to help the Libyan people to take
full advantage of the enormous wealth in Libya. We
commend the decision to establish a national fund to
compensate the victims of the conflict and hope that
adequate solutions will be found with regard to Libyan
foreign investments to prevent any losses.

Regrettably, the problem of illegal migration
remains a real obstacle to achieving the security and
stability in Libya to which we all aspire, in particular
following the emergence of heinous practices of slavery
against a number ofmigrants late last year. We condemn
such practices in the strongest terms and emphasize the
need for the international community, in general, and
the countries of origin and destination, in particular,
to address the root causes of that problem, especially
since Libya is a transit country and therefore suffers as
much as the destination cuntries.

In conclusion, we reaffirm the need to broaden the
dialogue on the amendments to the Libyan Political
Agreement. We believe that all participating parties
should be sufficiently flexible in order to achieve the
desired outcome.

