Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): Atthe start of 2020, the Middle East is facing one of its worst crises - one that could lead to a major military confrontation of catastrophic consequences, in which international Powers struggle with each other and with regional Powers adjacent to our region to settle their affairs on Arab territory. The ongoing crisis is compounded by another crisis of international legitimacy, the Palestinian question, which is deteriorating every day, as underscored in the briefings made by Under- Secretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant Secretary- General Mueller yesterday morning (see S/PV.8706). Since the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), which affirms the illegality or illegitimacy of settlements, there has been a relentless increase in the number of Israeli settlements, right under the nose of the Security Council, at a dire rate not seen since the conclusion of the Oslo Accords in 1993. That was also confirmed by the announcement of the construction of 2,000 new settlement units from the beginning of this year and the transformation of large portions of Area C into nature reserves. There has also been an increase in the number of demolitions and further displacement in order to ensure geographical contiguity between settlementsand East Jerusalem. Therefore, hopes for a return to credible peace negotiations between the Palestinians and Israelis on the five final status issues have waned because the Palestinian side no longer views Israel as a credible partner in the peace process and has given up hope in the neutrality and integrity of those responsible for the peace process. The situation has been further exacerbated by the illegitimate Israeli decisions that have been recognized by the United States. Those decisions relentlessly seek to eliminate the prospects for the two-State solution, in contravention of all international parameters of legitimacy, to recognize Al-Quds as the capital of Israel and to eliminate the problem of refugees by attacking the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. They also seek to recognize Israel's sovereignty over illegitimate settlements and to impose that reality on the ground by using heavy military force, in contravention of international humanitarian law and _ international human rights law. Despite the obstacles to implementing the international consensus to establish an independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, along the 4 June 1967 borders, the Palestinian Authority believes in a just and comprehensive peace and continues to build the pillars of the Palestinian State by preparing for the holding of Palestinian presidential and legislative elections, including in East Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip. With the assistance of the League of Arab States, it has also stepped up its efforts to increase international recognition of the State of Palestine from States that have not yet recognized it officially, and to gain international recognition of the fact that the State of Palestine is eligible to fulfil the obligations of full-fledged membership in the United Nations, following its outstanding success chairing the Group of 77 and China with great efficiency in 2019, as acknowledged by all international and regional actors at the United Nations. The members of the League of Arab States demand that the Council take a decisive position in order to stop the flagrant violation of international legitimacy and ensure respect for resolution 2334 (2016). We call for an end to all settlement activities and related confiscations, displacement and demolitions, which are at variance with international law. We call on countries that have yet to recognize the State of Palestine to do so expeditiously in order to uphold international legitimacy, which is under threat. We call on the International Criminal Court (ICC) to open investigations into violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law. The Prosecutor of the ICC has concluded that the conditions have been met for launching an investigation in order to promote the principles of accountability and prosecution. Israel has always been the exception where those principles are concerned because of pressure from some international Powers. Despite the success we achieved in eliminating Da'esh and in restoring peace and stability in Iraq, the Middle East has seen a wave of grave escalation at the beginning of this year. More than ever before, our region needs de-escalation and calm, which will be brought about by ending foreign interference in the internal affairs of Arab States, in particular by non-Arab neighbouring countries. The League of Arab States has condemned and cautioned at the highest level against such intervention, which has negative repercussions on Arab regional security. The League of Arab States stresses the need to respect the Charter of the United Nations, uphold its well-established rules and implement them within the multilateral framework, in accordance with presidential statement S/PRST/2020/1, adopted at the high- level debate convened by Viet Nam on 9 January, on upholding the United Nations Charter (see S/PV.8699 et seq.). We thank Viet Nam for organizing that debate. Regrettably, such interference was not limited to foreign military action on Iraqi territory. It also included increasing foreign interference in Libyan affairs. The League of Arab States rejects foreign interference in Libya's affairs, including military intervention, and affirms the need to prevent the transfer of foreign fighters, mercenaries, terrorists and extremists to Libya. We reiterate our full support for the political process in Libya and we emphasize our ongoing readiness to work with the United Nations, the African Union and the European Union in order to peacefully resolve the crisis, including by implementing the agreement made recently at the Berlin conference. At the same time, the League of Arab States underlines its interest in Syria's affairs and its commitment to Syria's unity and territorial integrity, while seeking to overcome the deteriorating humanitarian situation in the country. We welcomeresolution 2504 (2020), on the renewal of the work of the cross-border aid mechanism for Syria. The League of Arab States reiterates its position rejecting the recent military aggression in northern Syria. We demand that the Security Council call for the withdrawal of the aggressor forces from Syrian territories and the removal of the illegal buffer zones that they have set up there. In the same vein, the League of Arab States supports international efforts to restore calm and stability in Yemen. We are working with stakeholders to strengthen the commitment to a political solution and to implement the Stockholm and Riyadh agreements. We support the leading role of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and its efforts to achieve the desired political settlement. The League of Arab States congratulates its brothers in Algeria and the Sudan on the peaceful transformations in response to the people's will. It reiterates its full solidarity with Lebanon and will continue to provide political and economic support to its Government and all its constitutional institutions. In conclusion, the League of Arab States calls on the United Nations, including the Security Council and the Secretary-General, to make tireless efforts to ease tensions in the Middle East. They should encourage all parties to exercise the utmost restraint, stop foreign interference in the affairs of Arab States, including by neighbouring countries in the region, and instead promote political action, not military confrontation, in the context of good-neighbourliness, peaceful coexistence, mutual respect and fruitful and constructive cooperation with a view to achieving the common goals.
