Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): Regrettably, the Security
Council has convened for the second time within the
space of one month to consider the continued
deterioration of the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, as a
result of escalating violence and military attacks, as
well as the blatant disregard of international law by
Israel and its continued perpetration of extrajudicial
executions, the latest being the brutal murder of Hamas
leader, Mr. Abdel Aziz Al-Rantisi last Saturday. This
latest Israeli action will only serve to inflame emotions
on the ground, further worsen the situation and clearly
jeopardize the prospects for peace in the Middle East.

As expected, Palestinians are vowing to take
revenge. Israel continues with its arrogant attitude to
carry out further attacks. When will the cycle end?
Malaysia unequivocally condemns extrajudicial
executions, which are clearly illegal and
counterproductive to the peace efforts. We condemn
the assassination of Mr. Al-Rantisi, as we did the
assassination of Sheikh Ahmad Yassin.

Malaysia reiterates its grave concern over current
developments and the continuing deteriorating situation
in the occupied Palestinian territories. The Prime
Minister of Malaysia, the Honourable Dato' Seri
Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, has conveyed his concern in
letters which he has written to key world leaders,
expressing alarm over the worsening situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, reaffirming his support
for the efforts of the Quartet, including the United
Nations, to achieve the objective of bringing into being
a sovereign and independent Palestinian State and
stating his firm belief that confidence-building plays a
crucial part in the implementation of the road map. He
has urged the leaders, as well as the Secretary-General,
to ensure that Israel abides by the Middle East peace
plan.

Malaysia believes that Israel's continued resort to
acts of State terrorism is a clear violation of
international law. Israel must be held responsible and
accountable for the cycle of violence that has resulted
in widespread suffering and loss of life. The
international community must condemn such horrific
acts in the strongest terms possible. It must not allow
Israel to repeatedly act with impunity, in complete
disregard of international law and public opinion.

Malaysia calls on the Security Council at this
critical juncture to reiterate its demand for the
complete cessation of all acts of violence, including all
acts of terrorism, military attacks, provocation,
incitement and destruction. Furthermore, the Council
should reiterate its full endorsement of the road map
and the vision of two States living side by side in peace
and security and call on both parties to adhere to the
provisions of the road map and to implement them.

