Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): As the focus
of this meeting is the status of progress in security-
sector reform in Afghanistan, I shall confine my
comments to an update on recent developments since
the last briefing to the Council on this item, followed
by several observations on security-sector reform from
the perspective of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I shall limit my
comments on security-sector reform to the
interrelationships among the various activities, leaving
the discussion of each specific sector to the lead
nations concerned.

But, before beginning my briefing, I wish to
inform the Council of some sad news. We have learned
from press reports that an aircraft accident near
Karachi has caused the death of the Afghan Minister
for Mines and Industry, His Excellency Mr. Juma
Mohammed Mohammedi, as well as that of a high
official of the Pakistani Ministry for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Mohammad Farhad Ahmed, and of other Afghan
and Pakistani colleagues. I should like to express our
sincere condolences to the Governments of
Afghanistan and Pakistan with regard to that cruel loss.

I now return to the subject of this briefing.

With respect to the implementation of the
political transition outlined by the Bonn Agreement,
there has been progress in the especially important
process of drafting a new constitution. President
Karzai's office is currently preparing a decree that will
establish the Constitutional Commission and detail the
main elements of the constitutional process. The decree
will provide the necessary clarity on that essential
process, while signalling the Government's strong
support for the process. The nine members of the
currently functioning Constitutional Drafting
Commission will be made part of the larger
Constitutional Commission, which should be
established early next month. President Karzai's office
has compiled a list of almost 80 candidates for possible
selection to the Commission.

An important part of the constitutional process
will be the series of public consultations to be held
between April and June that will solicit the views of
Afghans on the political future of their country. Those
consultations will take place in every province of
Afghanistan, as well as among the diaspora in Iran and
Pakistan, and possibly in other countries where there is
a significant Afghan diaspora. The results of those
consultations will be important elements for
consideration in the work of the Constitutional
Commission.

Technical assistance from UNAMA, the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), bilateral
donors and academic sources has been made available
to the Drafting Commission and its secretariat. Of
course, those resources will also be available to the full
Commission. While support from international experts
will certainly be a useful resource in the Commission's
work, we continue to believe that it is critical for the
quality of the constitutional process that it remain
Afghan-led, and for Afghans to decide among
themselves, using the tools of dialogue and
compromise, and to take the decisions on the most
politically sensitive issues.

I am also pleased to inform the Council that there
has been progress in the preparations for the elections
to be held in June 2004. On 15 February 2003,
President Karzai sent the Secretary-General a letter
formally requesting UNAMA's assistance in organizing
the electoral process and coordinating international
electoral assistance. A few days ago, the head of
UNAMA's electoral section arrived in Kabul and began
to work on preparations for the elections. A core team
of electoral experts, the first members of which have
already arrived, is in the process of being deployed to
the United Nations Mission. On the Afghan side,
President Karzai has identified a number of candidates
for membership in the electoral commission, which we
expect will be formed in March. Once the commission
is established, it will work with the UNAMA team to
create an Afghan electoral authority to manage the
electoral process. An electoral unit has also been set up
in the Ministry of the Interior.

(spoke in English)
The Government is now engaged in a rigorous
process of finalizing its budget for the next Afghan
financial year, which begins on 21 March. Ministries
are preparing proposals in consultation with the newly
formed sector consultative groups, which bring
together Government actors and the assistance
community in a coordinated framework. That process
is an important test of the Government's inter-
ministerial and Cabinet policy-making systems. The
proposals will be subjected to an intensive Cabinet
review and will be finalized so that they can be
presented to the Afghanistan Development Forum,
which will begin on 13 March in Kabul. In order to
sustain the still-fragile Afghan peace process, I would
urge all donors to participate in the Development
Forum with the same generous spirit that was
demonstrated at the meeting of the Afghanistan
Support Group in Oslo last December.

Afghans are optimistic that the international
community will fulfil the commitments it has already
made for 2003. The Government looks forward to the
provision of between $1.7 billion and $2 billion in aid
this year. That optimism is, however, tempered by
concerns about the slow pace of allocations. There is
also a fear that, as donors monitor the current
international situation, they may withhold funds for
possible use elsewhere. As a result, these agencies are
concerned that they might not be able to meet their
existing assistance commitments to Afghanistan.

The human rights situation in Afghanistan
continues to be undermined by the poor overall
security environment. In the absence of effective State
institutions, many Afghans are subjected to arbitrary
rule by local commanders and have no recourse to
legitimate judicial institutions. UNAMA human rights
officers continue to hear of cases of extrajudicial
executions, extortion and forced displacement.

UNAMA is maintaining its efforts to build the
capacity of the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission and to engage with local authorities to
prevent abuses. Satellite offices of the Commission are
in the process of being opened in Bamyan, Herat and
Mazar-i-Sharif. With assistance from the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(UNHCR), the Afghan Human Rights Commission has
begun to prioritize the more than 600 complaints that
have been lodged with it. That exercise will help the
Commission to decide the most pressing cases to
investigate, while ensuring that its resources are used
as effectively as possible and that positive results are
demonstrated.

Turning to the main theme of today's meeting, I
would like to preface my comments on security-sector
reform by describing some recent and worrying
security trends in Afghanistan. Those trends highlight
the imperative to both quicken the pace of security-
sector reform and to consider immediate measures to
improve security. Hopefully, those issues too will
factor into our discussion today.

While the Bonn process has so far successfully
averted full-scale fighting between major rival factions,
Afghans continue to suffer on a human level from the
insecurity created by the conjunction of weak national
security institutions and strong local commanders.
Council members will recall that when Mr. Brahimi
briefed the Council, less than a month ago, an
improvised mine had exploded on a roadside near
Kandahar that same day, killing 12 bus passengers.
Since then, several other incidents have occurred in
Kandahar. On 12 February, a grenade exploded outside
the office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR). That was the second grenade
attack on United Nations premises in Kandahar in the
last seven months. Fortunately, there were no injuries
in either case. On 29 January, an explosive device
detonated in the compound of the non-governmental
organization Action Against Hunger, fortunately
causing no injuries. A week ago, in the north-eastern
city of Kunduz, a grenade was thrown over the wall of
the compound belonging to the International
Organization for Migration. The blast blew out
windows in the building, but luckily there were no
casualties. An hour later, a second explosion occurred
in the centre of Kunduz.

In eastern Afghanistan, the Government's poppy-
eradication campaign continues to face strong
opposition from local tribes who do not feel they have
been offered sufficient compensation. United Nations
activities have been suspended in four districts in
Nargarhar as a result of that tension.

UNAMA has also recently received credible
threats of the kidnapping of international staff in
Kabul, Jalalabad and Kunar provinces. Enhanced
security measures were implemented as a result.
However, we remain worried about increasing threats
and actions against international assistance agencies.
Purely as a contingency, UNAMA has discussed with
United Nations agencies and some foreign missions the
response that should be made if the security situation
deteriorates to the point that international operations
become unsafe in any given area. In the light of the
political importance of the international presence to the
peace process, there is a common understanding that
the overall approach will be to analyse security
incidents on a case-by-case basis and conduct any
potential withdrawal primarily to other locations in
Afghanistan, while continuing operations in all other
areas as long as this is feasible and safe. Caution and
prudence will guide our actions, but never panic. I
must stress that this is simply contingency planning
and there is at present no sense among key actors in
Afghanistan that there is any area that has, or is likely
to, reach a state where withdrawal would be required.

Despite a general sense of concern about security
conditions across the country, I am pleased to note the
smooth handover of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) command from Turkey to
Germany and the Netherlands on 10 February. I would
like to thank Turkey for the leadership provided over
the past seven months by General Hilmi Akin Zorlu
and his staff, as well as for the professionalism and
dedication that has been, and continues to be,
demonstrated by the officers and soldiers of the 22
Member States that contribute to ISAF. I also thank,
Mr. President, your Government and that of the
Netherlands for assuming joint command under
General Norbert van Heyst.

The challenges of reforming the Afghan security
sector are significant: the national army needs to be
built, factional armies need to be dissolved, and
assistance needs to be provided to help ex-combatants
reintegrate into civilian life. A national police force
needs to be created, the rule of law re-established, the
justice sector rehabilitated, and the cultivation of and
trafficking in illicit drugs countered. Finally, the
bloated and intrusive internal intelligence structures
must be reformed so that they no longer inspire fear
among the people that they are expected to protect.

Security sector reform is made all the more
urgent by the complex political activities planned for
the next 16 months. The security sector must be able to
provide minimal conditions of stability to ensure that
the Constitutional Loya Jirga and the national elections
are meaningful and credible. Confirming this
assessment, President Karzai has said that the reform
of the security sector is his priority in the coming
months.

Success will depend on a comprehensive,
integrated approach that addresses the linkages
between the security subsectors and unites the efforts
of international actors and Afghan leaders at every
level. For example, the creation of the new army and
police is linked to the successful reintegration into
civilian life of the members of existing security forces.
That will require political consensus at the local and
national levels and international commitment to deliver
the required assistance.

Success will also depend on creating fully
representative institutions of central government. The
upper echelons of the Ministries of Defence and the
Interior must reflect the regional and political diversity
of the country, and they must be seen to work together
in the interest of national unity. Only this will build the
necessary trust in the national character of the new
security forces. The decision on 20 February to effect
changes in 17 high-level positions in the Ministry of
Defence is therefore a welcome development and a
strong signal of the Government's determination to
create a truly national army.

The creation of the army, the phasing out of
factional militias and the effective demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration (DDR) of former
combatants constitute the linchpin of security sector
reform. If those processes succeed, implementing the
others, and the Bonn Agreement in general, will be
much easier. While we hope that strong signals and
actions at the national government level will help build
confidence among various factions that must be
disarmed, demobilized and reintegrated, it is also clear
that the political support needed to complete the DDR
process will probably have to be built, carefully and
gradually, from region to region across the country. In
terms of international support, a conference on DDR
was just held in Tokyo on 22 February, and I am sure
that we will hear more about that shortly.

As local militias are drawn down, a reformed
national police will have to be created to provide the
foundation of law and order across the country. The
newly appointed Interior Minister, Ali Ahmad Jalali,
has displayed a promising readiness to reform the
police. Efforts are also being intensified to support the
border police, which has just been moved from the
Ministry of Defence to the Ministry of the Interior.
Norway and other Nordic countries have expressed an
interest in pushing that process forward. President
Karzai and the Minister are also working on a draft
decree to set the course of reform for the police and
border guard, much as the 1 December decree did for
the army.

The counter-narcotics effort has been spurred
recently by the Government's active poppy eradication
campaign in the five core poppy-producing provinces.
As mentioned, this law enforcement effort has created
some tensions and will need to be accompanied by
convincing alternative livelihoods programmes. We
estimate that $20 to $40 million in various alternative
livelihoods, infrastructure and employment generation
projects should be available in the near to medium
term. The magnitude of this problem is extremely well
documented in a study on the opium economy released
last month by the United Nations International Drug
Control Programme. The study estimates that gross
income from opium production at the farm level may
have been as high as $1.2 billion in 2002. This is more
than half of what the Government expects in total
international aid.

All the activities under the rubric of security
sector reform are closely linked to each other and to
other critical political and economic developments
under the Bonn process. Success therefore requires a
great deal of cooperation, and I am pleased at the way
the lead nations for each subsector and UNAMA have
coordinated their efforts in Kabul. But the resources
needed to carry out security sector reform are greater
than those that the designated lead nations can provide
on their own. For that reason, I would like to re-
emphasize that those countries are working to attract
and coordinate the assistance of others in their
respective sectors. I urge Member States to provide the
necessary financial and material support. The United
Nations has established four trust funds for
contributions to the police, the justice sector, DDR and
the payment of salaries and the provision of non-lethal
equipment to the Afghan national army.

While the international community can and must
provide support, in the end the success of the reform
project depends on the Afghans themselves. In the
months ahead, the political underpinnings of security
sector reform must be strengthened by the deeds and
words of the Transitional Administration. The police,
army and intelligence service are still viewed by too
many Afghans as politically biased. The chances of
successfully reforming the security sector will be much
enhanced if the statements of Afghan authorities on
national reconciliation are demonstrably upheld.

I would like to thank you, Sir, once again for
focusing our attention on the important issue of
security in all its dimensions. I look forward to a
fruitful discussion on this topic, which, in the end,
underpins the entire Bonn process.
