Ms. Kang (Republic of Korea): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to speak to the
Council. I also thank Secretary Tillerson for calling for
the meeting and Under-Secretary-General Namamitsu
for her briefing.

It is a great honour for me to return to the Council,
although under very different circumstances and with
very different responsibilities. I shall be brief, as it is
late in the day.

Let me start by reaffirming my Government's
strong commitment to strengthening the global
non-proliferation regime. As outgoing Chair of both the
Nuclear Suppliers Group and the Missile Technology
Control Regime, we have led the strengthening of the
multilateral export control regime. We have also been
a strong advocate of countering the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) to non-State
actors by supporting efforts to build an enduring
nuclear security architecture and implementing
relevant Security Council resolutions. Not least, we
continue to work with the international community to
make meaningful progress in the run-up to the 2020
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

Although I could elaborate futher on my Government's
efforts in field of the non-proliferation of WMDs, I
am compelled on this occasion to focus on the single
topic that poses the most urgent and grave threat to the
international non-proliferation regime - that is, North
Korea's nuclear and missiles threat.

Last year, North Korea conducted two nuclear tests
and launched 24 ballistic missiles. This year, during a
period of less than nine months, North Korea conducted
another nuclear test and launched 19 ballistic missiles.
On average, since 2016 North Korea has launched two
ballistic missiles every month. The most recent, sixth
nuclear test, on 3 September, was especially alarming,
with its explosive yield far exceeding the sum of all five
previous tests and North Korea claiming it as a hydrogen
bomb to be mounted on an intercontinental ballistic
missile. The Security Council quickly responded
with the strongest ever resolution - resolution 2375
(2017) - but the ink was barely dry on that new
resolution when North Korea launched yet another

ballistic missile launch, which flew a distance of 3,700
kilometres over Japan into the Pacific.

The international community has reacted firmly
and rapidly to the latest provocations by North
Korea. In addition to the quick adoption of the new
Security Council resolution, numerous countries and
international organizations have strongly condemned
North Korea and taken unilateral measures. The
Republic of Korea appreciates and welcomes the
firm actions taken by the international community.
North Korea must be stopped. North Korea must be
made to understand that continued provocations will
only deepen its diplomatic isolation and intensify the
economic pressure that will lead the regime to ruin.
Denuclearization is the only path to a secure and stable
future for the North.

Since the first nuclear test by North Korea in
2006, nine Security Council resolutions have been
adopted. With repeated provocations and resolutions,
it is perhaps easy to lose the sense of urgency around
the issue. Perhaps it has become routine. But we must
not let that happen. Indeed, the urgency of the issue
is heightened by the day and by the week. We may be
rapidly approaching a point of no return. The North
Korean leader is quoted as saying that North Korea
is indeed in the final stages of nuclear weaponization
and that it will clearly demonstrate to the world that
this goal will be achieved despite endless sanctions.
Further troubling is the potential for the proliferation
of North Korea's nuclear weapons and missiles, which
would deal a crippling blow to the international
non-proliferation regimes.

Thus, with a renewed sense of urgency, we must
ensure now more than ever the full implementation
of the Security Council's resolutions, which include
sanctions on North Korean coal, iron, fisheries,
textiles and overseas labourers, as well as a steep cut in
refined petroleum products going into the North. Fully
implemented, these sanctions will have a significant
impact and force a change of course on the North
Korean regime.

Let me reiterate, however, that the sanctions are not
an end in themselves or to bring North Korea down, but
to bring it to the negotiating table for denuclearization.
In that regard, we deeply appreciate the active efforts of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) and its Chair.

Even now, North Korea is continuing its reckless
drive towards nuclear weaponization, testing the resolve
of the international community. We can only go as fast
and as effectively as the slowest link among us. North
Korea will try to take advantage of the weakest link
among us to defeat the Council's resolve and decisions.
Therefore, the Council members and the international
community must stand together in implementing the
sanctions and in sending the unequivocal message to
North Korea that it will pay painfully and dearly for its
provocations, and its nuclear weapons programme will
never be accepted.

Let me emphasize that our common goal is to achieve
the complete, verifiable, and irreversible dismantlement
of North Korean nuclear programme in a peaceful
manner. The Republic of Korea will work assiduously
and tirelessly to achieve the denuclearization of North
Korea and the establishment of permanent peace on
the Korean peninsula. We will work closely with all to
that end.

I would like to conclude with a message to North
Korea, which I am sure is shared by the Council as a
whole: "Come to the right side of history."

The meeting rose at 7pm.
