Mr. Vilovie (Serbia): At the outset, allow me to
express the satisfaction of the Republic of Serbia with
all the efforts of the President and the Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), Judge Patrick Robinson and Mr. Serge
Brammertz, related to the cooperation of Serbia with
the Tribunal, and with their thoroughly professional
approach in submitting their reports to the Security
Council.

At the same time, allow me to take this
opportunity to pay my respects to the President and the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, Judge Dennis Byron and Mr. Hassan B. Jallow.

As on previous occasions, the cooperation
between Serbia and ICTY described in the reports of
the President and the Prosecutor (see S/2010/588) is in
line with the assessment by Serbia of the level of
cooperation achieved so far. There are no outstanding
requests for assistance in regard to the provision of
documents to the Tribunal, while the requests
pertaining to witnesses and access to the State archives
are being processed on time and without difficulties.

In other words, during the reporting period,
Serbia fully respected the recommendations of the
Prosecutor to continue responding effectively and in a
timely manner to the his Office's requests for
assistance. The level of cooperation achieved in this
area will undoubtedly continue in the coming period.

As far as cooperation relating to the arrest of the
two remaining fugitives is concerned, it is evident that
political will to resolve this problem exists in Serbia
and has been expressed by the country's highest-
ranking officials. We consider it very important that the
Prosecutor states in his report that the prosecution
maintained regular and close contact with the Serbian
agencies in charge of locating and arresting the
fugitives, and that this interaction had intensified in
recent months. This kind of interaction will certainly
continue in the future. It is also significant that the
Prosecutor has recognized Serbia's efforts to
implement the recommendations presented in his
previous report (see S/2010/270).

These facts, along with the unambiguous
determination of Serbia to bring the two remaining
fugitives to justice, as was the case with the 44
individuals it transferred to the Tribunal, give us reason
to expect that the results awaited by both the Tribunal
and Serbia will be achieved.

In addition, Serbia continues to give its full
support to the implementation of the Tribunal's
completion strategy, including issues related to the
archives, as well as the establishment of the residual
mechanism, which should have the power to prosecute
the persons indicted by ICTY who are still at large. In
that connection, Serbia reiterates its position submitted
to the Security Council in October 2008 and March
2009, and it is ready to continue to actively participate
in all future discussions on this matter.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
goals of Serbia and of the Tribunal are identical. They
include, on the one hand, maintenance of the level of
cooperation reached in the area of the provision of
documents and access to witnesses and the archives,
and, on the other hand, the location, arrest and transfer
of the two remaining fugitives to the Tribunal. The
fulfilment of those goals will be of exceptional
importance for the realization of international justice
and the successful completion of the Tribunal's
mandate, while certainly contributing to the further
normalization of the situation and the improvement of
relations between the States established on the territory
of the former Yugoslavia.

