Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil): I thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this open debate.
I also thank Special Coordinator Robert Serry for his
briefing.

These are particularly difficult and challenging
times. While the international community still faces
unfulfilled mandates in the Middle East, new demands
unfold. Renewed and strengthened commitment to
diplomacy is required of the Council.

We follow with distress and extreme concern the
escalation of the crisis in Syria. We are deeply worried
over the difficulties the Council has encountered in
sending a unified message in response to the latest
developments. An urgent ceasefire is imperative
and requires determined support for Joint Special
Envoy Kofi Annan, his six-point plan and the
Final Communique of the Action Group for Syria
(S/20l2/522, annex). The Council must work harder
to discharge its responsibilities in that regard. Brazil
supports the approach taken by the Action Group and
strongly encourages the Security Council to endorse the
Communique.

Mr. Annan's efforts towards a negotiated solution
and a Syrian-led political transition continue to be
supported by the international community. They are
the best, if not the only chance to avoid further descent
into a spiral of destruction that will only bring greater
suffering to the Syrian population, generate increasing
flows of refugees and risk affecting the whole region,
with unpredictable consequences for the Middle East
and international peace and security.

Unfortunately, as the International Committee
of the Red Cross has indicated, we are facing dire
symptoms and consequences of what can now be
characterized as a non-international armed conflict.
All of the parties must fulfil their obligations to halt the
violence, but the primary responsibility in that regard
lies with the Government of Syria. We also repudiate
terrorist attacks against the civilian infrastructure.

The extension of the United Nations monitoring
mission for 30 days is welcome. We must ensure that it
contributes to changing the dynamic on the ground in
a way that brings the parties urgently to the negotiating
table. Eleven Brazilian observers have served with the
United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria for the
past three months. Their work has unfortunately been
limited by a lack of minimum security conditions. We
reiterate that all parties must ensure the observers'
safety and freedom of movement and cooperate with
the Mission.

With great concern, we took note of recent
declarations concerning chemical weapons that directly
contradicted long-established international norms and
basic principles enshrined not only in the Chemical
Weapons Convention, but also in the 1925 Geneva
Protocol, to which Syria has been party since 1968.

We have yet to see meaningful developments in
the long-stalled peace process between Israel and
Palestine. We regret that recent attempts to revamp
direct negotiations did not bear fruit. The paralysis of
the peace process has pushed the question of Israeli
settlements even further to the fore. Settlements are
illegal under international law, contrary to peace,
detrimental to Israel's own security concerns and
a threat to the two-State solution. We are troubled
by attempts to affirm the legality of settlements and
outposts. They support a logic that runs counter to the
two-State solution and the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people.

In the face of those actions, recognition of the
Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967 borders and
its admission as a Member of the Organization are
fully warranted, as President Dilma Rousseff recalled
before the General Assembly in September 2011 (see A/66/PV.11).

We should be supportive of an enhanced role for
the Council in the Middle East peace process. The
Council should exercise its responsibilities and renew
efforts to deal with the Israeli-Palestinian question,
which is undeniably one of the main challenges on the
international peace and security agenda today. It should
be regularly reported to by the Quartet and have the
necessary elements to evaluate progress or the lack
thereof. In the absence of progress, the Council should
fulfil its role by providing guidance.

We believe that the support of other actors could
contribute to the urgent resumption of negotiations.
A renewed, collective effort towards changing the
dynamics and overcoming political inertia should be
seriously considered. Peace will not be served by an
inoperative Quartet and a silent Security Council.

We commend the Egyptian people for having
realized free and fair elections that will further
consolidate Egypt's peaceful path towards democracy.
Brazil also welcomes the holding of legislative
elections in Libya with broad popular participation, and
congratulates the people and Government of Libya on
that important step forward in its democratic transition
process. We likewise acknowledge the positive
developments in Tunisia, where vibrant public debates
about the country's future have been taking place in
a democratic environment. Brazil also commends the
Government of Lebanon for reconvening its national
dialogue in such challenging times. The importance of
stability and progress in Lebanon today can hardly be
overstressed.

