Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): I should
like first of all to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing a public meeting of the Security Council to
consider the overall situation in West Africa. In this
regard, we are grateful to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and Ms. Carolyn McAskie, Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for their very useful statements. They
both described a situation that has already been set out
in a straightforward and lucid manner in the excellent
report provided by Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

On the one hand, the report shows very clearly
that the problems facing West Africa are not only
national, but transnational in nature, as the
repercussions of the Sierra Leonean conflict fully
demonstrate. On the other hand, it clearly identifies the
enormous development needs in the subregion and
formulates practical, relevant and, we believe, viable
recommendations.

I should like, on the basis of those two
observations, to emphasize the elements that my
delegation believes deserve special attention within the
context of our discussion today.

First of all, there is an urgent need to resolve the
question of refugees and displaced persons. This matter
was clearly set out by Ms. McAskie, and I would
merely like to emphasize that we, too, believe that it is
imperative to guarantee safe access to refugees and to
promote conditions to facilitate their return to safe
areas in their countries of origin. In this context, we
support the recommendation on strengthening the
presence in Guinea and Liberia of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs with a view to
supporting efforts to meet the growing humanitarian
needs in the West African subregion. Neither can we
fail to endorse the appeal to the international
community and the Governments concerned to support
the actions of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to facilitate the
relocation and voluntary return of Sierra Leonean
refugees in Guinea.

I wish to focus on the need to find lasting
solutions with regard to the priority needs and
problems of West Africa.

First of all, there is a need for peace. As Council
members know, for more than a decade the West
African subregion has been convulsed by many
conflicts whose repercussions include, in particular, the
progressive deterioration in relations between countries
in the Mano River Union. I shall not repeat here all the
initiatives and actions taken by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to try
to resolve these conflicts. I shall confine myself to
stressing the commitment of ECOWAS to finding a
comprehensive political solution involving all the
countries concerned and their partners. I should like, in
passing, to thank Mr. Guehenno and Mr. Fall for
speaking about this.

Thus, with regard to the situation in Sierra Leone,
it is important - as stipulated in Security Council
resolution 1346 (2001) - that all the parties to the
Sierra Leone conflict intensify their efforts towards the
peaceful implementation of the Abuja Ceasefire
Agreement of 10 November 2000. That reference is
important to us, because we also believe that military
pressure is not enough to bring about a lasting solution
to the Sierra Leonean conflict and its worrying
consequences, in particular the continuation of armed
raids along the borders of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra
Leone.

As we know, however, peace is not just the
absence of war. There must also be a viable political
and economic framework, that is, the construction and
consolidation of a State based on law, the promotion of
education and health policies and measures to combat
poverty - in short, good governance.

In this regard, it is necessary to strengthen
security and promote economic development within
each country as well as among the countries in the
subregion. In this context, it is essential to strengthen
the local conflict-prevention capability, in particular
through the Mano River Women's Peace Network,
which Ms. McAskie mentioned, and, more generally,
through the ECOWAS early-warning mechanism,
which is designed to collect and process data through
offices opened in Banjul, Cotonou, Monrovia and
Ouagadougou, and its Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light
Weapons in West Africa.

It is also essential to provide the countries
concerned with a means of speeding up the peace
process, in particular by implementing disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes. This
was the case in Mali, for example, where, in the wake
of an armed rebellion in the north of the country, the
authorities helped to integrate former rebels into all
areas of the Administration and the national army and
to reintegrate them through a new policy of
decentralization and the financing of effective
development projects.

That notwithstanding, the report of the Inter-
Agency Mission sketches out a comprehensive,
regional and integrated approach to all these questions,
which we fully endorse. We support the
recommendation to open a United Nations office for
West Africa, which could act as the eye of the United
Nations in the area and facilitate useful dialogue with
bilateral and multilateral partners, as well as with
ECOWAS, in particular in relaunching the peace
process and the process of economic development in
West Africa.

We are pleased that the report also stresses the
need to further develop coordination and cooperation
between the United Nations and ECOWAS with a view
to establishing a true partnership, particularly given the
regional implications of the Sierra Leonean conflict. In
this regard, we believe that it would be useful to look
further at the ECOWAS recommendation on
broadening the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). We must respond
positively and specifically to the ECOWAS offer of
May 2000 to strengthen UNAMSIL by the addition of
3,000 men, who would have the advantage of knowing
the terrain and would be able to deploy rapidly and
effectively.

Likewise, the political support of the United
Nations - in this case, the Security Council - and the
provision of material and technical assistance by the
international community are essential for the successful
implementation of the ECOWAS initiative to deploy a
multinational ECOWAS Monitoring Group force along
the borders of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.

I would also note that close cooperation between
the United Nations and ECOWAS is necessary to
ensure implementation of the sanctions laid down
against Liberia in resolution 1343 (2001).

In conclusion, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for having sent the Inter-Agency
Mission to West Africa. I also wish to thank
Mr. Ibrahima Fall and members of that Mission for
their important work in the search for lasting solutions
to meeting the priority needs and issues of West Africa.
We await with interest action on specific measures and
recommendations of the Mission's report that are
practical, relevant and viable. ECOWAS is ready to
play its part in that work.
