Mr. Dilja (Albania): At the outset let me reiterate
that, as stated by Ambassador Ryan of Ireland, Albania
fully associates itself with the statement he made on

behalf of the European Union. I shall therefore make only
a few brief comments on the item before the Council.

Allow me to express my delegation's appreciation
to you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate,
which gives non-members of the Security Council the
opportunity to express our views on the very important
issue of a draft resolution on non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD).
Every one of us, and all our countries, together
have the obligation to make the world a better and a
safer place. Particularly today, when terrorism is
seriously threatening to use a variety of means against
every country and every people in the world, we have
the duty of collective mobilization and vigorous action
to fight it, with clear goals and positive results. We
consider the draft resolution under consideration to be
the right step and a further measure in that direction.

Unfortunately, no region, no country, no nation
and no border is immune from terrorism in a broader
sense or, in particular, from the barbarous danger of the
proliferation of WMD and their delivery systems. The
prospect of weapons of mass destruction falling into
the hands of terrorists or other non-State actors is a
growing and paramount threat to international peace
and security. The threat is real. It is thus a challenge
that we must address collectively and resolutely. The
events of 11 September 2001 and other horrible
terrorist acts in other cities of the world have taught us
the lesson that those who would direct attacks against
innocent civilians with conventional weapons should
be assumed to be equally willing to commit atrocities
with weapons of mass destruction. That prospect
convinces us all that this problem must be addressed
every day, on every front, in an effective and collective
way. The sooner we take preventive measures, the
sooner we take action, the better.

We recognize the draft resolution on this issue as
an entirely appropriate measure to counter that threat, a
threat we all agree is very serious. We recognize it as
an appeal to every State to prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. We consider the draft
resolution to be a necessary and important document
which complements but does not undermine existing
multilateral treaties and conventions and which calls on
States to renew their commitment to multilateral
cooperation in the framework of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and other international
bodies. We think it will provide an additional useful
tool for all States members of the international
community to combat this new dimension of the threat
posed by weapons of mass destruction.

Albania welcomes and supports the draft
resolution and will remain committed, as required, to
developing and maintaining any appropriate effective
measures and to adopting and enforcing any
appropriate effective laws to help prevent the
proliferation of nuclear, chemical or biological
weapons and their means of delivery.
Our delegation appreciates the fact that this draft
resolution is already sponsored by a number of permanent
and non-permanent members of the Security Council. We
would like, in conclusion, to commend the Council and
the sponsors of the draft resolution, and to echo the
confidence expressed by other speakers that the draft
resolution will ultimately enjoy widespread support.

