Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania):
My delegation welcomes with pleasure this opportunity to
address the Security Council. It is a greater pleasure to do
so under the Canadian presidency - especially under
your own leadership, Sir - when addressing a subject in
which Canada, under the chairmanship of Ambassador
Robert Fowler, has invested so much. We are particularly
honoured that you, Minister Axworthy, have taken time
from your other ministerial functions to chair these
discussions. The presence of a delegation from the
Canadian House of Commons is clear proof of your
Government's commitment to the establishment of a
sanctions regime which not only works but also produces
the intended results.

We want to commend the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993)
concerning the situation in Angola, and the Panel of

 

Experts on violations of Security Council sanctions against
UNITA established by Council resolution 1237 (1999),
chaired by Ambassador Mollander, for the report on
violations of Security Council sanctions against UNITA.
We do not and must not underestimate the boldness
required to produce such a compelling report.

It has been noted that the recent record of sanctions is
an account of successes and failures. The Panel of Experts'
report on UNITA sanctions is clear proof that these
sanctions have been allowed to fall into the latter category.
Indeed, the state of failure appears so pervasive and
pertinent that it is only legitimate to undertake a
comprehensive re-examination of the circumstances and
procedures regarding the application of Security Council-
mandated sanctions. In this regard, we must welcome the
Council's decision yesterday to establish, on a temporary
basis, an informal working group of the Council to develop
general recommendations on how to improve the
effectiveness of United Nations sanctions.

We must nonetheless caution that the more effective
use of sanctions by the Council will also depend on how
well the Council deals with the violations put forward by
the Panel of Experts. UNITA sanctions were imposed to
secure specific objectives. They were imposed to counter
not only perceptions of impunity on the part of UNITA
leadership, but also as a tool to end the suffering of the
people of Angola. If those who could be proved to have
aided and abetted Mr. Savimbi do not suffer any
consequences, the legitimacy of sanctions as an effective
tool available to the Council will be severely undermined.

There is no denying that the people of Angola have
suffered enormously. In spite of the enormity of their pain,
it might not be too late to reassess what can now be done
differently to bring their torment to an end. What the report
of the Panel of Experts can achieve in the short term is to
focus our attention on strengthening the framework against
which sanctions on UNITA were imposed.

The Panel of Experts makes useful recommendations,
which, if acted upon promptly, will bring Savimbi's roof
tumbling down. We should not, however, lose sight of the
fact that the implementation of some of these quite apt
recommendations relies on the capabilities of countries that
are severely constrained in that regard. Our collective
partnership in enhancing their necessary capabilities will
therefore remain critical. At this juncture, I welcome the
assurance of support and assistance to the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), of which we are a
member.

UNITA has taken the Council for a ride for too
long. Reports that it has not been doing so alone are
cause for great concern. We therefore also welcome and
support the establishment of a mechanism which would
seek additional information concerning the serious
allegations in the report. We urge and support stern
measures by the Council against proven violations.

We recognize that others may want to avoid the
political consequences of such an outcome. We also
realize that the report raises serious questions regarding
the conduct of certain political leaders. It is gratifying to
remember, however, that the grave charges against those
who have proclaimed their innocence can be lessened
only through a fair process. In the end, it would be fair to
let the chips fall where they may. Those who are culpable
must bear the responsibility.

We have welcomed the report of the Panel of
Experts. Above all, we have welcomed it because it
provides us with the added benefit of increasing our
knowledge base and experience in developing a more
systematic approach for dealing with sanctions violations.
We therefore also welcome the Canadian proposal to
convene a conference of experts to develop a regime to
govern the use of sanctions. It is our hope that it will be
inclusive of a broad range of perspectives.

Mr. President, you have succinctly observed that

"Sanctions are economic statecraft in action. When
purposefully used and implemented to prevent or
stop aggression, violence and abuse, this is statecraft
in the service of people." (S/PV.4]28)

Regrettably, this statecraft has so far failed the
people of Angola.

