Mr. Salam (Lebanon): I am sure that you, Madam
President, and all members of the Council would agree
with me that we in the Chamber all share the same
frustration of having the Palestinian question agenda
item discussed every three months. We all wish that
this item, the oldest and still ever present on the agenda
of this body since the creation of the United Nations,
were taken out, had a just and durable settlement to the
Middle East conflict been achieved and implemented,
based on the numerous resolutions adopted by the
Council and in particular the principle of land for peace.

Unfortunately, it must be recognized that such a
prospect keeps slipping away, and consequently the
Palestinian question keeps rooting itself deep in the
agenda of this body. Indeed, how can ajust and durable
solution be achieved and an independent, viable and
contiguous Palestinian State emerge when, first, the
construction of 6,000 new Israeli units in the occupied
West Bank and East Jerusalem has been approved by
Israel since the beginning of the year; secondly, a law
retroactively legalizing settlements built on the occupied
Palestinian territory was adopted last February; and,
thirdly, when only a few weeks ago Israel approved the
construction of a whole new settlement site?

Last January, during a debate on preventive
diplomacy (see S/PV.7857), my delegation reminded the
Council of Lebanon's initiative in 2016 to seek, based
on the Charter of the United Nations and operative
paragraph 10 of resolution 1701 (2006), the good
offices of the Secretary-General in the delineation of
the disputed maritime border and exclusive economic
zone between Lebanon and Israel, emphasizing that the
non-resolution of that issue shall remain a source of
conflict that threatens peace and security in our region.
And while we were looking forward to receiving, in
this regard, an update on the results of the efforts of
the Special Coordinator for Lebanon, Israel, in utter
defiance of international law and in a clear attempt
to undermine the Secretary-General's good offices,
threatened, in a letter dated 2 February, that it would
"not allow" what it referred to as

"unauthorized economic activities, including,
inter alia, the granting of rights by another State
to any third party; exploratory activities, drilling
or exploration of natural resources in maritime
areas in which Israel asserts sovereign rights
and jurisdiction".

In a letter to the Secretary-General, my Government
responded to these threats by reiterating Lebanon's
long-standing commitment to international law and
in particular to the provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea regarding the
delimitation of maritime borders.

However, these were not the only Israeli threats
against my country, as only few weeks later, Naftali
Bennett, Israel's Minister of Education, threatened,
in an interview with Haaretz on 3 March, to launch
"a massive attack on the civilian infrastructure along
with additional air and ground action" targeting "the
Lebanese institutions, its infrastructure, airport,
power stations, traffic junctions" along "Lebanese
army bases" with the aim of "returning Lebanon to
the Middle Ages". The least one can say is that those
are despicable words. Nothing is more barbaric than
threatening civilians. As to the outrageous threat to
return Lebanon to the Middle Ages, the only thing it is
reminiscent of is the darkness of the Middle Ages.

With all these threats, and Israel's continued
violations of my country's sovereignty, documented and
recorded in numerous letters addressed by my mission
to the Security Council, I would now like to ask if it is
not high time for the Council to condemn those actions
as blatant and deliberate violations of the Charter of
the United Nations, the basic rules and principles of
international law and humanitarian law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions. But my Government
remains firmly committed to implementing resolution
1701 (2006) in its entirety and urges the Council, one
more time, to show leadership and compel Israel to
abide by its clear obligations under that resolution.

Lastly, do I need to remind the Council that Lebanon
has been commended for fighting terrorism? I would
like to thank your Government, Madam President,
along with many others represented on the Council,
for their greatly appreciated commitment to supporting
my country and strengthening our army's ability to
address the multiple challenges that it is now facing,
ranging from combating terrorism to maintaining
stability and safeguarding Lebanon's sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

