Mr. Inehauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (Spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefing on small arms and light weapons presented
by the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu.

Bolivia is a pacifist State that does not produce,
store or export weapons of any kind. We therefore firmly
believe that mitigating the use, trade and trafficking of
small arms and light weapons is vital to the success
of the peacebuilding and stabilization efforts of
countries in conflict. We are concerned about the issue
of the illegal trade of small arms and light weapons,
which is an ongoing challenge that contributes to the
permanent destabilization and lack of security in areas
where armed conflicts are being fought. We are equally
concerned to see that the great challenge to combating
the illicit arms trade has not yet been overcome by the
United Nations or the international community.

We believe that, in addition to being a criminal
activity, illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons further exacerbates armed conflicts,
accentuates tensions, encourages terrorism and
transnational organized crime, and causes serious
injuries and deaths to innocent civilians. We emphasize
that addressing the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons is of vital importance to maintaining
regional peace and stability and thereby to promoting
development in the affected countries in the framework
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

The gravity of the problem is rooted in the trade
in small arms and light weapons, as evidenced in
the figures cited in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/1025), which estimates that the financial value
of that lucrative business was worth at least $6 billion in
2014 alone. Moreover, illicit arms trafficking generates
a parallel market whose profits are then injected into
the global financial system through money-laundering
and tax havens, which tend to diminish or eliminate
controls, especially through the investment services of
the tertiary sector, which is used by organized crime
groups to legitimize their profits.

When it comes to the issue of the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons, we are compelled to
address the aspect of their illegal transfer to non-State
actors. In that regard, we consider it necessary to define
the concept ofnon-State agents, and in that regard there is
a substantive history of resolutions - such as resolution
1540 (2004) - that have been negotiated, agreed and
stipulated in the context of the non-proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons. Non-State
actors - who are illegally supplied with weapons
and ammunition - provoke and deepen conflicts,
destabilize States, commit crimes against humanity,
war crimes and serious violations of human rights,
spread destruction, and subject the civilian population
to the most despicable acts.

Undoubtedly, the aspect related to the management
of ammunition and weapons is a substantial component
of the United Nations system, whether in peacekeeping
operations or in the activities of the Security Council
and other bodies that are associated primarily with
programmes of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, in addition to activities related to the
registration and marking of weapons, which allows
them to be traced.

On the other hand, inadequate arms management
remains a cause for concern. We firmly believe that the
specialized agencies of the Organization, such as the
United Nations Mine Action Service and the United
Nations Register of Conventional Arms, should be
strengthened, as that would contribute positively to the
handling, storage, removal and destruction of small
arms and light weapons. Similarly, we are convinced
that international and national controls must be
strengthened with regard to those weapons.

Globalized arms trafficking requires global
controls that significantly reduce the risk of those types
of weapons being spread and continuing to endanger
the lives of millions of people. We therefore believe it
essential to have mechanisms in place that prohibit the
supply of small arms and light weapons to unauthorized
entities in the receiving States, and to ensure the strict
regulation of their trade activities and a total ban on the
re-exportation of unauthorized weapons and on their
production, with or without expired licenses.

It cannot be denied that violence, transnational
crime and terrorism are closely linked to the illicit
arms trade. The international criminal groups and
terrorist groups that the Council and every member
of the Organization are combating are its biggest
beneficiaries. That is why, in relation to the principles
that govern the activity of this organ in the context of
threats to international peace and security, it is vital to
lay concrete foundations to tackle that scourge, which
endangers human rights and life itself.

