Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank President Mbeki and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Menkerios,
for their briefings on the situation in Abyei and other
areas of the Sudan. I would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan and the
representative of the Government of Southern Sudan
for their statements.

Over the past month, we have witnessed a serious
deterioration in the security and humanitarian
situations in Abyei, Southern Kordofan and adjoining
areas. More than 100,000 people are reported to have
been displaced. Peacekeepers from the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) have been obstructed
in the implementation of their mandate, and access by
the United Nations humanitarian agencies has also
been restricted.

These developments underline not only the
fragile security situation but also the lack of trust
between the parties to the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). As the post-referendum transition
period nears its end, the ongoing conflict could have
disastrous consequences for the people of the region as
the parties divert scarce resources from the urgently
needed tasks of nation-building. It is therefore
necessary to expeditiously resolve the stalemate.

We commend the efforts of the African Union's
High-level Implementation Panel, led by President
Mbeki and the representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Menkerios, to facilitate dialogue between the
parties and offer a package of agreements on
outstanding CPA issues, including security
arrangements for Abyei and borders, the sharing of oil
wealth, and so on. The negotiations that began last
week have led to the signing of an agreement on Abyei.
We support the continuing efforts of President Mbeki
and Special Representative Menkerios to mediate
between the parties in order to resolve other issues, and
we urge the parties to show a spirit of compromise,
flexibility and political will in order to reach a
comprehensive agreement. We also appreciate the role
played by the Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Mr. Meles
Zenawi, for the security arrangements that have been
worked out for Abyei.

A number of pending problems between Northern
and Southern Sudan have long and complicated
historical backgrounds. Their resolution will require
patience and an approach that takes into consideration
the long-term interests of all the peoples of the region.
Any attempt to impose artificial deadlines and
preconceived ideas will not be helpful to enhancing
mutual trust between the parties, nor for the long-term
resolution of the pending issues.

We urge all the parties concerned with an interest
in the issues between the North and the South to
encourage the parties to abjure violence and rededicate
themselves to the same spirit in which they have
implemented the CPA over the past six years.
Unilateral actions, particularly military operations, will
not be in the interests of either party. The parties
should act with the utmost restraint, refrain from
provocative actions and ensure freedom of movement
and access to UNMIS. They should work towards long-
term cooperative relationships that will benefit both the
North and the South, and help them undertake urgently
needed development activities. The international
community, including the Security Council, should
stand ready to support the parties in implementing the
agreements that they may reach. We hope that the
agreement on Abyei's security will be expeditiously
endorsed by a resolution of the Council. To that end,
we stand ready to work with the other members of the
Council.

