Mr. Chavez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for promoting the holding of
this open debate and to thank the Secretary-General for
the presentation of the report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/2009/277). We also thank
Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for his comprehensive
introduction to the subject on which we are meeting
today.

The report of the Secretary-General mentions
concrete progress that should be underscored, for
example, the establishment of the Security Council
Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians in
response to a recommendation from the Secretary-
General. The Group, which has already held a number
of meetings, has substantively promoted the treatment
in the Security Council of matters relating to the
protection of civilians. That has contributed to the
subject's being reflected in respective Council
resolutions. That achievement, we believe, can promote
the strengthening of the needed interaction between the

Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the Security Council, as indicated in the Secretary-
General's report. Peru firmly supports this. The Expert
Group needs to continue to work steadily, focusing on
those cases that, as the report indicates, have not yet
been definitively resolved, in spite of the passage of
time and the efforts devoted to them.

We have all seen how the United Nations has
been working, particularly in the Security Council, to
promote and provide real protection for civilians in
armed conflicts. In the past 10 years there have been
many reports and resolutions that define steps and
actions to be taken with regard to this problem.
Nonetheless, it is very alarming to see in the report of
the Secretary-General that in 1999 the situation was
not substantively different from the current situation.
In other words, there are still inexcusable situations
where human rights and international humanitarian law
are violated in the different conflicts that now persist.
The civilian population, women and children in
particular, are the main victims.

In light of this situation, the Security Council
must maintain and promote concrete and effective
action to ensure the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts and of displaced persons and refugees.
Therefore we urge the Council to effectively manage
the complete implementation of its resolutions 1296
(2000) and 1674 (2006), which reflect the heart of
today's debate - in other words, the responsibility of
all Member States to protect the civilian population in
armed conflicts. Along with those efforts, it would be
desirable for the debate on the responsibility to protect
to begin as soon as possible in the relevant forum.

Likewise, Peru resolutely supports the
programmes and policies that promote the prevention
of violence. That is why we must insist on the need for
the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) so
that grave cases of rape and other forms of sexual
violence will be referred to the International Criminal
Court. On that same issue, it is indispensable that
States assume as a matter of priority their
responsibility to execute justice and to punish those
responsible for the crime as part of the integral
approach to national reconciliation - which should be
their goal.

We also share the views expressed by the
Secretary-General in his report regarding the need to
implement certain measures that will contribute

substantially to actions undertaken to protect civilians
in armed conflicts. Among others, we would
underscore the promotion of respect for international
humanitarian law and of compliance therewith by all
parties to a conflict, in particular by non-State armed
groups. Other measures include the strengthening of
protection of civilians by making peacekeeping
operations and other, related operations more effective
and, lastly, broad access to humanitarian assistance and
accountability when the law is broken. With these
concrete actions we would be giving renewed impetus
to the protection of civilians in armed conflicts.

Finally, we must recognize that in order to
strengthen the protection of civilians once the conflicts
have ended, resolute action should be initiated to build
and strengthen, in the affected countries, institutions
and the rule of law and to ensure stable economic
conditions with development strategies. Those would
be crucial steps towards consolidating any integral
peace and development process, which would
effectively combat poverty and social exclusion -
problems that often lie at the origin of internal armed
conflicts that we endeavour to prevent.

