Mr. Trautwein (Germany): I would like to thank
the representatives of the United States and the United
Kingdom for the comprehensive update on the general
situation in Iraq, the efforts being undertaken to
restructure and reform that country and the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1483
(2003), as well as for their assessment of the situation
following the insidious terror attacks on the
headquarters of the United Nations last Tuesday.
We share with the whole Secretariat the deeply
felt grief over the loss of close friends and colleagues,
among them Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mellos, Special
Representative for Iraq, who was a truly remarkable
civil servant and representative of the United Nations,
as well as others with whom we had developed not
only professional but also very often deep personal
relationships. They and their work will not be
forgotten.

Tuesday's incident has clarified the magnitude of
the challenge that we are facing in Iraq. However, that
does not change the strategic objectives that the
international community is pursuing in that country.
The first of those objectives is the restoration of
security countrywide. Pursuant to resolution 1483
(2003) and in accordance with international law, that is
the ultimate responsibility of the coalition forces. The
second objective is the economic and political
rebuilding of Iraq, with the aim of fully restoring
sovereignty.

Germany is involved in the humanitarian field
and will continue to assist in that regard. We do not
exclude further assistance in the civilian sector, thereby
contributing to the political process.

From our point of view, the process of restoring
sovereignty needs to be accelerated. In that respect, the
Governing Council is only an intermediate first step on
that path. The necessary basis for this process remains
the vital role of the United Nations in Iraq. The more
that role is strengthened, the more credibility and local,
regional and international support it will gain.

We must seek ways to win the hearts of the Iraqi
people. We believe that is directly linked to the concept
of a time frame, which the Secretary-General presented
in his July report (S/2003/715). It is also linked to the
perception, held by a large part of the Iraqi population,
of an occupation by foreign forces.

The attack attempted to diminish the United
Nations and the international community, as well as to
isolate the coalition in Iraq. The stronger the role
designed for the United Nations in Iraq, the more it
will become evident that resistance against the United
Nations and the international community is in fact
directed against the aspirations of the Iraqi people to
live in peace and end their suffering. As the Secretary-
General has pointed out, we owe it to Sergio Vieira de
Mello that the Coalition Provisional Authority, the
United Nations, the international community and the
Iraqi population now come together.
