Mr. Snoussi (Morocco) (interpretation from French):
I thank you warmly, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
speak and thus to express my delegation's deep gratitude to
the Council for its consideration of an issue to which my
country, the Islamic world and the Arab world attach the
utmost importance.

We welcome the laudable efforts of the non-aligned
countries that are members of the Security Council, and we
thank them very much for the role they have played and
their co-sponsorship of the draft resolution that has just
been voted upon. I particularly commend the Coordinator
of the Caucus, Ambassador Salim Al-Khussaiby, Permanent
Representative of the Sultanate of Oman, for his transparent
activity, carried out in the framework of consultations with
all the members of the Council and other concerned parties,
to reach a consensus text.

Our thanks also go to the delegations that, in a spirit
of good will and compromise, were good enough to vote in
favour of the draft resolution, which has, unfortunately,
been rejected. My delegation cannot but regret this
outcome, because, rather than being understood in the way
the representative of the United States suggested the other
day, it is likely to send a negative signal.
The draft resolution was intended, with its simple
flexibility, to be a step in the right direction. We will
continue to have the same concern as the United States to
safeguard peace. We therefore fervently hope that the
Israeli Government will meet our expectations by
reconsidering its decision to expropriate land and
demonstrating a spirit of cooperation in order to calm
nerves, dispel fears and give a new impetus to the peace
process, which, as we all know, is now experiencing great
difficulties. We hope the negotiations will be freed of all
unnecessary obstacles to progress, one of which is
expropriation.

We passionately hope that the Israeli Government will
take this vote not as encouragement, but, rather, as a reason
to reflect on the harmful consequences of such actions. We
hope the Israeli authorities will realize how huge the stakes
are and ask themselves if the peace that all of us have been
striving so hard for - the Russians, the Americans, all the
Arab States, indeed all the members of the Council - is
to perish.

