Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I welcome the
insightful update delivered by Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Jan Kubis on the activities
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) and his important contribution to the
Security Council's deliberations. Kazakhstan highly
values the efforts of UNAMI and the United Nations
system to provide critical services to the population
of Iraq amid grave and challenging threats and in
promoting political dialogue and reconciliation among
the parties. At the same time, we are also grateful for
the briefings provided by Under-Secretary-General
Vladimir Voronkov and Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Director Michele Coninsx.

Kazakhstan strongly condemns the attack by two
suicide bombers that took place in Baghdad on 15 May,
which killed at least 35 people and injured 90 others in
an attack on a square where daytime labourers gather
to look for work. We consider that attack hideous and
cowardly, showing little respect for human life or the
holy month of Ramadan.

Kazakhstan congratulates the leadership and
the people of Iraq for the successful parliamentary
elections held on 12 May. Following the military defeat
of Dae'sh, the elections represent further progress
in building a stronger Iraqi democracy. With those
encouraging results, we call on all Iraqi political actors
and their supporters to uphold peace as the results
are processed. We furthermore urge political actors to
resolve any electoral disputes through the established
legal channels and to complete the electoral process by
forming an inclusive Government as soon as possible.
The world community should remain committed to
supporting the Government and the people of Iraq in
that endeavour.

The successful operations of the Iraqi Government
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) have been commended by all and are greatly
appreciated. It is obvious that we must enhance the
effectiveness of counter-terrorism mechanisms in
Iraq and strengthen security measures at the borders,
following the expulsion of ISIL from Iraq. We would be
glad to see Iraq join Kazakhstan's initiative on a code
of conduct for achieving a world without terrorism. The
international community must make every effort to
consolidate stability and restore peace in Iraq after the
expulsion of ISIL.
Kazakhstan is in favour of preserving the territorial
integrity of Iraq as a State. There can be no lasting
consolidation of peace efforts without bringing about
reconciliation among the parties, together with justice
and the rule of law throughout the country.

We underscore the inadmissibility of extrajudicial
acts of retaliation against the supporters of ISIL,
their family members and those with any connection
to the group. We urge the Iraqi authorities to take
urgent measures to bring perpetrators to justice, while
upholding international law and international human
rights law, and to refrain from actions that violate
human freedom and justice. We were deeply shocked
by the fate of 42-year-old housewife Amina Hassan, a
Turkish woman who had two minutes to defend herself
against charges of supporting the Islamic State. We
have learned that the entire trial lasted just 10 minutes,
before the judge sentenced her to death by hanging.
Approximately 14 death sentences were handed out in
a span of two hours to those accused of supporting the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, together with the
sentencing of workers, wives and bystanders.

At the same time, we support measures to achieve
the most critical goals in Iraq, which are, preserving
unity, re-establishing stability and fostering peaceful
coexistence among all segments of the population,
including minorities. That commonly accepted
approach should be based on equal rights andjustice for
all citizens. The challenge for Iraq now is to uphold the
paramount principles of good democratic governance
with deep, stable foundations.

Finally, we must support without hesitation the
Special Representative's efforts to bring about a stable,
post-ISIL Iraq with a new vision.

