The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of South Africa.

We thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock,
for their briefings. South Africa wishes to express its
support for Special Envoy Griffiths and congratulates
him on the efforts he is undertaking to find a peaceful
solution to the situation in Yemen.

We also welcome Lieutenant General Abhijit Guha
and wish him well in his role as Head of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
(UNMHA).

My delegation would like to address the following
two issues: the political situation in Yemen and the dire
humanitarian situation.

First, on the political situation in Yemen, we
continue to call on all parties involved in the conflict
in Yemen to de-escalate tensions and fully commit to
the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement. We
reiterate our support for a negotiated political settlement
that engages all parties in an inclusive Yemeni-led
dialogue in order to resolve differences and address the
legitimate concerns of all Yemenis, in accordance with
relevant Security Council resolutions. We also call on
the parties to engage in good faith with Special Envoy
Griffiths in order to resume an inclusive political
process with a View to reaching a comprehensive,
negotiated settlement to end the conflict, including
with the meaningful participation of women and youth,
in parallel with continued efforts to implement the
Stockholm Agreement.
South Africa urges those who have influence
over the protagonists in the Yemeni conflict to apply
maximum pressure so that the parties may sustain
ongoing peace processes, make necessary compromises,
release political prisoners, maintain the ceasefire and
relaunch meaningful and sustained all-party talks, as
contained in the Stockholm Agreement. Special Envoy
Griffiths hasjust briefed the Council, and wejoin others
in thanking the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for urging the
current promising Yemeni negotiations.

On the humanitarian situation, South Africa
remains extremely concerned about the dire crisis in
Yemen, which has caused immeasurable suffering for
millions of civilians. According to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the humanitarian
crisis in Yemen remains the worst in the world. Nearly
four years of conflict and severe economic decline
are driving the country to the brink of famine and
exacerbating needs in all sectors. An estimated 80 per
cent of the population - 24 million people - require
some form of humanitarian or protection assistance,
including 14.3 million who are in acute need. The
severity of their needs is deepening, with the number
of people in acute need a staggering 27 per cent higher
than last year. Two-thirds of all districts in the country
are already suffering pre-famine, and one-third face
the convergence of multiple acute vulnerabilities. An
estimated 85,000 Yemeni children under the age of five
may have died of starvation.

About 2 million Yemeni children have stopped
attending school since the start of the war and,
according to UNICEF, many schools are damaged, not
in use or have become shelters for displaced persons.
Furthermore, about 2,500 boys have joined the fighting,
and more than half of all Yemeni girls are now married
before they reach the age of 15. The armed conflict
in Yemen has killed and injured thousands of Yemeni
civilians since it began. According to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, about 7,000 civilians have been killed and more
than 10,000 wounded. The actual number of civilian
casualties is likely to be much higher. Thousands more
have been displaced by the fighting and millions suffer
from shortages of food and medical care. In that regard,
we urge donors to disburse the pledges they made to
the United Nations humanitarian response plan as
a matter of urgency in order to help address the dire
humanitarian situation. South Africa thanks all those
donors who have generously disbursed their funds as
pledged, including Saudi Arabia, the United States of
America, the United Kingdom, Kuwait and the United
Arab Emirates, and we are grateful for the many other
donations, such as that announced by China today.

We further call on the parties to the conflict to allow
for the free, regular and undisputed passage of food and
other humanitarian relief and not to take actions that
could deprive civilians of their rights to food and health
care. We also call on all parties to facilitate access to
the humanitarian relief that the people of Yemen so
desperately need. In that regard, we remind parties
to the conflict that all necessary measures should be
taken to respect the Geneva Conventions. We further
call on all parties to the conflict to abide by their
obligations under international law, including human
rights law. This unprecedented humanitarian crisis is a
strong indicator of the human toll of continued military
action and conflict in Yemen, which necessitates an
urgent commitment to a ceasefire and the pursuit of a
negotiated, peaceful and inclusive solution to the crisis.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that the only
sustainable solution to this conflict will be through
a negotiated, Yemeni-led political settlement that is
inclusive and fair and puts the interests of all citizens of
Yemen first. South Africa appreciates the initiatives of
all players that have brought about the current improved
security environment and increased the prospects for
peace in Yemen.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

