Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by thanking Mr. Khare, the Secretary-General's
Special Representative for Timor-Leste, for his
briefing. I understand that this will be his last
appearance before his departure in December, so I
would very much like to thank him for all his efforts
during his time as Special Representative and indeed
before. I would also like to welcome Deputy Prime
Minister Guterres to the Council Chamber and to
commend his and his Government's efforts to deliver
sustainable security and development to Timor-Leste.

As the Secretary-General's report (S/2009/504)
notes, there have been welcome signs of continued
progress during the reporting period. In particular, the
successful holding of local elections on 9 October was
evidence of the relative stability and security that
Timor-Leste now enjoys, and of the capacity of the
body politic to engage in the democratic process in a
committed but peaceful manner. We also welcome the
progress noted in the Secretary-General's report with
regard to the medium-term benchmarks for Timor-
Leste. We are particularly pleased to see the successful
resumption of policing responsibilities by local police
in three separate districts. It is especially encouraging
to note that no increase in crime or disorder has
followed this transfer of responsibility. We look
forward to the continued transfer of policing
responsibilities to the Timor-Leste authorities in the
remaining districts.

The progress in this area is a tribute to the efforts
of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste (UNMIT) police component to help strengthen
national policing capacity. I would like to express our
gratitude to them and to the Governments of Australia
and New Zealand for their valuable and ongoing work
in this field. On security sector reform more broadly,
we concur with the conclusion in the Secretary-
General's report that greater clarity is required on the
role and responsibilities of the national defence forces.
The absence of such clarity has the potential to hamper
the overall security sector reform effort. We are also
encouraged by progress in the other three benchmark
areas: justice and the rule of law, democratic
governance and the concerted efforts being made in the
field of economic and social development. This is all
evidence of Timor-Leste's increasing capacity in these
fields.

Notwithstanding the progress reported in a
number of areas, I would like to take this opportunity
to stress the importance of doing more, and more
quickly, to address the issue of impunity for those
found to have been involved in war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide. We note the valuable
work being carried out by UNMIT's Serious Crimes
Investigation Team, but the focus must now be on
pursuing this work even more vigorously and
processing outstanding cases more rapidly. We also
continue to be concerned by the reports of human
rights violations by Timor-Leste's national security
forces. We urge that all possible steps be taken to
investigate these allegations and hold those responsible
to account. The protection of human rights and
establishment of robust accountability mechanisms is
of central importance to the development of sustainable
democracy in Timor-Leste.

The Secretary-General's report confirms that a
technical assessment mission will visit Timor-Leste to
look at medium-term options for reconfiguring
UNMIT. This will be an important opportunity to
reflect on how best UNMIT can match resources to
outstanding tasks, and we look forward to hearing the
Secretary-General's proposals based on those
recommendations. We recognize that any adjustments
to UNMIT's police component should occur on a
gradual, step-by-step basis, but it is also important that
UNMIT's structure and size evolve to reflect progress
on the ground, including the welcome improvements in
the overall security situation.

Our goal should remain to enable Timor-Leste to
stand on its own feet in facing the challenges ahead.
Achieving that objective will require the continued
engagement and support of the international
community, including UNMIT. But given our overall
objective, it is also right that the focus of our efforts is
increasingly on the gradual transfer of responsibilities
to the Timor-Leste authorities.

