Mr. Motoc (Romania): I too wish to warmly
welcome His Excellency the President of Nigeria to the
Security Council. Our appreciation goes also to the
Chairman of the African Union Commission.

I wish to congratulate the Spanish presidency on
having convened this meeting, which sets a standard
for the manner in which the Security Council conducts
its business in dealing with issues of regional
significance.

Romania is and will remain committed to the
peaceful resolution of the Darfur crisis. Romania
believes in a prosperous and stable future for the entire
Sudan. We appreciate and fully support the African
Union's efforts to work out a solution to the crisis.

We praise the personal efforts of President
Obasanjo towards enhancing and strengthening the
African Union's role in the Darfur crisis. We would
like to thank His Excellency for today's timely,
comprehensive and substantial briefing. We have full
confidence that, under his chairmanship, the African
Union's involvement will really make a difference in
Darfur. Our delegation considers that, given President
Obasanjo's outstanding track record in the last six
years as President of Nigeria, we have every reason to
hope that the African Union will take significant steps
on the road to stability and progress in Darfur.

If I may say so, our confidence in that regard is
also based on the very meaning of the name
"Obasanjo", which, in the Yoruba language, means, ifI
am not mistaken, "the king who makes the lives of his
subjects easier". Here, we trust that, during his tenure
as Chairman of the African Union, those subjects will
include the population of Darfur. I have to confess that
my deputy, Ambassador Dumitru, is responsible for
that information: he served for five years as
Ambassador to Nigeria under His Excellency's
presidency.
The recent resolution of the Security Council,
resolution 1564 (2004), acknowledges the regional
ownership that is at work in resolving this crisis. It
encourages and supports further contributions of the
African Union. It also adequately reflects the
architecture of cooperation in support of addressing the
Darfur situation deployed by the United Nations in
conjunction with the African Union, the European
Union and many individual nations neighbouring
Sudan as well as from other continents.

Romania attaches great value to regional
ownership and regional solutions to crises that can
affect entire regions. Such an approach is essential for
Romania, during its present tenure in the Security
Council, as an advocate of an updated reading and
practice of Chapter VIII provisions as they apply to the
realities of our times. Proximity, on-the-ground
knowledge and intimate understanding of the problems
are, in our view, guarantees of the success of such an
approach. Romania intends to organize a public
meeting of the Security Council next year on ways to
foster greater effectiveness in cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations that are
active in conflict resolution around the world.

The success of the African Union monitoring
mission in Darfur could be the success of a model to be
replicated in other African subregions and on other
continents. The partnership between the African Union
and the United Nations in facilitating the political
settlement and in solving the humanitarian crisis in
Darfur needs continuous backing from the international
community. In that regard, Romania supports the
actions of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Jan Pronk, to harmonize the efforts of
regional organizations and the global Organization on
the Darfur question.

Romania is of the view that we need to ensure
that the African Union has all the necessary resources
and our complete assistance in fulfilling its tasks.
Romania considers that a sustainable and long-lasting
solution to the Sudan's internal crisis can be found
only through political talks. The answer to the crisis
has to be a negotiated and mutually accepted political
solution. We therefore encourage a rapid conclusion of
the Naivasha peace talks.

While so much effort has been invested in the
North-South dimension of the peace process, we also
hope to see a political, negotiated solution to the
ongoing conflict in the western region of the Sudan.
We encourage both the Government of the Sudan and
the rebels to restart negotiations in good faith in order
to stop the humanitarian crisis in Darfur. Romania
hopes that the Government of the Sudan and the rebels
got the right message from Security Council
resolutions 1556 (2004) and 1564 (2004).

In its future consideration of the Darfur question,
the Council should strive harder to speak with one
voice. Romania undertakes to continue to work in that
direction. The Security Council's credibility and
resolve are at stake in Darfur. Now is the time for the
Council to take yet another step in implementing a new
approach involving, directly and firmly, regional
organizations in solving crises within their respective
areas. If that should prove workable in the Sudan -
which is, after all, home to the longest conflict on the
African continent - it could become a way of action
that might be successfully reproduced in other potential
or active crises in different regions of the world.

Romania looks forward to the Secretary-
General's report on the Sudan that will be issued by the
end of the month. We also look forward, more
importantly, to seeing positive evolutions on the
ground.

