Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): I have the honour to
report on the Council's visit to Addis Ababa, Khartoum
and Accra, which we undertook jointly with
Ambassador Jones Parry of the United Kingdom.

One of the most important things that we did was
to spend significant time in Addis Ababa with
Chairman Konare and other high officials, discussing
issues that always end up before this very Council as it
tries to find a way in which, in partnership with the
African Union (AU), we could make our work much
smoother and understand the positions of two different
bodies that happen to deal with similar issues.

One of the things we also did while in Addis
Ababa was to hold a formal Security Council meeting
together with the African Union Peace and Security
Council. Out of that meeting came a statement which
we have asked the President to circulate as an official
document of the Security Council. One of the things
that came out of our meeting with the African Union
Peace and Security Council was an agreement that we
would like to have these consultation meetings
between the United Nations Security Council and the
AU Peace and Security Council take place at least once
a year, if possible, and in each of the capitals. They
could come this way, or we could go that way, but at
least we would meet once a year. We also discussed
common issues that come before this Council because
most of the resolutions that we end up adopting
originate with the African Union Peace and Security
Council.
07-42533
With Chairman Konare we discussed an issue that
was very important to our mission and that was
upcoming: our trip to the Sudan. The discussion related
to what this Council can do in terms of preparing a
resolution on the Sudan. Chairman Konare, as shown
in paragraph 20 of the document before us, urged the
Security Council to "adopt a resolution authorizing the
operation and recommending United Nations funding"
(S/2007/42l, para. 20). Mr. Konare said that, in his
view, "assured funding would generate sufficient
numbers of African troops to maintain the African
character of the operation" (ibid.), as per agreement
between the United Nations and the AU.

As the Council knows, there is a draft before us
that has been provided by the United Kingdom, as the
lead country. We are looking at the draft, but we just
want to be sure that it stays in the spirit that we had on
the trip. It was a spirit of cooperation between the
United Nations, the African Union and the Government
of the Sudan in addressing the issues of Darfur. That
spirit is very important in terms of what will be
contained in the resolution, which should essentially be
an implementation resolution.

When we arrived in Khartoum, we met first with
Foreign Minister Ajawin, together with his high-level
officials, including the governors of the three Darfur
States. We engaged with them about the concerns that
this Council has about the situation in Darfur. Later on,
we also met with President Al-Bashir, and both
President Al-Bashir and Foreign Minister Ajawin, as
reflected in paragraph 24 of the report, confirmed their
full acceptance of the hybrid United Nations-African
Union operation. They said that they accepted it
without any conditionalities and expected the Security
Council to move ahead and adopt a resolution.

Our understanding of what the operation would
be is contained in paragraph 25 of the report, which
states that the operation would be as outlined in the
African Union-United Nations plans for the hybrid
operation in Darfur contained in the 5 June report of
the Secretary-General (S/2007/307/Rev.l), and would
be mandated by the AU Peace and Security Council -
which they have already done - and the United
Nations Security Council. We are looking at a draft
before us and trying to make it more relevant to the
understanding that we had all the time.

Another issue that is linked to the visit to Addis
Ababa and to Khartoum is that the Council would
07-42533

come back and consider requesting the preparation of
joint African Union-United Nations timelines for
deployment of the hybrid operation in Darfur. This
timeline is important, because we think it important for
everybody to know what is expected of the
Government of Sudan, what is expected of the AU and
what is expected of the Security Council.

The mission then proceeded to Accra to see
President Kufuor of Ghana, the Chairperson of the
African Union. Even though it was the eve of the AU
Summit, President Kufuor was able to set aside
significant time to meet with the United Nations
Security Council team. We had a working meeting that
included the Foreign Minister of Ghana, at which we
discussed a number of issues, including Somalia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Cote d'Ivoire;
the latter two States were part of our itinerary.
President Kufuor encouraged the Security Council to
follow up on those issues and adopt a resolution that
would quickly facilitate the deployment of a hybrid
operation in Sudan, as the situation was very serious
and needed urgent attention.

So, I must say, in conclusion, that, for my
delegation, it was an honour to be co-leader of this trip,
and I am sure that members of this Council - and
indeed, members of the wider United Nations
community - will see in this report that we tried to the
best of our ability to address all the urgent issues that
are important to the African continent. We also tried to
seek solutions and ways in which we could deal with
those issues. In the report, members will see, of course,
that the issue was not only Sudan, but we did receive
reports on other urgent issues on the African continent,
including the issue of the Lord's Resistance Army and
other relevant issues.

I present this report and say that, together with
my co-leader, we think that we met the mandate that
the Council had set out for us with this mission, and it
was indeed an honour for us to carry out the mission.

