Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
Allow me to start with one remark. Today resolution
2183 (2014), extending the mandate of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force, was unfortunately not
adopted unanimously. In that regard, I want to point out
to all States members of the Security Council that the
statement I will deliver today is approved by all three
members of the presidency of my country. That means
that this statement expresses the position of all three
constitutive peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
highest institution in charge of foreign policy, which in
our case is the presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I wish to thank High Representative Mr. Valentin
Inzko for his briefing. We take note of the forty-sixth
report (S/2014/777, annex) to the Security Council,
covering the period from 21 April to 21 October. I
would like to underline some key developments during
the reporting period.

First, general elections were successfully held in
Bosnia and Herzegovina on 12 October. My country
has a complex constitutional setup, which is reflected in
our electoral system. The legal framework for holding
elections is regulated by our Constitution and the
Election Law. The turnout was around 55 per cent. The
regularity of the elections was monitored by a number of
international and domestic observers. There were more
than 500 international observers from 38 countries, as
well as monitors from the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. Furthermore, civil society was
more active during the elections by forming a coalition
for free and fair elections - Pod Lupom, which means
"under the magnifying glass" - which brought together
seven non-governmental organizations from all parts
of the country. The coalition recruited and trained
more than 3,000 monitors and observers. The overall
conclusion of all the monitors was that the elections
were conducted in an orderly manner, in a democratic
and fair atmosphere and in accordance with the
Election Law. The citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina
have exercised their democratic right. They have cast
their votes and their choice must be respected. The
political parties are now in the process of forming the
new Government.

Secondly, in May my country was struck by an
unprecedented natural disaster, as many of today's
speakers have said. Severe rains, landslides and
catastrophic floods hit one quarter of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's territory. One million of our citizens
were affected across the country and thousands of them
were displaced from their homes. In some parts of the
country entire villages were wiped out by landslides
and floods. The total damage was estimated at around
€2 billion, which is equivalent to 15 per cent of our
gross domestic product. The floods also moved the
land mines, leaving large flooded areas insecure for the
return of those who were displaced.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
United Nations agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
led by the United Nations Development Programme,
for their quick reaction and strong support during the
dreadful days of the floods, as well as the damage
assessments and recovery. The new United Nations
delivering-as-one approach has proved to be very
efficient in our case. I also wish to convey our gratitude
to the European Union-led peacekeeping force, which
helped, in a coordinated action with the Bosnia and
Herzegovina armed forces, evacuate people from
flooded areas. It also helped protect certain villages and
homes and delivered food, clean water, medicine and
other assistance to the affected persons and families.
Our gratitude also goes to the European Union (EU), the
United Nations, the World Bank and other international
parties, as well as other friendly countries that came to
our assistance and have pledged significant financial
aid to Bosnia and Herzegovina at the international
donors conference organized in Brussels on 16 July.

Full recovery from that natural disaster is going
to take time. Authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
together with our international partners, will continue
recovery efforts to alleviate the suffering of the
affected population. It has been said many times that
the natural disaster showed the world the best side of
my country, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the region.
People demonstrated solidarity, humanism, hospitality
and care for their neighbours.

Thirdly, I should like to turn the attention of Council
members to an important issue regarding the status of
refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina. Annex VII of
the Dayton Peace Agreement guarantees all refugees
the right to return to their pre-war homes. Although the
process of the return and local integration of refugees
and internally displaced persons remains a top priority
for my country, the necessary conditions for sustainable
return have still not been created everywhere in my
country. Thus, the initiative of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on a possible
termination of refugee status would at this time most
certainly have a negative impact on our refugees and
our country. We therefore oppose such a termination at
this time.

Fourthly, Bosnia and Herzegovina has moved from
being a post-war transition country to being a contributor
to international peacebuilding and security-building
efforts. Bearing in mind the changing nature ofconflicts
throughout the world, the response of the international
community must change accordingly. In line with that
View, and with the current threat of foreign fighters
participating in ongoing conflicts, on 6 June Bosnia and
Herzegovina adopted a law amending the criminal code
of Bosnia and Herzegovina that prohibits and sanctions
any form of the participation of our citizens in foreign
paramilitary or parapolice formations by eitherjoining,
mobilizing, organizing, promoting or financing terrorist
activities. Furthermore, in September my country
began the prosecution of 16 individuals under that law.
All relevant institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina
will continue to actively participate and cooperate with
our international partners in combating terrorism and
countering violent extremism. We believe that such
terrorism can be defeated only with a firm approach
and the active engagement and cooperation of all States.

For almost 15 years, Bosnia and Herzegovina
has continuously contributed to United Nations-
led peacekeeping operations in Haiti, Liberia, East
Timor, Cyprus, South Sudan, the Sudan and the
Congo. Currently, police officers from Bosnia and
Herzegovina, 21 per cent of whom are women, are
deployed in the United Nations peacekeeping missions
in Liberia, South Sudan and Cyprus. Those police
officers' contributions have been highly appreciated
and respected. We strongly believe that the participation
of women in conflict prevention and mediation is
crucial to the maintenance and building of peace and
stability. We also have a policy that women should
make up at least one-third of our nominated candidates
for peacekeeping missions.

In conclusion, I wish to underscore that the
Euro-Atlantic integration processes remain high on
the list of our foreign policy priorities. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a potential candidate for European
Union membership. Six years ago, we signed the
Stabilization and Association Agreement with the EU.
We look forward to the Agreement entering into force in
the near future so that we can move to the next phase of
the integration process. The new Government will face
the challenges of fulfilling the conditions for applying
for and achieving European Union candidate status.
The new phase of integration would give an impetus
to achieving a greater political stability and accelerate
the economic recovery of the country. We welcome and
support the refocused, progressive engagement of the
European Union in Bosnia and Herzegovina to facilitate
reform processes, and especially to strengthen the rule
of law and good governance and to speed up other
necessary reforms.

Generally speaking, good governance, a strong
educational system and a vibrant civil society are keys
to promoting a culture of dialogue and tolerance. In that
sense, in July the presidency ofBosnia and Herzegovina
signed on to the United Nations project Dialogue for the
future: promoting coexistence and diversity in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The project, launched jointly by
the United Nations and our presidency, will serve to
promote peacebuilding processes by providing a space
and platform for citizens, civil society representatives
and local leaders to work jointly on promoting civic and
intercultural dialogue and trust building.

Finally, my country will continue to make efforts
to implement positive reforms with the aim of securing
stability, progress and prosperity for all our citizens.

