Fiji congratulates the Dominican Republic on assuming the presidency of the Council during this particularly trying period for the whole world. Fiji thanks the President for continuing to schedule open debates via video-teleconference and for allowing non-members of the Council to contribute, particularly given the current restrictions. As we celebrate the fifth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015), we recognize that young people play an important and positive role in the maintenance and promotion of international peace and security. Resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) stress the need for the equal and full participation of young people in peace and security. In the Secretary-General's first- ever report to the Council on youth, peace and security, he highlights that there is "growing recognition of young people's essential role in peace and security", but that "core challenges remain" (S/2020/167, para. 10). Across so many conflicts, young people are among the first to suffer when livelihoods are destroyed. They suffer when their access to education is thwarted or denied. They suffer when merchants of conflict prey upon their uncertainties to radicalize and turn them into weapons of war and conflict. They suffer even more when we, the United Nations, are unable or unwilling to give this issue the urgency that it requires. That must change. When our young people suffer, so does our collective future, and so do we all - countries in conflict and countries not facing extreme conflict. Fiji welcomes and supports the 2030 United Nations Youth Strategy. We fully support its call for increasing youth engagement in sustainable development, human rights, peace and security - both in forums and in humanitarian action. Effective youth partnerships take time, resources and skill. For many countries, adequately resourcing such action plans remains a challenge. Fiji has established policies within our national development plan to empower young people. National youth exchange programmes, national youth conferences and national youth parliaments are some initiatives implemented by the Fijian Government to listen directly to youth voices. Fiji has made a habit of ensuring that its young are able to participate in forums such as the United Nations Climate Change Conference and the 2019 United Nations Climate Action Summit, held during the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly, so that they can directly project their voices to the world. But our young people, like young people everywhere, face challenges and pressures of an intensity not seen since the Great Depression. The report of the Secretary-General brings many of these challenges and pressures home to us. Nearly 1.9 billion of the world's young people live in or face the threat of extreme poverty. The Secretary-General's report indicates that young people are gravely underrepresented in peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development interventions. The report also suggests that the world's young are facing an increasingly uncertain future. All these pressures are more intense and more widespread in poor, small island and landlocked developing States. The President has drawn attention to another grave challenge before us: the COVID-19 pandemic. This pandemic is undoubtedly affecting young people around the world. The health, economic, social and eventual political pressures that this pandemic will create will be far greater in the poorer and conflict-affected regions of the world, and they will be far greater in small island developing States like my own. The United Nations system, and in particular the Security Council, should be called upon to assess the implications of the COVID-19 pandemic on the youth, peace and security agenda. An early discussion will be useful in framing a Security Council's response and, more broadly, a United Nations response, even though the tragedy is still unfolding. We must take note that poorer countries, including small island and landlocked developing States, have woefully insufficient access to the scale of resources needed to cushion the impacts of COVID-19 on their communities. The livelihoods, opportunities and health of our young, and of especially girls and young women, are being destroyed, affecting the lives of tens of millions of people across many countries. This is a problem for countries making a transition out of conflict, a problem for countries torn by conflict, a problem for countries at high risk of conflict, a problem for small island developing States and for all poor countries. Only last week, an Arria Formula meeting was held by members of the Security Council on climate change and security. Climate change is a threat multiplier that affects all regions of the world. We all know the numbers: for every 0.5°C in warming, the risk of conflict increases by around 20 per cent. The combined impacts of climate change and COVID-19 on young people are even more worrisome, which is why today's debate on the importance of youth in the areas of peace and security is so timely. Allow me to address three issues in response to the questions the President has raised. First, the Security Council will benefit from direct briefings by young people who are heroically leading efforts aimed at rebuilding and maintaining peace in many conflicted-affected regions, especially in countries where the United Nations has deployed political missions and peace operations. The Council does not hear their voices directly or often enough. Young people's expectations from resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) need to be heard. Secondly, we suggest that the Secretariat provide a detailed analysis of how the security impacts of climate change are affecting young people, especially women and girls, around the world, particularly in countries where United Nations political missions and peace operations are deployed. Thirdly, we suggest that youth advocates for the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) examine more carefully the interconnected nature of peace, security and development. In recent weeks, peace operations have become even more complicated than they were before. The implications of amended mandates for peace operations must be carefully considered. United Nations peacebuilding programmes need to work more closely with young men and women and focus on their vulnerabilities and the imperative of bringing their talents into the process of creating opportunities for development. The world's compass - the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the SDGs - remains more relevant than ever. We have not paid enough attention to unleashing the full creative and political force of the world's young people in our efforts aimed at achieving the SDGs. We will fail if we continue with a business-as- usual approach. The youth, peace and security mandate and the women and peace and security mandate are two fundamental signposts for the international system to use to steer us through this turbulent period. Combined, they will be a powerful tool in creating the foundations for making more solid and irreversible progress towards the achievement of the SDGs. It took 70 years for the Security Council to recognize the critical role that the young can play in the peace and security agenda. We need to act comprehensively to implement resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018). Fiji pledges its full support to the Security Council in maintaining international peace and security during this difficult period and to its efforts aimed at implementing these resolutions.
