Mr. Ruiieka (Slovakia): Slovakia welcomes the
opportunity to speak in this open debate on United
Nations peacekeeping, with a focus on the nexus
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We align
ourselves with the position presented earlier today by
the observer of the European Union. In addition, let me
make a few remarks from the point of view of the Slovak
Republic. We fully support the idea that peacekeepers
are essentially early peace builders and we look forward
to the discussion today on how to strengthen synergies
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

It is important to note that the role played by
United Nations peacekeeping missions has changed
considerably in recent years. That evolution can be seen
in particular in the area of justice and security sector
reform (SSR). Peacekeepers are now asked to take on
a more proactive role and have become peacebuilders.
Early stages focus mainly on the stabilization of SSR
aspects that are often linked to certain peace agreement
clauses. With security restored, as the focus shifts
to peacebuilding it is important to ensure that the
accountability objective of SSR is not forgotten and is
fully taken into account in the country's reconstruction
and development plan.

Slovakia co-chairs the United Nations Group of
Friends of Security Sector Reform. Let me share some
insights drawn from a series of events on the United
Nations approach to SSR that we organized in December
2012. With the support of the Geneva Centre for the
Democratic Control of Armed Forces, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Development Programme, we launched the first set of
United Nations integrated technical guidance notes on
SSR. We also organized a high-level meeting of the
Group of Friends of SSR and an expert-level seminar on
"The United Nations and SSR: towards the next report
of the Secretary-General on SSR".

Those events provided some key lessons that are
of relevance to today's debate. Notably, in order to
support effective multidimensional peacekeeping,
there is a need, first, for clarity on strategic priorities
across the peacekeeping and peacebuilding continuum;
secondly, appropriate capacities to match the needs
of peacekeeping missions; and thirdly, effective
partnerships based on coordination, cooperation and
comparative advantages.

The United Nations integrated technical guidance
notes were developed by the United Nations inter-agency
Security Sector Reform Task Force. The guidance
notes are intended to support field and headquarters
practitioners and deal with issues such as democratic
governance of the security sector, peace processes and
gender responsive security sector reform.

Of particular relevance to today's debate is the
guidance note on United Nations support to national
security policy and strategy-making processes.
Supporting national processes from the outset of a
peacekeeping mission can help national actors to
articulate a national strategic vision based on clear
priorities that can guide international support through
the evolution from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.
National security policymaking can thus help to
enhance the coherence of international efforts in the
area of SSR, support integrated planning within the
United Nations system, and enable the allocation of
resources in line with national strategic priorities.

The high-level meeting of the Group of Friends of
SSR involved presentations from Member States that
had organized regional workshops on the United Nations
approach to SSR. For example, Indonesia and Slovakia
jointly hosted such an event in Jakarta in 2010, entitled
"The Role of the United Nations in Multidimensional
Peacekeeping Operations and Post-Conflict
Peacebuilding: Towards an Association of Southeast
Asian Nations Perspective". The meeting highlighted
the fact that United Nations multidimensional
peacekeeping has essentially become "peacebuilding
with security guarantees". Against that background,
calls were made for greater complementarity of efforts
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding actors. It was
noted, however, that this depends largely on resource
challenges. There is a need to address issues such as the
separate funding of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
and the need to consider the interoperability of various
funding instruments. On the other hand, efforts are
also needed in the area of human resources, notably by
enhancing civilian expertise in peacekeeping, in line
with the civilian capacity initiative.

Getting the right people into the right posts at the
right time is crucial, whether in a civilian, police or
military capacity. Thanks to the observations of the
Senior Advisory Group (in S/2011/85), we know where
gaps are and therefore where to focus our attention to
ensure that field missions are staffed appropriately and
in a timely fashion to deliver on important Security
Council mandates.

SSR is not a separate set of tasks, but rather a
process that impacts on and is influenced by many
others. That means that training peacekeeping
personnel in SSR needs to be fully integrated across
missions, incorporating units responsible for different
areas and dimensions. Joint SSR training should occur
both before deployment and throughout the mandate of
a mission as context and linkages evolve.

Lastly, allow me to say that with the multitude of
actors on the ground providing assistance, coordination
among international and national stakeholders remains
as important as ever. It is worth mentioning that one of
the key recommendations that emerged from the recent
SSR events hosted by Slovakia was the key importance
of strengthening partnerships between the United
Nations and Member States, regional and subregional
organizations and non-State actors involved in SSR.
Partnerships should also entail a greater focus on
providing support to South-South cooperation in the
area of security sector reform and peacekeeping.

