Mr. Akbaruddin (India): Since the start of this
year there has been sharper focus by the Security
Council on issues relating to Afghanistan. The
Council members' visit to Afghanistan, the ministerial
debate on Afghanistan and regional connectivity (see S/PV.8162) and the enhanced focus by the Chairman
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011) on the situation in the country all bode
well for the attention that the worsening situation in
Afghanistan necessitates.

I thank you, Madam President, for following that
welcome trend and organizing today's debate. We also
thank Ambassador Yamamoto, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for sharing his insights on
the prospects for peace ahead of us in 2018. We also
appreciate the eloquent portrayals of the strides made
by Afghan women and what more needs to be done in
that regard.

The report (S/2018/165) of the Secretary General
has highlighted what we feared. The year 2017 was
perhaps the worst year in terms of civilian causalities
and security incidents in Afghanistan. Thousands
of innocent and precious Afghan lives fell prey to
mindless violence. It is in that context that we welcome
the adoption of resolution 2405 (2018), which extends
the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), as an affirmation of the
collective objective of support for the Afghan people.
The brave Afghan people must not lose hope, and we,
the international community, must not lose heart.

We specifically welcome the Council's focus on
linkages among extremism, terrorism, drug production
and the illegal exploitation of the natural resources of
Afghanistan. The increase in the cultivation of poppy
in the areas under the control of the Taliban and the
Taliban's involvement in virtually all aspects of the
opium trade suggest that it is akin to a drug cartel. We
hope that the Council will better utilize the range of
tools available to it to deal with those transnational
networks of drugs, terrorism and crime.

Despite the international community's efforts,
those supporting the terrorists affecting Afghanistan
have not been deterred. There are still those who provide
sanctuaries to support the dark agendas of terrorist
organizations like the Taliban, the Haqqani Network,
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, Al-Qaida,
Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and Jaish-e-Mohammed. Indeed, the
challenges posed by cross-border terrorism emanating
from safe havens and sanctuaries to Afghanistan and to
our region must be addressed.

Today being International Women's Day, we join
in acknowledging that women are perhaps the worst-
affected by the protracted conflict and violence in
Afghanistan. Notwithstanding the continuing conflict
situation, Afghanistan has come a long way since the
days of the Taliban, who had reduced women to less
than second-class citizens under a despotic regime.
Women in the country are no longer imprisoned in their
homes and are making progress in all sectors, from
technology to athletics and from transportation to the
civil service. As we heard earlier, they are committed to
continuing their struggles in order to play a significant
role in building a progressive and stable society. Afghan
women have achieved a lot in the two recent decades.
We must not allow those gains to be lost or wasted.

India has invested over $2 billion in Afghanistan
since 2002 in the reconstruction and development of
the country. A major focus of our work has been on
nearly 550 high-impact community development
projects, which cut across areas such as education,
health, agriculture and irrigation, power and energy.
All ofthem have a direct bearing on improving the lives
of all Afghans, including girls and women, specially so
for projects in the education and health-care sectors.

Indian women's non-governmental orgainzations
have undertaken various activities in Afghanistan
such, as vocational training of Afghan women in India,
as well as establishing women's vocational training
centres in various provinces of Afghanistan. They have
been working for almost a decade with poor women
workers and sending them for training-of-trainers
sessions in India. To date, 150 women trainers have
been trained in India out of the target of 200 up until
May 2018. In addition, more than 3,000 Afghan women
have been trained in Kabul and other provinces in
Afghanistan to help them to establish a women's self-
help organizations in Kabul. During the past three years,
about 5,000 Afghan female students have been trained
under various higher education scholarship schemes.
Moreover, several rural women from Afghanistan have
been trained at the Barefoot College in Raj asthan, India,
in the field of solar electrification. We will continue
our work on the ground to help the women and girls of
Afghanistan become self-reliant and capable of playing
an effective part in the reconstruction of their country.

If we are to preserve the achievements of Afghan
women and girls, the international community must
continue to extend its full support to an Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process.
The Afghan National Unity Government recently
once again issued a new call for peace and proposed a
concrete approach to the Taliban to join the mainstream.
The Afghan Government's willingness for peace is
despite the fact that armed groups have identified
themselves and demonstrated to all of us that they
are the irreconcilables. Those efforts by the Afghan
Government calling on the armed groups to cease
violence and join the national peace and reconciliation
process, which would protect the rights of all Afghans,
including women, children and minorities, deserve
our full support. However, it should also be clear to
the armed opposition that there will be no tolerance
for those who continue violence. Any violence needs
a robust response. The irreconcilable guns need to
be silenced.

The indomitable courage of the Afghan people,
the spirit of the Afghan youth and the strength of their
dreams are a source of collective pride for our region.
India is committed to continuing its efforts to strengthen
that spirit by supporting all initiatives designed to end
violence and bring back peace.

