Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): I take this
opportunity to congratulate the German delegation on
its assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of July, as well as to thank the delegation of
Gabon for its leadership of the Council during the
month of June.

We thank you, Mr. President, and your delegation
for convening this important thematic debate and for
your effective leadership on this issue. We also
acknowledge the fact that the Council has remained
seized of this important matter, especially through the
continued oversight and consistent support of its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We
strongly believe that it is important that the Council
remain seized of the matter.

Papua New Guinea, having ratified the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, continues to
support its implementation, more specifically as it
relates to children in situations of armed conflict. We
also continue to support the four core principles of the
Convention, which are, first, non-discrimination;
secondly, devotion to the best interests of the child;
thirdly, the right to life, survival and development; and,
lastly, respect for the views of the child.

While the organization Security Council Report's
recent fourth Cross-Cutting Report on Children and
Armed Conflict, dated 6 July, notes that much has been
achieved, much more remains to be done.

In that respect, we observe and express our deep
concern for the continued numerous violations
perpetrated against children around the world.
Furthermore, we would note the following six specific
grave violations against children of which, we believe,
the Council is aware and must continue to examine: the
killing and maiming of children; sexual violence
against children; the recruitment and use of children as
child soldiers; attacks on schools and hospitals; the
denial of humanitarian access to children; and
abductions of children. My country therefore supports
the Council's resolutions that seek to protect children,
especially resolutions 1612 (2005) and 1882 (2009).
The present debate is also about attacks on
schools and hospitals. My delegation underlines the
importance of schools and the right of children to
education. We therefore call for the creation of zones
of peace for schools and urge the Council to support
actions towards securing schools around the world.

In conclusion, my country reiterates its support
to, and commends the work of, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy. We
also commend the relevant United Nations agencies,
including UNICEF and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, for their commitment to
addressing this area of critical concern to the
international community. We pledge our support for
their work.

Finally, if the children of the world are to become
our future then surely we, the international community,
have an obligation to ensure a better future for them.

