Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
The Russian Federation is convinced that a decisive
resolution of the humanitarian crisis will be impossible
while the humanitarian sanctions continue. We have
consistently advocated putting an end to the sanctions
regime in the context of the renewal of disarmament
monitoring in Iraq. We will keep working in this direction
in the future.
Unfortunately, in spite of the efforts to implement a
humanitarian resolution, the overall situation of the Iraqi
population and the degradation of the social and economic
infrastructure of the country has continued to worsen
further. The problem of delivering urgently needed goods
and equipment to the population is growing because the
contracts are being blocked in the sanctions Committee.

In this connection, based on the need to take urgent
steps in order to correct the situation that has developed,
the Russian Federation proposed that we adopt a draft
resolution to further extend the humanitarian operations of
the United Nations, taking into account the
recommendations of the Secretary-General and the
conclusions of the humanitarian panel chaired by Celso
Amorim on the necessity of enhancing the humanitarian
operations of the United Nations.

We believe that it is extremely important that such
measures as raising the oil ceiling, increasing the quota
for deliveries to Iraq of spare parts for the oil industry,
simplifying the procedure for considering contracts in the
sanctions Committee and resolving the problem of air
transport connections with Baghdad enter into effect now,
within the framework of a new phase of the operation,
thereby enhancing its effectiveness. Unfortunately, our
argument that all items pertaining to the humanitarian
blockade should be considered within the framework of
a comprehensive resolution on Iraq was not taken into
account by a number of delegations.

Given the position taken by a number of members of
the Council, we do not object to the adoption of a short,
technical draft resolution to extend the sixth phase of the
United Nations humanitarian operations by two weeks on
the understanding that the next phase of the effort to
resolve the humanitarian problem is to be determined
later. That will include taking into account continuing
work on the entire Iraqi problem.

We would like to make it clear that our position on
this draft resolution should not in any way be considered
as having any linkage with our position on the
comprehensive draft resolution that must be adopted by
the Security Council when the two-week period has
elapsed. In other words, such a technical solution should
not at all determine the timetable for conclusion of work
on an omnibus draft resolution, and we do not take upon
ourselves any obligations in this respect. In order to find

 

a way out of the Iraqi deadlock, we must reach agreement
on the essence of the serious problems that remain.
Attempts to establish any kind of artificial timetable would
not be appropriate.

