Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): I would like to
warmly welcome both Mr. Bildt and Mr. Solana, and to
thank Mr. Bildt for his comprehensive briefing.

Mindful of the concept to hold today's meeting in
the form of an interactive dialogue with the Special
Envoy, I would like to limit my remarks to the
following several points.

After decade-long efforts to bring about lasting
peace and reconciliation to the Balkans, the situation in
this part of Europe still requires constant international
attention and involvement. In responding to different
conflicts in the Balkans over the years, the
international community - with the United Nations at
the forefront- has acquired a long record of both
successes and failures. What we have just heard from
Mr. Bildt reinforces my delegation's conviction that the
establishment of a lasting and self-sustaining peace in
the Balkans can be achieved only by addressing all the
existing problems of a regional dimension, and with the
participation of all the countries of the region. We
totally agree with Mr. Bildt's view on the need for a
political framework that provides stability for the entire
region, since to contain or to solve the tensions in one
part ofthe region will not suffice.

Today it seems that all of us are largely satisfied
with the remarkable progress achieved by the post-
conflict peace-building efforts in Croatia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the absence of inter-ethnic
violence in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. At the same time, the dangerous
developments in the situation in Kosovo remain a
source of grave concern to us, and are a constant threat
to international achievements towards peace in the
whole region. My country is deeply disturbed by the
increasing upsurge of ethnically related violence
against non-Albanians. This must be stopped by any
means.

We cannot be satisfied with Kosovo's steady
movement towards independence.

We were pleased to take note of Mr. Bildt's
remark made at the South-East Europe high-level
conference held in Tokyo last May. We can affirm the
similarity of our assessments that a regional political
framework for Kosovo is possible only if there is an
international consensus on what we are trying to
achieve there. It is difficult to disagree with Mr. Bildt
that the future of Kosovo should one day be settled
through an arrangement and agreement between Serbia
and Kosovo, thus making peace in the region possible.
This is the only viable scenario.

At the same time, we are not convinced that there
cannot be any dialogue to that end with the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia under its current leadership.
Such a dialogue should be sought for the sake of peace
in the region and for the future of this country. In our
view, the increasing tendency to exclude and isolate the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia from the regional
framework is counter-productive, because this country
remains a key player in a final settlement of any
existing problems and disputes in the Balkans.

We agree with the point that the future structure
of the entire region can be substantially affected by the
future of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. What we
should therefore avoid now is putting this country in
such a position that will impede it from becoming
democratic and integrated into the European family of
nations.

I would also like to reiterate our support for Mr.
Bildt's view that any long-term strategy for stability
and peace in the region is based on the successful
pursuit of the comprehensive reform of all societies
devastated by conflict, the reintegration of the region
into the European and global infrastructure, and
reconciliation between all the States and nations of the
region.

Undoubtedly, the issues of refugee returns and
economic reconstruction remain central to the entire
process of ensuring regional stability. In this context,
factual accounts of increased returns of refugees and
displaced persons to Bosnia are encouraging. The
commitment of the new leadership of Croatia to
solving the existing problem of refugee returns to that
country should also be acknowledged. At the same
time, we believe that much more has to be done to
create the conditions for solving the problem of
refugees and internally displaced persons in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and for reversing the continued
mass exodus of national minorities from Kosovo as a
result of systematic acts of violence against them.

My delegation again emphasizes the significance
of the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe as a
basic document that provides a solid regional
framework for the economic reconstruction of the
Balkans as a whole, and reiterates Ukraine's interest in
becoming closely associated with this process.

I must now raise another point that seems to be of
the utmost importance. That point is the lack of
established dialogue between the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General and the Security Council.
Unfortunately, the Council does not have at its disposal
sufficient information about Mr. Bildt's activities in the
Balkans and his regional approaches. We are grateful to
Mr. Bildt for his presentation today, but even an
excellent briefing cannot substitute for a written
document containing concrete recommendations for the
Council's consideration. We are disappointed by the
fact that in the last three months the Secretariat has
failed to prepare and to submit a report to the Council
on Mr. Bildt's activities and regional approaches for
the Balkans. In our view, such a document is
indispensable. We also see the merit of defining the
time-frame for submitting such reports to the Council
on a regular basis, say every six months.

My delegation is of the view that Mr. Bildt's
broad mandate can allow him to address some Balkan
issues that for different reasons are outside the focus of
the Security Council. We also deem it important for
Mr. Bildt to play a more active role in the coordination
of efforts between the international actors on the
ground, including all the United Nations missions in
the Balkans. Therefore the establishment of the usual
practice of such briefings in the form of an interactive
dialogue between the Council and the Special
Envoy - such as the one we are having today - along
with the submission of the Secretary-General's report
on a regular basis, will be quite beneficial. It will
obviously enable the Council to have a better grasp of
Mr. Bildt's activities and, when necessary, to extend its
political support to him or use his good offices.

Back in February, my delegation also asked the
Secretariat to provide additional information about the
activities ofthe second Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Balkans, Mr. Kukan. Unfortunately, no
briefing has been delivered. I would therefore like to
repeat that request again.

Finally, let me reiterate the readiness of my
country to continue its contribution to our joint
endeavours to restore peace and security in the Balkans
from the regional perspective advocated by Mr. Bildt.
We look forward to positively considering his new
ideas presented to the Council today.

In conclusion, I wish Mr. Bildt every success in
his activities in the Balkans.

