The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.

Speaking in my national capacity, I wish to state that
Japan has on numerous occasions expressed its hope for
the early conclusion of an agreement to bring an end to
the decades-long conflict in Guatemala. Japan, thus,
heartily welcomes the signing by the Government of
Guatemala and the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional
Guatemalteca (URNG) on 29 December last year of the
Agreement on a Firm and Lasting Peace. Both parties are
to be commended for their courageous and determined

 

efforts in achieving this important and decisive first step
towards peace and national reconciliation. I should like to
add that this peace Agreement is truly of historic
significance in that it puts an end to the last internal
conflict in the region. Peoples throughout Central America
can now look forward to building a peaceful and prosperous
future.

The involvement of the United Nations played an
important, indeed, I would say crucial role in bringing the
two sides to the negotiating table and in achieving a
successful outcome, reminding us once again of the
valuable contribution this Organization continues to make
to the maintenance of international peace and security. I
should also like to express my admiration for the
contributions made by the Group of Friends of the
Guatemala Peace Process in promoting the negotiations.

Japan strongly hopes that genuine and enduring peace
will take firm hold in Guatemala, and would urge the
Government of Guatemala and its people to join together in
the effort to achieve national reconciliation and economic
and social development. We believe that the deployment of
a group of 155 military observers and medical personnel
will be useful in solidifying the peace, and thus we strongly
support the draft resolution authorizing that effort. My
delegation expresses its sincere appreciation to the countries
that participated in drafting such a concise and effective
draft resolution. We hope that it will be adopted
unanimously, thus demonstrating to the broader
international community that the Security Council is indeed
united in supporting the consolidation of peace in
Guatemala and, in particular, the role that the United
Nations has to play in that process.

In closing, let me take this opportunity to state that the
Government of Japan has followed with great interest and
concern the peace and democratization process in
Guatemala. At the time of the presidential election in
November 1995, for example, Japan sent an electoral
observer and made a contribution of $100,000 to the
Organization of American States for its election monitoring
activities. It also sent two electoral observers for the
presidential election held in January 1996. Japan intends to
make further contributions, both political and financial, to
the peace process in Guatemala, taking into account the
specific needs of that country.

I now resume my functions as the President of the
Security Council.

I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained
in document S/ 1997/ 18.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Chile, Costa Rica, Egypt, France, Guinea
Bissau, Japan, Kenya, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation,
Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America

Against:
China

The President: The result of the voting is as
follows: 14 in favour, one against and no abstentions. The
draft resolution has not been adopted, owing to the
negative vote of a permanent member of the Security
Council.

I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting on the
draft resolution.


