Mr. Oyarzun (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful for the opportunity given to my delegation to
participate in this open debate on the activities of the
three Security Council Committees focused on the
fight against terrorism. In that regard, I would like
fully to endorse the statement to be made by the
representative of the European Union delegation.
Spain believes that the Security Council has made
great efforts since the 1990s to build a counter-
terrorism system that, as a whole, is satisfactory and
should be supported and improved as necessary in a
duly constructive spirit by all States. This work of the
Security Council should be complementary to the
counter-terrorism efforts developed by the General
Assembly, which should be the preferred forum for

articulating the overall response of the international
community to global problems of our day. Spain is
firmly committed to active multilateralism in the fight
against terrorism and believes that the implementation
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, adopted by consensus by the General
Assembly in 2006, is a valuable tool against the global
threat posed by terrorism.

Respect for the rule of law and human rights is
basic in the fight against terrorism. Spain will therefore
always support reforms of the system that allow that
fight to be conducted in a more fair, rational and
transparent way, with full respect for human rights. The
guarantees provided for in resolution 1904 (2009)
concerning the listing procedures of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
constitute a concrete example of the constructive spirit
of improvement I mentioned earlier.

Spain also contributes actively to promoting the
Alliance of Civilizations, an initiative of the Secretary-
General that seeks in a practical way to promote
understanding and cooperative relations among States
and peoples of all cultures, so as to address all kinds of
extremism and fanaticism that could lead to violence.

In that regard, I would like to refer to the
informational meeting of the Security Council held on
26 May, which was devoted to intercultural dialogue
for peace and security and convened by the presidency
of Lebanon (see S/PV.6322). I would also like to refer
to the victims of terrorism. In that connection, Spain
believes that we must respond by highlighting their
status, visibility and testimony. We therefore hope that
the Security Council will encourage the necessary
follow-through to the intention expressed in resolution
1566 (2004), on assistance to victims of terrorism,
through a support fund or a practical assistance
mechanism, which is also called for in the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

I would like to thank the Chairs of the 1267
Committee, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) for the information
provided today and for the work that they have been
carrying out together with their expert groups to fulfil
the mandates assigned to them. In that regard, we
appreciate their intention to strengthen cooperation
among themselves and to organize joint initiatives and
visits to States so that States may better understand
their degree of compliance with their obligations.

Resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540
(2004) constitute concrete actions by the Council in
defence of international peace and security against the
threat posed by international terrorism. Spain would
like, first of all, to highlight the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999),
concerning Al-Qaida, the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities. Specifically, we would like to
point to the recent review of the consolidated list
within the deadline, 30 July, which will help to monitor
compliance with the sanctions regime imposed by the
Security Council. Resolution 1904 (2009) introduced
improvements in the procedures of the individual
sanctions established by resolution 1267 (1999) and
increased due process guarantees so as to set fair and
clear procedures regarding the matter of listing and de-
listing.

Spain would also like to highlight the work done
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate to ensure compliance with resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005) and to facilitate technical
assistance to countries that request it.

Today, new threats to international peace and
security are linked to the proliferation and trafficking
of weapons of mass destruction in the hands of non-
State actors or States outside or in violation of
international law. Therefore, Spain would like to
express its support for the work performed by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and for its efforts to design mechanisms for
monitoring the implementation of that resolution, and
for the work to extend its universal application.

Terrorism constitutes a grave threat to
international peace and security, has devastating effects
on innocent people in all regions of the world and aims
to undermine supreme values extolled in the United
Nations Charter. It is time that Member States above
all, under the aegis of the Organization, show strong
political will to confront this barbarism and that we use
all means that the United Nations Charter provides us.

