Mr. Belle (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Pascoe for his briefing.

Let me begin with a few comments on the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. We are now in an interim phase.
The year 2006 saw the situation deteriorate, while 2007
has given us reason for hope. Direct dialogue between
the parties has resumed with regular summit meetings;
the regional players have renewed their commitment,
as evidenced by the Mecca Agreement and the
reaffirmation of the Arab Peace Initiative; and the
international community, in particular the Quartet, has
renewed its involvement. But hope remains fragile, and
to avoid any backsliding all the players must work
together and translate their dialogue into concrete
action.

I turn first to the parties. Belgium supports
President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert in their
intention to meet regularly, which should enable them
to restore mutual trust and to make progress that their
respective peoples will feel in terms of improved living
conditions and security. But such interim issues should
not overshadow the real need for discussion of the
future: how to achieve a solution based on two States
living side by side in peace and security. Too
frequently, the past has shown us that, for lack of
credible political vision, deeply-felt desires have led
nowhere. In the meantime, Belgium calls upon the
Israeli and Palestinian Governments to make every
effort to maintain and consolidate the Gaza ceasefire
agreed upon in November 2006. The continued firing
of rockets, the recent violent confrontations and
statements made in the past few days are all of great
concern in that regard. The goal must continue to be to
maintain the ceasefire and extend it throughout the
occupied territories.

We welcomed the establishment of a Palestinian
Government of National Unity as a positive
development, and we expect its programme and, above
all, in its actions to reflect the change of course agreed
upon at Mecca and a willingness to reflect the Quartet
principles. In Belgium's View, security sector reform
must be a priority for the Palestinian Government, the
Palestinian presidency and the international
community. Moreover, we call upon the Israeli
Government to make powerful symbolic gestures with
a View to strengthening the current bilateral discussion
by returning Palestinian tax and customs revenues and
by ceasing the expansion of settlements in the occupied
territories and the construction of the separation wall
beyond the Green Line.

Turning to the role of regional actors, Belgium
joins the Secretary-General in welcoming the proactive
efforts of the Arab countries, as seen at the Riyadh
Summit. We encourage this active role, which since
that Summit has been reflected in last week's Cairo
ministerial-level decision to establish working groups
to explore, together with international actors and with
Israel, the contribution of the Arab Peace Initiative and
ways of reviving the Middle East peace process. Here,
Belgium welcomes the Quartet's renewed commitment
to play its role as a catalyst for the efforts of the
international community, in particular through
increased cooperation with regional actors.

With respect to Lebanon, we do not want this
dangerous situation to continue without a response. All
of us, in Lebanon and elsewhere, must work to
safeguard the country's stability and sovereignty. We
therefore call upon all Lebanese political players to act
responsibly by making it possible for State institutions
to function normally with a View to buttressing that
sovereignty. We share the View of the Secretary-
General, as expressed in his recent report (S/2007/ 147)
on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), that
deployment of UNIFIL and of the Lebanese army south
of the Litani river has brought about genuine strategic
changes. These changes give rise to hope, but
resolution 1701 (2006) is a complex machine that must
remain in motion. The Secretary-General has a central
role to play in maintaining this momentum. Here, we
welcome the consensus reached in the Security Council
last week in support of the Secretary-General's
proposals, specifically the dispatch, with the consent of
the Lebanese Government, of an independent
assessment mission to monitor the border.

In conclusion, because of our common concern
for the stability of Lebanon and the fight against
impunity, we look forward with interest to a report on
the mission of support for the Lebanese parties led by
Mr. Nicolas Michel, Under-Secretary-General for
Legal Affairs.

