Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahiga, for his
comprehensive briefing, and wish him every success in
his work for peace and stability in Somalia. I also
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kenya and
thank him for his valuable contribution, and stress the
importance of the statement made the Permanent
Representative of Somalia.

We support the Djibouti peace process in
Somalia, and stress the need to identify a
comprehensive approach to the situation in that country
for a peace that addresses not only security but also
economic development and the promotion of the
country's institutions.

Lebanon condemns the acts of piracy and armed
robbery off the shores of Somalia, which threaten
navigation and international trade and obstruct the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. Lebanon maintains
that addressing the root causes of piracy will lead us

10-5364]
into the interior of Somalia, which will require
building the capacities of the Transitional Federal
Government (TF G) and its armed forces, and assisting
it in providing employment opportunities for Somalis.

We have considered the Secretary-General's
report (S/2010/447) and would like to stress the
following points. In regard to the political process, we
commend the work done by Somali institutions in
certain areas, although their capabilities have been
limited. Here, we note in particular the preparation of a
draft constitution by December 2010. We call on the
TFG to resolve its differences, move forward on
fulfilling its commitments and implementing its main
tasks, and improve the provision of basic services for
the people.

With regard to security, we are greatly concerned
about the acts of Violence and repeated attacks by
insurgents against the Government, leading to many
innocent deaths. Such attacks demonstrate the need to
support the Somali armed forces expeditiously, to
expand the authority of the State and to reintegrate the
deserting members of armed groups. We call on donor
parties to promote support for the Somali security
forces and to help them pay their salaries, a matter
concerning which the Secretary-General agrees in his
report, so as to address the dangers of extremism, and
especially the threat posed by the Al-Shabaab
movement not only to Somalis but to Muslims and
others elsewhere.

In regard to the humanitarian situation, we
express our great concern that children have been
recruited by all parties and about reports of the
coercive expulsion of internally displaced persons in
Somalia and the increased sexual violence against
them, particularly in Somaliland. We also condemn the
repeated threats against journalists and humanitarian
workers. In this respect, we regret the fact that the
World Food Programme has been unable to deliver
humanitarian assistance to areas under the control of
Al-Shabaab, leading to a sense of marginalization
among the people who live in those areas and creating
an unintended image of politicization of humanitarian
aid there.

With regard to the international presence in
Somalia, we stress the need for further coordination
between United Nations bodies working there. We also
stress the importance of expediting the implementation
of the phased efforts to strengthen the United Nations

10-5364]
presence, and of the Security Council's sending a
message of support for the Djibouti peace process in
Somalia.

In the absence of international peacekeeping
forces, we call on donor entities to increase their
contributions to covering the costs of the African
Union Mission. We commend the contributions of the
African Union, particularly Uganda and Burundi, to
efforts for peace in Somalia. We also commend the
United States of America for having stated its readiness
to facilitate the deployment of the 2,000 additional
troops pledged by the African Union.

We call for further cooperation with regional
organizations in order to benefit from their
comparative advantages, in particular their special in-
depth understanding of conflicts in the area and their
local experience. The African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development have called
for the preparation of a new support plan for AMISOM. that
would enable it to augment its forces for deployment
throughout the territory of Somalia.

Should we not respond to that call from the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development? Should we not support them and back
the Secretary-General in his conviction that assistance
to AMISOM. should be in line with assistance provided
to other peacekeeping operations? Should not the rate
of reimbursement for AMISOM. be similar to that for
peacekeeping operations elsewhere?

We believe that the cost of investing in the
attainment of peace and stability in Somalia through
the Djibouti peace process and the transitional federal
institutions far outweighs the danger of having a
Somalia in total chaos and lacking a functioning
government - not to mention the human costs, which
can never be recouped.

