Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Allow me, Mr.
President, to congratulate you and your delegation on
having organized this public meeting on Kosovo. We
are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report. I would like to express my
delegation's appreciation to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Bernard Kouchner, for
his briefing. His illustrious leadership has our support,
and he can count on our country to support him in his
mission until the completion of his task.

We note with appreciation that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
has begun to consolidate the central administration and
municipal administrations throughout the province,
with the renewed political life reflecting the diversity
of the people of Kosovo. My delegation notes also the
progress achieved in the establishment of 20
departments of the Joint Interim Administrative
Structure (JIAS) and other municipal bodies. However,
we want to underscore the limited participation of
minority communities in the political enterprise. We
also concur with the Special Representative and with
the report of the Secretary-General that increasing
intimidation and unmitigated acts of violence by the
Albanian majority aimed at driving the minority
communities out of Kosovo are totally unacceptable.
The perpetrators of such acts of violence and
intimidation must be brought to justice. For that, the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) and UNMIK need unequivocal
support from the international community.

All Kosovars should be given the opportunity to
participate in social, economic and political activities
free from intimidation. In that connection, we urge
Serbs and other minorities to participate in the
forthcoming municipal elections, and we also call upon
the authorities in Belgrade to give their support to the
elections in Kosovo.

The return of refugees and internally displaced
persons to their homes with dignity, along with the
issues of detainees and missing persons, are of
paramount importance to my delegation.

We are aware that the situation in Kosovo is very
complex and that miracles are rare in the real world;
therefore UNMIK cannot be expected to produce them,
if at all, beyond its capacity to act in the province.
Therefore, we acknowledge the multi-pronged
approach of UNMIK and KFOR, not only in bringing
administrative stability to Kosovo but also in creating
an enabling environment to promote peaceful
coexistence, tolerance and economic development,
which by its nature depends on long-term planning. It
is in that regard that the complete and comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) is vitally
essential.

