Mr. Carrillo Gomez (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the delegation of the Republic of
Paraguay, I am grateful for the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/373) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and for the initiative by the Indonesian
presidency to convene this open debate.

We believe that, with regard to the Security
Council, the protection of civilians in armed conflict
must be clearly and explicitly included in the mandates
of peacekeeping operations. That protection must
be a priority in situations where civilians are at high
risk of violence and must also be explicit with regard
to protection against sexual violence, in its broadest
sense, and the specific protection of children and
adolescents in armed conflict. The existing mandates
of peacekeeping missions must also be amended in
that regard.

We further emphasize that education and training
in international humanitarian law and international
human rights law to stop and prevent acts of violence,
attacks and threats against civilians are critical to
improving the system for the protection of civilians. In
the context of peacekeeping operations, we stress the
need for military and police personnel to receive general
training on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
prior to their deployment to missions, in line with the
needs of the location where they will be deployed. The
training of contingents once deployed in host countries
should only be complementary to that received in the
country of origin.

It is imperative that both the Security Council
and States Members of the Organization, regardless
of their status as parties to conflicts, contribute to
establishing an effective system for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. In its effort to contribute to
comprehensive political and legal frameworks for the
protection ofcivilians in armed conflict, the Republic of
Paraguay recently ratified the Kampala amendments to
the Rome Statute, thereby reaffirming its commitment
to cooperation with the International Criminal Court
in order to address and prevent impunity by ensuring
justice and reparation for victims of international
crimes. We also support the Secretary-General's
proposal to Member States to participate constructively
in the development of a political declaration on the use
of explosive weapons in populated areas. We reiterate
our adherence to the Santiago Communique of 2018 and
urge Member States to adhere to the Oslo Safe Schools
Declaration of 2015.

Finally, the Republic of Paraguay condemns
disregard for the fundamental norms of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
by parties to conflicts, in particular the practices of
starvation of the civilian population as a method of
warfare, restrictions on humanitarian access and the
protection of civilians, and undermining the institution
of asylum and the principle of non-refoulement.

