Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the President for convening today's meeting and
Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their
very important briefings.

We would like to express our appreciation for
the efforts they are making in their respective and
complementary fields of action, bringing all parties
closer to an inclusive political solution to the conflict
in Yemen and addressing the worst humanitarian crisis
in the world today. We believe that their work should
receive the strongest and most unanimous support
of the international community, including that of the
Security Council.

We would like to welcome the recent understandings
reached, such as the valuable support and commitment
to the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. We
would also like to stress the need to maintain the
momentum generated at the meeting held in Stockholm.
We join others in highlighting the role played by the
host country, Sweden, and the important participation
of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres. We would
especially like to pay special tribute to the Yemeni
parties for the specific commitments they have made
and emphasize the urgency of implementing them and
giving priority to the attention required by more than
14 million Yemenis exposed to imminent famine.

It is critical to strictly comply with the ceasefire
agreed at the ports of Saleef, Ras Issa and especially
Al-Hudaydah, which Mr. Griffiths has called the
"centre of gravity" of the conflict. We also emphasize
the understanding reached in relation to Taiz - another
urban centre severely affected by the conflict.

In view of the continuation of the talks in January,
we encourage the parties to continue to build trust.
We believe that the exchange of prisoners should be
followed by other actions, such as the full opening of
Sana'a airport. We welcome the transparency shown
in Sweden, which should allow the international
community, and the Council in particular, to monitor
and to support the implementation of the agreements
reached and promote greater confidence among all
parties in the peace process.

The withdrawal of forces from Al-Hudaydah and
the leading oversight role that the United Nations will
play in those efforts require the prompt adoption of
a Council resolution. We would like to express our
appreciation to the delegation of the United Kingdom
for its diligence in dealing with that matter and to
underline the importance of keeping the Council united
around the priority that should be given to the protection
of the civilian population.

We considerit vital that the international community,
in particular the neighbouring countries, increase their
contributions towards stabilizing and revitalizing the
local economy, since factors such as inflation and the
devaluation of the currency significantly increase the
risk of famine.

We emphasize that achieving sustainable peace will
require broad consensus around a shared vision for the
future. In that regard, it is essential that the process be
inclusive and that all sectors of the Yemeni population
be represented. We particularly encourage a greater
participation of women and young people.

In conclusion, I emphasize that today, we have
reason to be optimistic. However, we must also exercise
caution because, while a turning point that allows
us to glimpse a better future has been reached, the
reality today is that there is much to be done to end the
suffering ofmillions onemenis, as we heard in today's
briefings. Peru will continue to support the efforts to
achieve a political solution in Yemen that puts an end to
the serious humanitarian crisis.

