Mr. De la Sabliere (France) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, thank you for your words of welcome. It
is a pleasure to be here in the Council once again and
to work with you and the other members of the Council
and with the Secretary-General and his representatives.
I assure you that you can always count on my full
cooperation and that of the French delegation.

(spoke in French)

The agreement signed on 2 December in Arusha
is an indispensable link in the Burundi peace process.
At a time when the Council has so often called for a
cessation of hostilities, the principal rebel movement
and the Government have finally signed a ceasefire
agreement. It should bring about an end to hostilities
between the Forces for the Defence of Democracy
(FDD) and the Government by tomorrow. We can only
be delighted with this agreement. Barely 10 days ago
the FDD was still bombing Bujumbura.

We wish to pay tribute to the Burundian
negotiators, in particular President Buyoya and
Mr. Nkurunziza. We also wish to pay tribute to the
heads of State of the region, in particular Deputy
President Zuma. It was his tenacity and his
determination to move ahead in the negotiations and
his personal commitment that made the signing of the
agreement finally possible. I am sure all the members
of the Council are very grateful to him for his efforts.

Nevertheless, a great deal still remains to be
done. The first priority is to make sure that the
cessation of hostilities and the ceasefire to follow will
become universal. This implies the National Liberation
Forces (FNL), the other rebel group, joining the peace
process launched by the Arusha Agreement of 28
August 2000. France will support the efforts of the
Transitional Government of Burundi and those of the
States of the Regional Initiative to bring the FNL into
the current political process. We must also convince the
remaining rebels that there will be benefits from the
complete cessation of hostilities for the entire
Burundian population: the economy will revive, taxes
levied to finance the war will decline, and displaced
people and refugees will be able to return to their
homes. It will be up to the signatories - the
Government and the FDD - to implement their
commitments and make the necessary reforms, in
particular as regards the army, that will help Burundi to
return to the path of peace and stability, as dictated by
the Arusha Agreement in August 2000.

The international community will also have a
primary role to play. The donors must respect the
commitments that they undertook last week in Geneva
to support the Burundian peace processes. France, of
course, will make its contribution, because we are well
aware that a peace process has no chance to succeed if
it lacks the means necessary for implementation.

Undoubtedly, the Security Council also has a part
to play. The United Nations is already committed to the
region and to facilitating the implementation of the
Arusha process. In that regard, we must pay tribute to
the efforts of Ambassador Dinka, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, who will
assist with the terms of the agreement of 2 December
in defining certain ceasefire modalities. Furthermore,
the Council will have to reflect on the support that it
can provide to a possible African force or to whatever
formula that the Secretary-General can recommend in
support of the peace process, once all the parties have
agreed to a ceasefire in Burundi.

In conclusion, I should like to recall that the
situation in Burundi must clearly be considered within
its regional context. The transitional authorities in
Bujumbura must be encouraged to continue to work
with their neighbours to make the borders secure. In
particular, we must encourage the work under way
between Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo aimed at normalizing their relations, and they
must be invited to define the appropriate mechanisms
for military cooperation along their border.

The signing of the agreement of 2 December
constitutes a new element that favours an international
conference in the Great Lakes region, which has been
requested by an increasing number of regional heads of
State. That would enable us to make further progress
on political issues and on the restoration of the rule of
law, democracy and development in the region.

