Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Haile
Menkerios, for his update of the situation on the
ground in the Sudan and commend him for the latest
developments. I also join previous speakers in
extending a warm welcome to President Thabo Mbeki
for participating in our deliberations today and in
commending him for his efforts to promote the
achievement of peace in the Sudan.

Brazil welcomes the temporary agreement
reached on Abyei and thanks the Prime Minister of
Ethiopia for making available security resources for the
implementation of the arrangement. I am also,
therefore, very grateful to have had Ambassador
Osman and Mr. Gatkuoth here with us this morning to
discuss important developments. I thank them for their
statements.

The clashes in Southern Kordofan are to be
deplored. We are concerned as well over reports of
insufficient assistant to southern returnees and of
continuing mistreatment of the civilian population by
the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA). Attacks
and threats against United Nations peacekeepers,
observers and civilian personnel are unacceptable. We
condemn those acts and express concern about the
safety of the personnel of the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan (UNMIS).

Brazil urges the parties to fully implement the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) for securing
peace in the Sudan. They cannot allow all the efforts
put into making peace unravel in the final mile. It is
imperative that leaders exert utmost restraint and
redouble their efforts to reach a peaceful agreement on
all outstanding issues.

We warmly welcome the efforts of the African
Union, under the leadership of President Mbeki, in
favour of de-escalation. We commend the measures
taken by UNMIS to support the negotiations and to
strengthen its capacity to protect civilians in Abyei and
Kadugli.

There is only one way that both Northern and
Southern Sudan can nurture a new reality of two stable
and viable States living together side by side, in peace
and cooperation. It is by dealing peacefully and
transparently with both their bilateral and their
respective internal issues.

Both Northern and Southern Sudan enjoy great
ethnic and cultural diversity, which needs to become an
asset in a pluralistic and democratic political
environment. Many Sudanese peoples have been able
to coexist and cooperate peacefully for centuries. There
is no reason for them not to be able to do so once again
in the near future.
