Mr. Djani (Indonesia): We welcome the adoption
of resolution 2497 (2019) by consensus, extending the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA) and its support to the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism by six months.

Indonesia recognizes the stabilizing role of
UNISFA in Abyei and along the border region between
the Sudan and South Sudan. We support the decision
of the Council to maintain UNISFA's authorized troop
ceiling and urge the Sudan and South Sudan to provide
full support to UNISFA in the deployment ofpersonnel.

United Nations peacekeeping is increasingly tasked
to operate in incredibly challenging and non-permissive
environments, and UNISFA is no exception to that.
The Secretary-General's latest report on the situation
in Abyei (S/20l9/817) attests to the fact that UNISFA
is facing serious support challenges. Goods, basic
services and other capabilities required by the mission
are not available in the proximity, due to UNISFA's
status as one of the most remote mission headquarters
in peacekeeping. This is not to mention the difficult
terrain and weather conditions that hinder the mobility
of its personnel in carrying out its mandate today.

Today, my delegation would like to put the following
points on record.

First, United Nations peacekeeping works best
when it is fully supported politically, financially and
materially. Resolution 2436 (2018) aptly identified
several critical factors that have a direct bearing
on the effective implementation of peacekeeping
mandates, ranging from well-defined, realistic and
achievable mandates to adequate resources, training
and equipment.

Secondly, United Nations peacekeeping will always
be a collective responsibility in which all stakeholders
have a role to play.

Third - and this is a point that my delegation
cannot stress enough - is the importance of regular,
timely and meaningful consultations between the
United Nations and the troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and police-contributing countries (PCCs).
Indeed, TCCs and PCCs must always be involved not
only in the discussion of mission mandates, but also in
the development of standards of performance and the
maintenance of the highest standards of conduct and
discipline. It is only logical that countries whose people
risk their lives for the cause of peace should always be
properly consulted.

We regret that all the important points that I have
raised are not reflected in the resolution. It is our
conviction that the resolution could have been stronger
had it contained proper reference to a number of the
issues Ijust highlighted. We expect that, in future, there
will be ample opportunity to discuss them further with
respect to all other United Nations missions. As the
largest TCC and PCC represented in the Council, we are
fully determined and ready to do our part to contribute
to the strengthening of United Nations peacekeeping,
including by sharing our experience and expertise.
