Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): Viet Nam would like to thank the Belgian presidency for convening this briefing. In particular, we express our gratitude to His Majesty King Phillipe and Her Majesty Queen Mathilde of the Belgians for their presence here today. We also thank the Secretary-General and the other briefers for their insightful remarks. Children's issues are always close to our heart. Viet Nam underwent decades-long wars. Our millions of then-children grew up in times of war and suffered its consequences, with many losing their lives. We left wartime behind half a century ago, but the pain of war is still strongly felt in many parts of our country. Paradoxically, hundreds of thousands of our children born many years after the end of those wars are the ones who continue to endure that pain, without even knowing what caused it. Such situations and far more heartbreaking ones are prevalent nowadays in many conflict-affected areas. The tragic situation of those millions of children is a poignant reminder of our unfulfilled promise to protect our children and build a peaceful world for them. The protection of children in armed conflict is therefore the crucial work of the Security Council, in line with its primary responsibility to maintain international peace and security. It is also the obligation of each and every of us here as a member of the international community. It is our moral imperative to defend our defenceless children. Commitments have been made. Our primary focus now is to translate them into reality by taking concrete actions. We welcome the practical guidance for mediators to protect children in situations of armed conflict as an outstanding example in that regard. We commend the tremendous efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, her team and others for their meaningful work and believe that the practical guidance will contribute to better protection for our children. In that connection, let me share our observations on some of critical issues that the practical guidance touches upon. First, the practical guidance should be a living document. The success stories of many countries shared in the guidance will surely inspire many more to come. Those moving testimonies show that, with genuine efforts, we can make a difference to the lives of millions of our children. In that regard, we welcome the recent signing of the comprehensive action plan to end and prevent all grave violations against children in South Sudan. We encourage the continued compilation of experiences and lessons learned to further improve the guidance so as to make it more responsive to rapidly changing situations. We also hope that the guidance can be brought into full play at the national level with customized application in order to adapt it to the national context, while being mindful of the specificities of each situation. Secondly, with regard to cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations, it is obvious that the latter are reliable partners of the former in the maintenance of international peace and security in general and the protection of children in particular. As shown in the guidance, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development made great contributions to facilitating the implementation of action plans to end and prevent violations against children. Regional organizations, through engagement with the United Nations and their member countries, could serve asbridge builders to connect national, regional and global efforts in a coordinated manner. Thirdly, education is the cornerstone of reintegration programmes. With priority given to education, Viet Nam spares no effort to ensure children's access to education under any circumstances. During wartime, classes were held in any available place, be it in orchards, communal houses or even underground shelters. Those classrooms, though poorly made, not only helped our children overcome harsh war conditions but also nurtured in their hearts and minds a pure love for peace and a fervent hope for a better future. When it comes to reintegration programmes for children formerly associated with armed groups, education is also the best way for them to break obsessions of the past and regain the childhood and future they deserve. More than 20 years has passed since our first debate on children and armed conflict (see S/PV.3897). Much has been achieved during those two decades, but much more needs to be done to save millions of children. The Security Council needs to demonstrate its responsibility, both through words and actions. We express our strong support for the presidential statement that was just adopted (S/PRST/2020/3). We look forward to its effective implementation.
