The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands.

The year 2018 is a crucial year for the Democratic
Republic of Congo. As the Security Council prepares to
renew the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), I would like to make three
points: first, on the political process; secondly, on the
role of MONUSCO in the elections; and thirdly, on the
protection of civilians.

My first point, on the political process, the people
of Democratic Republic of the Congo look forward to
the country's first peaceful transfer of power through
free, fair and credible elections at the end of this year.
Progress towards that historic day continues, while
progress in the implementation of the 31 December
Political Agreement has stalled. Fundamental freedoms
are threatened.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands condemns the
violence used during the protests held on 25 February.
All harassment of civil society, journalists and human
rights defenders must end. We call on all parties to
recommit to the spirit of the Saint-Sylvestre agreement

in order for the upcoming elections to gain the trust of
the Congolese people.

My second point concerns the role of MONUSCO
this year leading up to the elections. MONUSCO
has a Vital role to play in that context, not only in
providing logistical support but also in supporting
the implementation of the Saint-Sylvestre agreement,
building trust among all actors and monitoring
progress towards the elections. Therefore, our univocal
support for MONUSCO, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and the Secretary-General to
effectuate good offices is indispensable. The Council
must therefore show the will to monitor progress and
equip MONUSCO in that regard.

My third point is on the protection of civilians,
which must remain a priority for MONUSCO. We
are very concerned about the upsurge in violence in
Ituri over the last weeks. Sadly, it is not the only area
where we see increased fighting and civilian casualties.
MONUSCO is adapting to the circumstances through
the "protection through projection" approach. It is the
shared responsibility of the Council, the Secretariat,
the troop-contributing countries as well as of the
Congolese authorities to ensure that the conditions are
met to make this a success. We have to keep that in
mind during the mandate-renewal discussions.

Let me conclude by reiterating our sincere gratitude
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for her and her team's relentless efforts. Together, we
must work towards a better future for the Congolese
people.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I wish to encourage speakers under rule 37 to limit
their statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.

I now give the floor to the Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

