Mr. Mota Sardenberg (Brazil): Mr. President,
first of all, I would like to congratulate you and your
delegation for your excellent work in guiding the
Council's deliberations during the current month. Your
initiative in organizing a debate on conflicts in Africa
and on the importance of Security Council missions
and of United Nations mechanisms in promoting peace
and stability is certainly very timely. It also provides an
additional opportunity to focus attention on the north-
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where a dramatic situation is unfolding that could
deteriorate to the point of endangering an important
region of Africa, with serious humanitarian
consequences.

Despite our limitations, Brazil will contribute to
the United Nations rapid deployment force adopted
today by the Security Council, and we wish to
commend the French Government for the role it has
played in this respect. Our Government supports the
recent call of Secretary-General Kofi Annan for a
peacekeeping force with a mandate stronger than the
one given to the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC),
in order to tackle the violence that has erupted in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Out of solidarity, Brazil is greatly concerned with
the course of events in Africa. My country owes much
of its identity to the vitality of its African heritage. In
addition, fraternal relations have been built on the basis
of our ethnic, cultural and historical affinities. Finally,
Brazil fully recognizes that peace, security and
development in Africa are crucial not only to the
African people themselves, but also to the international
community as a whole.

As clearly stated by President Lula da Silva,
strengthening ties with Africa is a political, moral and
historical obligation for us. In this spirit, our
Government is engaged in reinvigorating bilateral
relations with African countries. The Brazilian
Minister of External Relations, Ambassador Celso
Amorim, has just completed visits to seven African
countries, thus paving the way for President Lula da
Silva's visit to the continent next August.

At the same time, Brazil and its African partners
have been exploring possibilities for mutual
cooperation within the framework of the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries, to which five African
countries belong.

Deep transformations have brought Africa to the
forefront of the international agenda. Conflicts are
perhaps the most visible and disturbing feature of this
process of change. But there have also been important,
positive developments, as shown by trends towards
democracy and by the willingness of African leaders to
devote their energy and creativity to social and
economic reconstruction, as embodied in the New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD).
The United Nations continues to be a source of
hope in Africa. When peace is challenged, we expect
the Security Council to make use of the entire range of
its diplomatic resources.

Brazil has taken part in United Nations
peacekeeping operations which were decisive for
achieving peace and stability in Angola and
Mozambique.

Security Council missions such as those
scheduled for Central and West Africa next month are
valuable, as they enable direct interaction with local
actors, assert a legitimate international presence and
reaffirm the commitment to peace and stability.

Bearing in mind the patterns related to the
upsurge or resurgence of conflicts in Africa, one should
address the root causes of conflict with a view to
creating sustainable conditions for peace and stability.
Conflict prevention involves not only the prudent use
of the measures at the disposal of the Security Council,
but also efforts to promote development strategies and
support poverty-eradication measures.

The shared responsibility of all - Member
States, the Organization itself, international financial
institutions, regional and subregional organizations, the
international donor community and civil society
groups- is an important ingredient of successful
strategies in Africa. Closer coordination between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
could prove to be an indispensable tool to address
issues related to conflict prevention or resolution. We
value the recent creation of an Ad Hoc Advisory Group
on Guinea-Bissau within the Economic and Social
Council, in which Brazil is participating. The
upcoming mission of the Security Council and
members of the Advisory Group to Guinea-Bissau, in
which Brazil will take part, is a positive example of the
potential for coordination among the principal organs
of the United Nations.

The fact that that African countries hold the
responsibility for their own development should not be
ignored. Since its inception, NEPAD has been a cause
for optimism as to Africa's destiny. It contains
mutually reinforcing measures that allow for the
creation of a virtuous circle of socio-political inclusion,
development and peace. NEPAD also offers new
opportunities regarding development assistance.

Resources to support NEPAD could be usefully
channelled through multilateral institutions to foster
triangular as well as South-South cooperation. Since
1996, Brazil has followed a debt-alleviation policy as
regards African countries that has contributed to the
success of initiatives such as NEPAD. In recent years,
we have written off more than $1 billion in debt in the
hope of fostering, to the extent of our ability,
development in Africa.

The peace and development issues and the
problems that affect many African countries are really
very complex indeed. Their resolution depends on
political will, solidarity and coherent and effective
strategies. In this effort, all of us have a role to play.
Brazil is striving to do its part.

