Mr. Pires (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation): Allow me to
congratulate you and your country, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of Security Council
for the month of May.

I would like to thank all the members of the
Council for once again giving me an opportunity,
within a three-week period, to participate in the
Council on behalf of legitimate Government of Guinea-
Bissau.

I would also like to express my gratitude to the
Minister of External Relations of Angola on behalf of
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP), the representative of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
Chair of Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations for Guinea Bissau.

In the light of the most recent developments in
the current political and military situation - namely,
the conclusions from the regional ministerial contact
group meeting held in Banjul on 29 April and the final
communique of the extraordinary meeting of the
ECOWAS Heads of State and Government Summit that
took place in Dakar on 3 May - the legitimate
5
authorities of Guinea-Bissau take this opportunity to
once again acknowledge and thank ECOWAS for its
efforts to find a just solution to the crisis caused by the
military coup of 12 April.

We are pleased with the solid positions taken by
the Security Council, the African Union, ECOWAS, the
CPLP, the European Union and the International
Organization of la Francophonie, which vehemently
condemned the military coup and considered the
application of sanctions against its organizers. We are
also overjoyed by the freeing of President Raimundo
Pereira, Prime Minister Carlos Gomes Junior and other
politicians who had been held under military custody.
However, we would like to alert the international
community, and the Security Council in particular, that
atrocities continue to be committed by the organizers
of the coup d'etat and their supporters, both in the
capital and in the interior of the country.

For example, many members of the Government,
party leaders, regional governors, individuals linked to
the interim President and the Prime Minister,
representatives of the judiciary, including its President,
the President of the National Electoral Commission
and some of the primary collaborators are still in
hiding since the coup on 12 April, many of them in
diplomatic representations in Bissau.

Peaceful rallies continue to be forbidden by the
military, and are violently dispersed when they are
organized.

Assaults and theft of cattle continue to occur in
Bissau and in the countryside, with no one to protect
the civilian victims from organized criminal groups.

The funds of many public institutions are being
pillaged by military elements, without a minimal
observance of legal and administrative procedures.

The largest party in the Bissau-Guinean
Parliament has been practically leaderless since
12 April, with its leadership in hiding due to
persecution and threats from the illegitimate military
power.

The home of the Prime Minister and candidate for
the second round of presidential elections, which was
bombed and destroyed by the military, continues to be
pillaged in spite of supposedly being guarded by the
military.
The legitimate authorities of Guinea-Bissau are
concerned about the mechanism adopted by ECOWAS
to implement the zero-tolerance principle vis-a-vis
coups d'etat, as detailed in the final communique of the
3 May extraordinary Summit of Heads of State and
Government. In truth, the recommended solution of
ECOWAS could be, in practice, an ineffective modality
to resolve the current political and military crisis,
possibly leading to the aggravation and postponement
of the problems the country is facing. Objectively, it
also legitimizes the coup d'etat by not endorsing the
continuation of the electoral process for the second
round of voting, nor the return of the legitimate
authorities who are supposed to serve until 11 April.

Indeed, the endorsement of the election of a new
bureau for the National Popular Assembly and the
recommendation to organize a transitional Government
with the political parties reinforces that view.
Therefore, in our View, the solution recommended by
ECOWAS seems to encourage coups d'etat in Africa,
in particular in Guinea-Bissau, instead of combating
them.

In that context, the legitimate authorities of the
Republic of Guinea-Bissau are of the view that the
mechanism adopted by ECOWAS to implement its
zero-tolerance principle against coups d'etat, by
distancing the country's democratically elected Interim
President and the Prime Minister, does not observe the
principle of the return to constitutional order demanded
by the international community, namely, by the Council
through its presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/15)
and by the main political and civilian actors in Guinea-
Bissau. The ECOWAS position on this is also a long
way from those held by other segments of the
international community, in particular the African
Union, the European Union, the IOF and the United
Nations.

For those reasons, the Government of the
Republic of Guinea-Bissau reiterates to the Council its
determination to fulfil the requests contained in the
Council's presidential statement of 21 April and
reaffirmed by the international community, considering
the following as necessary conditions, sine qua non, for
an immediate restoration of constitutional order and
democratic legitimacy, in accordance with Guinea-
Bissau's constitutional framework.

Those are, first, the restitution of effective power
to the democratically elected leaders who were serving
12-33105
the people up until 11 April, namely, the Interim
President of the Republic, the Prime Minister and the
Speaker of the National Assembly.

Secondly, a multinational force should be
dispatched, based on the willing cooperation and
involvement of various international organizations,
including ECOWAS, the African Union, the CPLP and
the United Nations. Such a force should be mandated
to ensure the protection of the Government's leaders
and institutions and the civil authorities, as well as the
holding of the second round of presidential and
legislative elections by the end of this year.

Thirdly, the electoral process should be continued
through the holding of the second round of presidential
elections interrupted by the military coup of 12 April.

Fourthly, the current military leadership must be
immediately removed from their posts in the Guinean
armed forces for their role in initiating all the military
uprisings in Guinea-Bissau during the past 14 years.

Fifthly, the armed forces should be reformed as
outlined in the proposed security sector reform, to
which the international force should actively contribute
by helping to create the necessary conditions for its
implementation and for the establishment of a
democratic, republican military.

Sixthly, sanctions should be imposed on the coup
leaders and their associates. Finally, criminal charges
should be brought against the leaders and their
associates for the grave economic and social effects of
the coup resulting from the acts of vandalism and the
pillaging of businesses and private residences
perpetrated during the disruption of constitutional
order. Our position is supported by the majority of
public opinion in the country, including the PAIGC and
its members of Parliament and all the parties that make
up the national anti-coup movement, the Guinea-Bissau
Human Rights League and the trade unions.

