Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): I wish to begin by paying
tribute to you, Mr. President, and to the delegation of
Sweden for your efforts that made today's discussion on
the protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations possible. I would also like to
join the other speakers in welcoming Deputy Secretary-
General Louise Frechette and express appreciation for her
remarks at the beginning of this meeting.

We see this open debate as timely and necessary.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General on
protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations. We believe that the content
of that report and the recommendations will be useful for
the future work of the Council.

 

The nature of armed conflicts in the world has been
changing for some time now. The Security Council is
dealing increasingly, although not exclusively, with internal
conflicts and their tragic humanitarian consequences. We
can no longer speak of a clear-cut dividing line between
combatants and civilians. Fighting between different
factions that do not necessarily have clear political or
military objectives provides for an environment without
organized powers and, consequently, without law and order.

Forced displacements of innocent civilians are often
the main objective of the fighting. The plight of children in
conflict situations is appalling. International humanitarian
personnel are often deliberately targeted. The purpose of
these attacks is to prevent humanitarian assistance to people
in need, and they serve political or strategic objectives of
the parties to the conflict. We witness human rights abuses
and violations of international humanitarian law on an
unprecedented scale.

There are many reasons why the question of protection
for humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in
conflict situations should be a standing item on the agenda
of the Security Council. Humanitarian emergency situations
are the most tragic symptom of the underlying threats to
international peace and security. They need to be addressed
as a matter of priority. However, humanitarian action must
not be used as a substitute for political or, where needed,
military action.

The main purpose of humanitarian action is to save
lives and alleviate suffering. It cannot be expected to solve
the root causes of the conflicts. It cannot relieve the
Security Council of its responsibility to address political
and security issues. The Council's responsibility remains a
key element in the international community's response to
humanitarian crises. The Council has to respond to
emergency situations in a timely, adequate and united
manner, using the range of options at its disposal, defining
clear mandates and objectives and, in this way, helping to
create the necessary conditions for effective humanitarian
aid.

One of the most worrying aspects of the new warfare
and non-international conflicts in general is the erosion of
respect for the norms of international law. We agree with
the Secretary-General in his analysis of this problem. We
believe there is a need to strengthen our efforts to ensure
respect for and implementation of existing provisions of
international law, including, in particular, humanitarian law,
human rights and refugee law.

Violations of international humanitarian law cannot
go unpunished. Prevention of impunity is primarily a
responsibility of the States and their national criminal
justice systems. However, it is also a legitimate concern
of the international community. The currently prevailing
sense of impunity must be stopped and the perpetrators of
crimes brought to justice. We welcome the adoption of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court as
a ground-breaking step forward in providing justice to
victims, limiting impunity and deterring the commission
of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.

In the light of the experience of recent conflicts
which have dramatic humanitarian consequences, such as
the situation until recently in Sierra Leone and currently
in situations like that of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Afghanistan and Kosovo, to name just a few, we
would like to stress the importance of ensuring
humanitarian access to refugees and others in need. We
share the view of the Secretary-General expressed in the
report that serious consideration should be given to
developing a range of options to maintain law and order
and create a secure environment for civilians endangered
by conflict and for the delivery of humanitarian assistance
in conflict situations.

In many situations, the key to the solution lies in the
need to achieve a ceasefire and to start a political
dialogue and negotiations. On the other hand, when one
or more parties to the conflict deliberately obstructs
humanitarian assistance to civilians, coercive options,
including military enforcement, may be the only effective
response to the mounting problems of a complex
emergency situation. We agree with the approach
explained by the Secretary-General in paragraph 25 of the
report, which addresses one type of such situations which
occurs very frequently.

International humanitarian organizations work on the
basis of the concepts of neutrality, impartiality and
independence. It is therefore unacceptable that, in their
efforts to help people in need, they often become
deliberate targets of the parties to the conflict. This is
partly because of the distorted perception of humanitarian
action. In most cases, however, their presence is simply
perceived as an impediment to achieving political or
military objectives of the parties to the conflict, or as an
undesirable witness to grave violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law. Humanitarian
organizations, therefore, require every form of support
possible, and the Security Council must be aware of that.

 

We strongly believe that the spirit of humanitarianism
can never die. However, we are also convinced that certain
security conditions have to be met in order for humanitarian
organizations to carry out their mission in reasonable safety.
We strongly condemn acts of violence against humanitarian
workers and welcome the provisions of the Statute of the
International Criminal Court, under which attacks against
United Nations and humanitarian personnel now constitute
war crimes and fall within the competence of the Court.

Let me say the following in conclusion. The work of
the Security Council is mainly situation-specific. A general
discussion like the one today can help in addressing broader
issues and in providing guidance to specific situations. The
report of the Secretary-General on the protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations contains valuable recommendations that should be
thoroughly and promptly considered by the Security
Council. Slovenia is willing to actively participate in this
effort.

