Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi, Permanent Representative of Spain, for
the briefing on the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), which he chairs, for the period under review.
I would also like to thank the Spanish delegation for
the skilled leadership of that subsidiary body of the
Council at this highly sensitive stage. We look forward
to further practical and constructive cooperation in the
Committee to swiftly settle the situation concerning
the Iranian nuclear programme.

On 20 March in Lausanne, the most recent full
round of talks of the sextet of international mediators
with Iranian representatives was held in order to work
out a final agreement on a comprehensive settlement of
the situation related to the Iranian nuclear programme.
The parties continued to seek compromise with regard
to solutions to the remaining unsolved issues. It was
agreed that the next round of talks would begin on
26 March. In that regard, we would like to note that
it is extremely important for all the parties to ensure
progress in moving towards a final agreement. It is
necessary to produce a document that includes all
of the basic principles, for which the parameters for
implementation will then be the subject of technical
consultations and planning work. We cannot let this
opportunity slip away.

Of course, the reaching of a settlement and the
implementation of the expected agreements will be
linked to a thorough review of the sanctions regime
currently in force. A discussion of the specific
parameters is currently being carried out in the format
of the P5+1 and Iran. Another aspect of this issue is
also important: several Members of the United Nations,
guided by a misguided interpretation of the sanctions
agreed in the Security Council are introducing
additional unilateral restrictions and limitations outside
of the Council, which have no international legal basis
to support them. We reaffirm our rejection of such a
practice.

For our part, we will continue to do everything in
our power to definitively and comprehensively bring
to a close the issues related to the Iranian nuclear
programme, and to relieve Tehran of the sanctions
introduced by the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council.

