Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank the
Ethiopian presidency for providing this platform.
I also thank High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs Nakamitsu and the previous speaker,
Secretary Tillerson, for their very valuable reflections,
including on the contribution of my nation to nuclear
non-proliferation and disarmament.

The effective implementation of resolutions, treaties
and conventions, together with sanctions regimes, are
mutually complementary instruments that prohibit the
use and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs). The effectiveness of sanctions resolutions
is measured by their ability to achieve the mandated
goals. We regret to note that the impact of sanctions
resolutions does not always meet our expectations.
This is often because of the deliberate non-compliance
of other States that undermine our collective efforts to
maintain peace and stability.

Kazakhstan's approach to this issue has been

conceived by President Nursultan Nazarbayev, who has
repeatedly underscored the need to develop concrete
mechanisms to discourage nuclear-weapon-possessing
States that are party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) from withdrawing from
the Treaty. More specifically, it was proposed by my
President that a State's request for withdrawal should
be subject to intensive inspection by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for possible violations,
as a review of the reasons for withdrawal by NPT
member States at an extraordinary conference, and, if
all attempts fail, an immediate transfer of the matter to
the Security Council under Chapter VII, Article 41, of
the Charter of the United Nations.

We recommend that a similar process be applied to
States that regularly violate WMD-related resolutions.
Certain fundamental questions need to be considered,
including the rationale for their actions and how
Member States can be motivated to not cooperate with
States under sanctions. We must try to foresee which
of the imposed sanctions are detrimental to the trade
and economic interests of other States and whether it
would be worthwhile considering the development
of compensatory and incentive-based mechanisms
to ensure that Member States fully adhere to their
obligations, or restrict or terminate cooperation with
States under sanctions.

Today, with regard to the Democratic People's
Republic ofKorea, the dilemma arises when the Council
is aware that a military solution is not an option, but
at the same time it is not easy to launch a negotiating
process. Kazakhstan strongly condemns Pyongyang's
defiant, provocative actions. We consider the continued
sanctions pressure is a step in the right direction until
North Korea heeds the appeal of the world's majority.

We therefore suggest that the parties involved
should reduce tensions and weigh the prospects of all
possible decisions. We believe that the joint proposals
of Russia and China are worthy of consideration. The
role of Secretary-General Guterres as a mediator cannot
be underestimated. Therefore, developing and adopting
a universal document within the United Nations on
negative guarantees and non-aggression by the five
permanent members of the Security Council and other
nuclear Powers would be most relevant and a significant
incentive for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
to return to the NPT as a non-nuclear State.

Implementing the robust steps undertaken by
President Nursultan Nazarbayev - namely, in closing
the Semipalatinsk nuclear test site and renouncing
the world's fourth-largest nuclear arsenal - strongly
required the cooperative efforts of the Russian
Federation and the United States. Their cooperation in
assisting my nation to rid its nuclear legacy, as well as
the rehabilitation of the former Semipalatinsk nuclear
test site, was exemplary. I believe that the United
States and the Russian Federation could continue with
this very fruitful and mutually beneficial cooperation
in new circumstances with regard to the new threats
emerging in our contemporary world.

In order to ensure the effective implementation
of the Security Council's resolution, Kazakhstan is
ready to offer practical assistance by hosting a regional
seminar for Central Asian countries. This would be in
conjunction with the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006). We also highly appreciate the
open briefing to be held on 9 October by the Chair of
the 1718 Committee for all Member States.

With regard to Iran, we would like to note that the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPoA) on the
Iranian nuclear programme was achieved as a result of
intense prolonged negotiations, and we were honoured
to host two rounds of those talks in our southern
capital, Almaty. It is necessary to acknowledge that this
agreement has put Iran on a nuclear-free path, with the
IAEA confirming that Iran is fulfilling all its nuclear
obligations. We should therefore convincingly show
Pyongyang the correct road map, with a legal solution
that also works pragmatically. It is worth pointing out
that it was due to the active efforts of the parties, through
their determined peace talks, that the JCPoA was
achieved against the backdrop of continuing sanctions.

Another glaring illustration of a weakened
non-proliferation regime is the case of the use WMD
in Syria. In general, Kazakhstan is firmly convinced
that the Security Council must be united at this critical
stage in its approach to finding a political solution to
the crisis in Syria. For our part, we will continue to
provide the Astana platform a complement in order to
facilitate the negotiation processes in Geneva. In turn,
an early resolution of the military and political crisis in
Syria would allow us to remove the vacuum that allows
chemical weapons be used with impunity.

The non-proliferation regime is greatly supported
by the cooperation mechanisms of resolution 1540
(2004), and every effort must be made to strengthen its
implementation. My country participates actively in its
work and continues to provide financial assistance. In
this context, we acknowledge that the Nuclear Security
Summits, initiated by the United States and followed by
others, have significantly reduced the nuclear threat and
strengthened the global architecture of nuclear safety.

Kazakhstan's President Nursultan Nazarbayev
proposed, during the launch of the IAEA low-enriched
uranium bank facility in Kazakhstan, reviving the
process of Nuclear Security Summits and offered
Astana as a host for such a summit in the future. He
has also proposed to unite the efforts of all the States
from nuclear weapon-free zones, which have proven to
be one of the most effective means in the fight against
the spread of nuclear weapons.

All of us need to Show responsibility, political
will and wisdom to take decisions of great historical
significance. We need to put the good of humankind
above national interests to solve one of the most
difficult global problems - keeping the world safe
from WMDs. I am confident that we will do so.

