Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Mr. Minister, for convening this
open debate. I also wish to thank Mr. Mladenov for his
briefing.

Spain aligns itselfwith the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I will focus my
statement today on three main points: the Middle East
peace process, Yemen and Syria.

It is perhaps timely to assess the impact on the region
of the recent agreement with Iran. What is certain is
that the nuclear agreement resolves a question that has
been weighing on the entire Middle East region; that is
why we must now decisively resume consideration of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

The process is at a particularly difficult juncture.
Both parties have declared themselves committed to the
two-State solution; but we are still far from agreement
on the conditions for undertaking negotiations.
We must therefore make progress on two tracks:
confidence-building measures and re-establishing a
negotiating framework.

In terms of confidence-building on the part of
the international community, that involves reacting to
measures that can be said to be moving backwards - for
example, the demolition of homes and humanitarian
facilities in Area C. That also involves recognizing
the progress made, including the fact that no new
settlements have been built in recent months.

At the same time, we must work towards Palestinian
reconciliation and the establishment of a national unity
Government under the authority of President Abbas.
Currently, there is risk of a de facto split in Gaza when
it becomes part of the future Palestinian State. We
believe that intra-Palestinian reconciliation is essential
to the continued viability of the two-State solution.

We must accelerate Gaza's reconstruction. One
year after Operation Protective Edge, according to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), almost no progress
has been made in the reconstruction of homes. The
figures provided today regarding UNRWA's financial
resources are of serious concern. Also worrisome is the
scenario described recently during the Arria Formula
meeting, where the true suffering of the people in Gaza
was highlighted.

The measures taken by the Israeli Government - the
so-called economic peace 4 are positive, but we must
not lose sight of the ultimate goal, which is the lifting of
the blockade, with appropriate security guarantees for
the State of Israel.

Not only do the settlements in the West Bank and
the Gaza blockade gradually erode the peace process,
they also heighten the risk of radicalization. The
presence of the groups affiliated with Daesh in the
Gaza Strip that have been identified in recent months
should lead all parties to reflect on the urgent need
to address the pressing political, humanitarian and
security challenges.

With respect to the creation of a new political
framework, there are no prospects for a solution without
the involvement of the international community. We
believe in the efforts made in coordination with the
countries of the region to reaffirm the validity of the
Arab Peace Initiative. Nevertheless, no initiative will
exempt the Security Council from its responsibility.
Sooner or later, as the representative of France just
noted, the Council will have to propose a proper
framework to the parties for a return to negotiations
based on conditions and a specific time frame through
a consensus-based resolution. Our Vice-Minister for
Foreign Affairs, who visited the region just a few days
ago, has sent that message to both the Israeli and the
Palestinian authorities.

Specifically, there are three messages. There is no
alternative to the two-State solution. Intra-Palestinian
reconciliation is urgent. And the Security Council must
play a key role. The next quarterly open debate, in
October, will provide an opportunity to assess the ways
in which the Council can contribute to promoting the
peace process in the Middle East.

I would also like to refer briefly to Yemen. The
Security Council must not remain indifferent to the
humanitarian tragedy that is facing the Yemeni people.
We have repeatedly called for a humanitarian pause,
without conditions. Humanitarian actors on the ground,
such as Doctors Without Borders, have continued to
warn us of the growing challenges in providing the
assistance that has become more urgent each day. A
neutral and more flexible mechanism is also essential
for monitoring imports of food, fuel and other basic
materials. We call on all parties to the conflict to respect
international humanitarian law. At the same time, we
look forward to the prompt mediation by the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General of a dialogue between
the parties towards a political solution in Yemen.

In conclusion, I would like to address Syria.
The fifth year of the conflict in Syria is casting a
devastating shadow. The humanitarian tragedy has
reached absolutely intolerable limits. We all know
the numbers, and saw them again today. However, we
cannot forget that each number represents a person, a
family or a story of unspeakable suffering that we have
failed to prevent.

The same is true of the grave violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law. We
condemn most emphatically the absolute contempt
shown for the most basic rules of international
humanitarian law. Those responsible must know
that they will be held accountable for their actions.
In any case, we should not fail to note the specific
obligation of the Syrian Government, in its capacity
as the Government, to protect its citizens, as well as
its full responsibility for its unjustified, barbaric and
indiscriminate attacks against its own people.

Spain has drawn attention, on many occasions, to the
urgency of making progress towards a political solution
in Syria, as it is the only way to end the conflict. We
reiterate once again our firm commitment to a solution
based on the Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex).

In that regard, we support the work achieved by Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura
during the weeks of consultations with all of the
relevant stakeholders. We highly value the participation
of regional actors in the consultations, as we believe
they are absolutely essential to achieving peace in
Syria. We therefore look forward with great interest to
Mr. De Mistura's briefing to the Council next week.
We call on the parties to the conflict, the States of
the region and the members of the Council to shoulder
the responsibility of uniting their efforts, over and
above all of the differences, to achieve a common goal:
peace and stability for the Syrian people. Syria and its
people must be our priority. We especially appeal to the
moderate opposition. An open and constructive attitude
is essential on the part of the various groups in order to
pave the way towards a reasonable meeting point upon
which to build a future for Syria.

Failure to act on all fronts will dangerously increase
the risk of an institutional vacuum that will only benefit
Daesh and other terrorist groups and further aggravate
the instability of the entire region. It is our duty to
prevent that. The Council cannot continue any longer
to shirk its obligations 4 enough of merely making
statements. We have heard too much talk, including
again today. It is time to become involved and to make
a genuine commitment to a negotiated political solution
that is pluralistic and democratic. It is the only way to
guarantee sustainable security and stability in Syria
and a place for all Syrians to belong.

