Mr. Sevilla Somoza (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): During the present international crisis, the
Government of Nicaragua has consistently emphasized
how important it is for the multilateral system and,
particularly, the United Nations Security Council, to
shoulder its collective responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, which implies acting
as an efficient instrument to carry out timely actions to
reinforce the faith in and credibility of the United
Nations system.

We are speaking today to reiterate the resolute
commitment of the Government of Nicaragua to the
international community. The Government of
Nicaragua has unambiguously supported all the
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 1441
(2002), which was designed to bring about the
immediate and unconditional disarmament of Iraq.
That country has not complied with that resolution,
thus endangering international security.

The present situation is the outcome of Iraq's
defiance of the collective will of the United Nations, in
particular as expressed in resolutions 678 (1990) and
1441 (2002). Those resolutions underlie the present
course of events, which was precipitated by non-
compliance with them.

The time has come to revitalize and renew the
united and consistent action of the Security Council.
We agree with the Secretary-General when he said
today that the time has come for the Council to find its
singleness of purpose once again.

Nicaragua considers that our Organization should
focus its efforts and action on the humanitarian
situation affecting the Iraqi people, a people which for
many years has been the innocent victim of an
oppressive regime. We are concerned about the lack of
electricity and drinking water, and particularly the
situation of children at risk of illness for lack of
hygiene, food and medicine. Also, internally displaced
persons who lack the necessary services will depend on
the concrete action taken by the Council.

For this reason, Nicaragua believes that it is
extremely important for the Security Council to renew
the Secretary-General's mandate and adjust the oil for
food programme so that humanitarian assistance to Iraq
is brought in an efficient and realistic way. The new
international situation calls for an updating, a
strengthening and an expansion of the spirit and scope
of the oil for food programme.

The people of Nicaragua can bear witness to the
importance of the United Nations as a decisive factor
in the post-conflict era. Looking back on our region,
the Council will recall how the United Nations role
helped Central America to come out of the deepest
political and socio-economic crisis of its modern
history, which required the active and intense presence
of the United Nations. Ever since its creation, the
participation of the United Nations in the various
international conflicts through different and creative
mechanisms has been essential to confront
humanitarian problems and to assure international
peace and security.

We want a dynamic and efficient organization
that will secure its central role in the international
order. For this reason, Nicaragua would like to
emphasize once again the importance of having the
United Nations play its historic part in the present
humanitarian crisis. Its presence is indispensable in
providing immediate humanitarian assistance to the
Iraqi people.

Nicaragua has been a victim of war and of the
pain and suffering in its wake. It is very familiar with
the importance of international cooperation and is
prepared to provide post-conflict humanitarian
assistance that might consist within a legal framework
of sending experts in demining and medical assistance
to victims.

I would like to conclude by quoting a notable
statesman, who said:

"Winning the war is a task for part of society, but
building the peace and bringing about unity is the
task of all. None are excluded, and there can be
no selfishness."

