Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
warmly welcomes you, Mr. President, as well as
other ministers present here today. We are especially
indebted to the delegation of Lithuania for organizing
this important debate on the protection of journalists
in conflict situations and for the concept note provided
to guide our discussions (S/2015/307, annex). We thank
the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson, for his
briefing. Mr. Christophe Deloire and Ms. Mariane Pearl
have inspired us with their remarkable testimonies, and
we are eternally grateful.

It is widely acknowledged that journalists play
a vital role in keeping the international community
informed about developments in situations of armed
conflict. They sometimes do this at great risk to their
lives. Journalists have been kidnapped, tortured and
killed while reporting wars, riots, demonstrations and
other civil disturbances. According to the Committee
to Protect Journalists, more than 1,129 journalists
have been killed since 1992. Many others have been
imprisoned or have disappeared. This underscores
the grave dangers that journalists face in the line of
duty and the need for the international community to
continue to pay attention to issues that pertain to their
protection.

Journalists in different and complex situations are
offered the same level of protection under international
humanitarian law as civilians. However, the reality
on the ground is vastly different. It is evident that
international norms have not been able to adequately
protect journalists working in situations of armed
conflicts. Clearly, then, much more needs to be done in
order to ensure that these norms are upheld in order to
grant journalists the protection that they deserve.

States bear the primary responsibility to protect
journalists in conflict situations, and they must take
decisive action in consonance with their obligations
under international humanitarian law. Lack of action
creates room for impunity on the part of offenders and
increases the risk to journalists working in conflict
zones. We do acknowledge, however, that conflicts
often occur in an atmosphere of lawlessness where
governance structures are weak and State authority is
absent. It is in this political and security vacuum that
terrorists, extremist groups and criminal networks
present a major challenge in the protection of civilians,
including journalists. These groups generally act with
total disregard for human rights and international
humanitarian law. This can be clearly seen in grave
crimes being committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham, Al-Qaida, Boko Haram and other terrorist
and extremist groups.

Nigeria acknowledges the importance that the
Security Council attaches to the protection ofj ournalists
in conflict situations. The adoption of resolution 1738
(2006) was a milestone in the annals of the Council.
Resolution 2222 (2015), which the Council adopted this
morning, builds significantly on resolution 1738 (2006).
It provides a framework for the United Nations and the
international community to ensure the protection of
journalists in situations of violent conflict.

Of particular significance is the request in the
resolution that the Secretary-General include in his
reports the issue ofthe safety ofjournalists as a sub-item
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We
believe that this will raise the profile of this important
subject in the context of the Security Council's
engagement with the United Nations Secretariat. It will
also allow the Council to closely monitor developments
in conflict situations on its agenda and to assess
the extent to which its resolutions pertaining to the
protection of journalists are being implemented.

As a country steadily but resolutely consolidating
its democratic institutions, Nigeria is committed to the
rule of law. Indeed, Nigeria respects and upholds the
rights of journalists to perform their duties without
hindrance. Our Constitution guarantees freedom of
expression, freedom ofthe press and freedom ofthought.
On 27 May 2011, the Nigerian National Assembly passed
the Freedom of Information Bill, which the President
signed into law the following day. The act reinforces
the civil liberties enjoyed by journalists and promotes
transparency and accountability in governance.

At the multilateral level, Nigeria has demonstrated
its preparedness to collaborate with other States in
the promotion of media freedom in the age of social
media. This is especially exemplified by our role as
one of the six lead sponsors of the first-ever Human
Rights Council resolution on freedom of expression on
the Internet (resolution 20/8), adopted by consensus
on 5 July 2012 at the Council's twentieth session. The
growing importance of the Internet as a means of
disseminating and receiving information underscored
our decision to work together with delegations of
Brazil, Sweden, Turkey, Tunisia and the United States
for the adoption of this landmark resolution. Today's
resolution 2222 (2015) firmly builds on that scaffold.

The protection ofj ournalists in conflict situations is
a challenge for the international community. It requires
a global effort, with all hands on deck. We encourage
all United Nations Member States to create conditions
suitable for journalists to carry out their essential work.
On our part, we assure the international community of
our firm and continuing commitment to engage with
all stakeholders in furtherance of the protection of
journalists.

