Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): Iwish to
begin by thanking Mr. Shearer, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for South Sudan, for his
briefing and particularly for his commitment and that
of his team on the ground. I also thank Ambassador
Wronecka for her briefing and her work as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015), concerning South Sudan.

There is an urgent need to form a transitional
Government. The postponement from 7 November to
20 February must be the last. It is indeed essential to
stay the course set out under the Revitalized Peace
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan. That is our only option. The announcement
made this morning must therefore be acted upon.

France calls on the South Sudanese Government
and the opposition to use the next 65 days to create the
conditions necessary for the formation of a Government
of national unity. The tasks to be completed are known.
Some can be achieved immediately. In that regard, we
are pleased that the $40 million required to implement
the agreement have been provided to the National
Pre-transitional Committee. It is now necessary to
expedite the practical implementation of those funds
while ensuring accountability for the expenditure. The
Government must also issue a passport to Riek Machar
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
must clarify his status and guarantee him freedom
of movement.

France encourages the parties to show political will
and not to allow certain issues to delay the formation
of the Government of national unity. We are aware
that the issue of internal borders lies at the heart of the
conflict. That issue may not be resolved definitively in
the immediate future. In the short term, it is important
that the parties demonstrate a spirit of compromise and
agree at least on the number of states and a negotiation
mechanism. The parties also need to continue
making headway in the implementation of security
arrangements. Furthermore, both Government and
opposition officials must reaffirm their commitment to
upholding the ceasefire, which must be a top priority as
the lives of millions of civilians depend upon it.

We are acutely aware that the humanitarian
situation remains tragic, having been exacerbated by
floods that have affected more than 900,000 people
since November. I would recall that it befalls all parties
to guarantee safe and unhindered access to all those
in need of humanitarian assistance, which involves
the protection of humanitarian and medical personnel
as well as civilian infrastructure. It is also essential
to continue the fight against sexual violence and the
recruitment of child soldiers. The establishment of the
hybrid court under the agreement would help to combat
impunity and reduce the scale of the violence. In that
connection, I would like to ask Mr. Shearer how soon
that could happen.

Moreover, peace will be sustainable only if it is
inclusive. The active and meaningful participation of
women and respect for the quotas provided for in the
agreement are crucial. An inclusive peace also requires
an open political space. However, the recent incidences
of violations of the freedom of expression and violence
against journalists are very worrisome.

The guarantors of the Revitalized Peace
Agreement and the stakeholders in the region should
continue in their endeavours. In fact, only concerted
regional pressure will encourage the parties to make
the necessary concessions. In that regard, France
congratulates the Sudan on its assumption of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
chairmanship. We encourage the Sudanese authorities
to remain fully mobilized on this issue. Our appeal also
concerns the Ugandan authorities, which have a crucial
role to play in ensuring compliance with the new
pre-transitional timeline. It is important that the new
monitoring mechanism announced by IGAD can be set
up as soon as possible and that the group of five African
States mandated by the African Union to support
IGAD's mediation efforts in South Sudan be able to do
so fully. The Council as a whole must reflect on the best
way for the United Nations to support regional efforts.
The good offices and technical expertise provided by
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan are valuable
and should be continued.

In conclusion, the Council has put in place a
sanctions regime that allows us to list any individual
who may hinder the smooth conduct of the peace
process. It is important that the Council use the full
range of tools and leverage at its disposal in order to
ensure that the peace process is not disrupted.

