Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Tadamichi Yamamoto for his briefing today. At the
outset, I want to express my gratitude and that of my
Government for the work that he and his team are doing
in extremely challenging circumstances. I also thank
Foreign Minister Rabbani for his intervention today.

As both Mr. Rabbani and Mr. Tadamichi made clear,
we simply cannot afford to lose sight of Afghanistan.
Despite years of progress, Afghanistan continues to
face tough security and development challenges, while
the human cost after years of fighting and violence only
continues to grow. Our work is therefore not done, and
it is clear that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) still has a vital part play.

Just as Afghanistan today is not the same as it
was 10 years ago, it is right that UNAMA changes
too, to fit the current realities on the ground. We
therefore welcome the review into how the Mission
can best support Afghanistan in a way that aligns with
the Government's own priorities. We share much of
the analysis in the strategic review, with its focus on
streamlining the work of the Mission towards a targeted
set of outcomes. The report (S/2017/696) contains a
number of recommendations that should strengthen its
work. The key thing now is implementation.

We will continue our close work with UNAMA
on donor coordination, the rule of law, anti-corruption
efforts and support for human rights, especially
womens' rights. We welcome the recognition of the
importance of the national civilian presence offered
by UNAMA's network of field officers. The United
Kingdom strongly supports the continued national
presence. Those officers are an important symbol to
local communities. They will also have a role to play
in delivering successful elections in 2018 and 2019, and
can make a contribution to underpinning local peace
negotiations in the future.

The report sets out three strategic priorities
corresponding to support for political stability, peace,
and economic and social development. We believe that
putting greater focus on support for an Afghan-led peace
process is the right way forward. Only by establishing
a credible peace process can Afghanistan move
forward. We all have a role to play in that, including
the United Nations. We very much hope, therefore, that
members of the Security Council can agree to adjust
the mandate of UNAMA in order to incorporate those
recommendations. That would ensure that UNAMA is
better able to focus on the critical task of supporting
the peace process. We look forward to discussing this
matter with Council members in the weeks ahead.

Before concluding I want to say a word on the
outcome of the United States-South Asia strategy
review. The United Kingdom and United States are
close partners in Afghanistan, and so we welcome the
United States long-term commitment to the people
and the Government there. Despite the challenges,
which we have heard a lot about today, we agree that
it is important that we continue to provide support on
issues such as security, development and governance.
That is crucial to building a stable Afghan State and to
reducing the terrorist threat to us all.

It is in all our interests that Afghanistan become
safer and more prosperous, that is why we announced our
own troop increase in June and confirmed development
support ofup to $1 billion until 2020. We also welcomed
the restated commitment that ultimately the only way
to a political settlement will be through negotiations
between the Afghan Government and the Taliban. That
is why we encourage Foreign Minister Rabbani and his
colleagues in the Government to take this opportunity
to reach out to the Taliban to establish a credible peace
process. We owe it to the people of Afghanistan, who
have suffered so much during decades of violence, to
do all that can be done to institute a peace process. It
will be beholden on us all - within the Council, in
the United Nations system more broadly and, of course,
the Government of Afghanistan - to support such a
peace process.

