Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank the United Kingdom for convening
this debate on the situation in the Middle East. We
welcome His Excellency Secretary of State William
Hague, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the other
distinguished participants in this very important
meeting.

Finding a point of departure for discussions on
the pending challenges that the Middle Eastern
societies have found themselves facing, and
extrapolating on prospective opportunities ensuing
from those challenges, could be an onerous task.
Suffice it to say that the wave of changes that has
encompassed the region since last year has
dramatically altered the security situation and the
political and societal status quo in many Middle
Eastern societies and beyond. The upheavals that set
some countries of the region on the path of
transformation have fundamentally reshaped the
typical set of features that once characterized the
region.

The changes reflect the natural aspirations of
people for greater freedom and wider political
participation. Against that backdrop, the will and
tenacity of people to write their own future within
democratic States, with functioning State institutions
and respect for the rule of law and human rights,
should be commended and supported. We believe that
consistency and incessant efforts will lead to the
achievement of targeted objectives.

At the same time, in spite of the promises brought
by the process of democratic transition, one should not
forget that it is an extremely responsible stage in the
history of the Middle East that demands the highest
vigilance and laborious work in order to rule out
miscalculations and unpredictability as to the region's
future. The method of violence as a means of achieving
political objectives is not itself a democracy, which
cannot be propagated by the sword and imposed from
outside. Any process within either an individual State
or a region as a whole should be built on a sound
legitimate basis, while progressive economic and
democratic development should be an objective for all
Governments. Azerbaijan commends the reconciliation
efforts of the national authorities in a number of
countries of the Middle East to find negotiated and
effective solutions, with the participation of all strata
and political forces of their societies.
We regret seeing the lack of progress in the
Middle East peace process. At the same time,
Azerbaijan commends and highly values the consistent
efforts of Jordan to revive the dialogue and resume the
negotiations towards the achievement of a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution.

Azerbaijan is deeply concerned about the
continuing illegal settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories. Apart from the impact on the
rights, freedoms and everyday lives of the Palestinians,
settlements cause serious damage to the peace process
and, more dangerously, threaten a two-State solution
and the emergence of a viable Palestinian State.

In that regard, I would like to stress once again
that, in contrast to some other well-known situations
involving groundless and illegitimate territorial claims,
including those under the concocted pretext of care for
ethnic minority groups, the right to self-determination
and statehood of the people of Palestine has been
recognized.

With respect to the occupied Palestinian
territories and similar situations in other parts of the
world, we proceed from the importance of reaffirming
the continuing applicability of all relevant international
legal norms, achieving the invalidation of activities
aimed at the consolidation of military occupations,
initiating urgent measures towards removing the
adverse effects of such activities and discouraging any
further practices of the same or a similar nature.

The Security Council cannot remain indifferent to
situations involving serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law and, in performing
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, must react adequately
in order to put an end to illegal practices and policies
and to ensure that human rights and fundamental
freedoms are observed and respected. It is also
important to fully utilize the advantage of cultural
diversity through promoting inter-communal dialogue
and reconciliation, while categorically rejecting and
invalidating any manifestation of ethnic and religious
intolerance.

The situation in Syria remains worrisome, with
rampant violence and human rights abuses that have
resulted in increasing the civilian death toll. We are of
the strong view that the only solution to the crisis in
Syria is through an all-inclusive and Syrian-led
political process, where all national stakeholders
demonstrate determination to solve the crisis
peacefully. Azerbaijan encourages all parties in Syria
to fully cooperate with the Joint Special Envoy of the

United Nations and the League of Arab States,
Mr. Kofi Annan. We hope that his mission will
contribute to ending violence and facilitating a
peaceful solution.

As has been pointed out during this debate,
repression does not deliver stability, peace or security,
and Governments that suppress basic freedoms will
always be unstable. As a country that suffers from
prolonged occupation of its territories and the resulting
massive population displacement, Azerbaijan believes
that the same understanding should apply equally to
inter-State relations. The behaviour of Governments
that resort to force to capture the territory of another
sovereign State and authorize attacks on civilians and
ethnic cleansing cannot be tolerated. It is of paramount
importance that the international community unite its
efforts and speak with one voice to reject repressive
policies in inter-State relations, overcome mutual
mistrust and double standards, and achieve the uniform
application of international law and democratization of
international relations.

