Mr. Biontino (Germany): Germany views the
signing of the Accra Agreement by all the Liberian
parties concerned as an encouraging step towards peace
in Liberia. The Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), under the current leadership of

 

President Rawlings of Ghana, has played a most important
role in securing this Agreement. We hope that, together
with the Akosombo Agreement and the underlying Cotonou
Agreement, it will prove to be the basis for a more dynamic
peace process in Liberia.

We voted in favour of extending the mandate of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) for
three months. During this extension the Liberian parties will
have to prove their commitment to the peace process. In
this respect, we are deeply concerned about the failure of
the Liberian parties to reach agreement on the composition
of the Council of State as stipulated in the Accra
Agreement. It is crucial that the cease-fire, the agreed
timetable towards a peaceful settlement of the conflict, and
the other relevant aspects of the Accra Agreement be
respected meticulously. Otherwise the Council will not be
able to examine UNOMIL's mandate more thoroughly.

While it is important to be cautious today, this does
not mean that we should hesitate to assist the peace process
in Liberia. In this respect, I should like to point out the
important role which the Cease-fire Monitoring Group of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOMOG), together with UNOMIL, is playing in securing
such a process. This shows how regional and subregional
organizations can assist the United Nations in maintaining
international peace and security. We know that the African
countries contributing to ECOMOG are shouldering a heavy
burden and we think that they should be assisted. I am glad
to recall that my Government has offered ECOMOG 35
trucks to help it carry out its mandate.

The Security Council and the international community
can assist the peace process. But the various Liberian
parties are ultimately responsible for the future of their
country. It is up to them to advance the process of national
reconciliation and thus to lay the foundations for a lasting
peace. We call on them truly to respect the Accra
Agreement as well as the Akosombo and Cotonou
Agreements, to which they have committed themselves. The
international community can assist the Liberians, but only
they can achieve true peace.

