Mr. Atieh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this important meeting on the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine. We had hoped
that the Security Council would give the opportunity to
all delegations that wished to express their opinion to it
on the tragic situation in this most important and
sensitive region of the world.

The Middle East region has witnessed continued
instability and tension for more than six decades now
because of the continuing Israeli occupation of Arab
land and the consequent killing, dispersion of people,
destruction of infrastructure, extrajudicial killing, the
policy of closure and siege - all within a premeditated
policy to oppress Arab peoples in their occupied
territory and to humiliate them, in blatant violation of
international humanitarian law and the Charter of the
United Nations.

Arbitrary Israeli practices in the occupied Arab
lands fall under the rubric of war crimes and terrorism,
for which Israel must be held accountable under
international law. The daily activities by the Israeli
occupation forces, attacks with tanks, helicopters and
rockets against the defenseless Palestinian people are
glaring proof of this.

Israel's attempts to spread accusations randomly
against others are desperate attempts to hoodwink and
to keep the world occupied elsewhere, ignoring its
crimes against the rights of the Palestinian people,
crimes even against women and children. The claim by
the representative of Israel that Damascus hosts a
number of terrorist organizations is blatantly untrue.
Palestinians in Syria are refugees, victims of Israeli
occupation to whom Israel denies the right of return to
their land in accordance with relevant United Nations
resolutions.

Syria looks towards a just, comprehensive peace
and rejects such attempts. However, we have fallen
victim to treacherous alliances attempting to push the
region towards further collapse and tension.

Since this Organization was formed, Arab States
have pinned great hopes on it to find a just and
comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Nevertheless, and regrettably, Israel did not heed the
will of the international community, despite dozens of
resolutions adopted by this Council, let alone the
hundreds of General Assembly resolutions, all calling
upon Israel to end its occupation of Arab lands and
withdraw to the line of 4 June 1967.

In 1981 the Security Council adopted resolution
497 (1981), which considered Israel's decision to
annex the Golan as null and void. The General
Assembly has adopted dozens of resolutions
condemning all measures and practices by Israel, the
occupying Power, aimed at changing the nature of the
occupied Syrian Golan and considered them null and
void and a flagrant violation of international law and
the Geneva Conventions.

Challenging the resolutions of international
legitimacy, Israel expelled about a half million Syrians
from their lands. Dozens have been detained, and some
have now been in jail for more than thirty years. Israel
continues to plan for building further settlements in the
occupied Syrian Golan. The question is: if Israel claims
that withdrawing its settlers is painful, if it is truly
genuine in wanting peace in the region, why does it
continue to build settlements and attract more settlers
to occupied Arab, Syrian and Palestinian lands?
Statements repeated over and over by Israeli officials
that they do not intend to withdraw from the Syrian
Golan clearly show Israel's premeditated decision to
continue to occupy Syrian lands and that it does not
wish to obtain a just, comprehensive peace in the
region. Syria has made every effort possible towards a
just, comprehensive peace in the region. Syria has
repeatedly declared its willingness to resume the peace
process unconditionally, while taking into
consideration that calls for implementation of
resolutions of international legitimacy do not create
preconditions.

Nevertheless, Israel has responded to all these
calls with more rejection, continued occupation and
defiance of international legitimacy. We wish to stress
that peace in the region of the Middle East, as desired
by the international community, will not be achieved
unless and until Israel heeds the resolutions of
international legitimacy, particularly Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), the principle of
land for peace and the terms of reference of the Madrid
Peace Conference; unless and until it accepts the Arab
Peace Initiative adopted at the 2002 Beirut summit and
reaffirmed by all subsequent summits, including the
latest, just concluded yesterday in Khartoum.

The tragic conditions in the occupied Palestinian
lands are worsening daily because of Israeli military
practices in those areas. The international community
must put an end those arbitrary Israeli practices, which
deny the Palestinian people their most basic rights -
the right to life and to self-determination. The
Palestinian people exercised their democratic right in
the legislative elections, which were transparent and
fair. The international community must respect the will
of the people in choosing their leaders; it must not
interfere in their internal affairs and certainly must not
punish them politically and economically because they
have exercised their rights. Unilateral actions that the
Israeli Government intends will destroy the peace
process in the region and will create a new situation on
the ground, again against United Nations resolutions.

On the other hand, Israel's ongoing construction
of illegal settlements and the wall on Palestinian lands
will lead only to further suffering by the Palestinian
people. It means new borders imposed on the future
Palestinian State. We call on the international
community to act to compel Israel to remove illegal
settlements and the separation wall immediately.

My delegation stresses again that a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East will be
achieved only by a complete Israeli withdrawal from
the occupied Arab lands - including the Syrian Golan,
the Shab'a Farms in Lebanon and Palestinian lands -
to the borders of 4 June 1967. Stability and security in
the region are hostage to Israel's willingness to commit
unconditionally to the principle of non-acquisition of
the land of others by force, and to implement decisions
of international legitimacy and to accept the
establishment of an independent State of Palestine with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

