The President: At the outset of the meeting, I should
like to acknowledge the presence at the Council table of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Canada, Gabon and the
Gambia, and of the Minister of State at the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office of the United Kingdom. I should
also like to acknowledge and welcome the presence of other
Ministers in the Council Chamber today. Their presence is
an affirmation of the importance of the subject matter to be
addressed.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Africa

Progress report on the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the report on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa
(S/l999/1008)

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Algeria, Australia, Belgium, Cuba, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Finland, India, Indonesia,
Japan, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Morocco,
Mozambique, Norway, the Philippines, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Senegal, Slovakia, South
Africa, the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Yemen and Zambia, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Baali (Algeria),
Mr. Downer (Australia), Mr. Adam (Belgium),
Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba), Mr. Ndombasi
(Democratic Republic of the Congo), Mr. Olhaye
(Djibouti), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Ms. Korpi
(Finland), Ms. Raje (India), Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia),
Mr. Takasu (Japan), Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab  Jamahiriya), Mr. Mpinganjira (Malawi), Mr. Snoussi
(Morocco), Mr. Simdo (Mozambique), Ms. Johnson
(Norway), Mr. Siazon (Philippines), Mr. Gama
(Portugal), Mr. Lee See-young (Republic ofKorea),
Mr. Iyamuremye (Rwanda), Mr. Baudin (Senegal),
Mr. Chlebo (Slovakia), Mr. Kumalo (South Africa),
Mr. Ismail (Sudan), Mr. Dlamini (Swaziland),
Mr. Kofi'igoh (Togo), Mr. Tarasyuk (Ukraine),
Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates), Mr. Kikwete
(United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Perez-Otermin
(Uruguay), Mr. Ba-Jammal (Yemen) and
Mr. Kasanda (Zambia) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.

Invitation to Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim,
Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I invite His Excellency Mr. Salim Ahmed
Salim, Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity, to take a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Salim Ahmed
Salim, Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity, took a seat at the Council table.


The President: I propose that we adjourn this
meeting at 1.15 pm. and resume at 3.15 pm. This
afternoon's meeting will be adjourned at 6.15 pm. Since
we shall probably still have a considerable number of
speakers left at that time, I propose to resume our debates
tomorrow morning at 10 am. sharp. If I hear no
objection, I shall take it that this programme is agreed.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in
its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/1999/1008, which contains the progress report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the report on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa.
 

I call on the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan.


