The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States of
America.

The work done by Special Representative
Yamamoto over the past three and a half years has
required commitment, resolve and, I know, many long
hours. I thank him for his briefing and for the consistent
support of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for good governance, human
rights and development in Afghanistan. But, more
than that, I thank him for his leadership and service as
Special Representative.

I want to also thank Ms. Aisha Khurram for her
briefing today. I was struck by the way her comments
captured the important role she plays in Afghanistan. It
is only through the meaningful participation of young
leaders like her and women across Afghanistan that the
country will reach its full potential.

As we convene to discuss the importance of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
we extend our deepest condolences to the family and
colleagues of a selfless and dedicated American,
UNAMA employee Mr. Anil Raj, who was killed in
Kabul last month. We likewise extend our sympathies
to the loved ones of Dr. Tetsu Nakamura and his five
dedicated Afghan colleagues, who are mourned by
Afghans of all walks of life. We strongly condemn
the senseless killing of those individuals, who were in
Afghanistan to serve its people.
The United States remains deeply committed to
Afghanistan. As Afghanistan continues its process of
auditing votes to ensure the credible outcome of the
presidential election, we call for the continued support
of the electoral bodies. We continue to call on all Afghan
candidates to engage with the audit process, file any
complaints through the legal channels and refrain from
any actions that would increase tensions.

As Afghanistan conducts its electoral process, we
also remain committed to our Afghan partners in their
efforts to combat security threats in the region, including
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan
Province (ISIL-KP). Over the past few months,
successful Afghan and coalition counter-terrorism
operations against ISIL-KP have led to hundreds of
the group's fighters surrendering to Afghan security
forces, all but eradicating their presence in Nangarhar.
A September operation in Helmand successfully
targeted a number of the senior leaders of Al-Qaida
in the Indian Subcontinent. Those who perpetuate
senseless violence against innocent civilians have no
place in Afghanistan's future.

We are extremely concerned about the allegations
of sexual abuse of boys in several schools in Logar
province and the subsequent arbitrary detention of civil
society activists who reported the alleged exploitation
and violence. We call on all Government authorities to
take decisive action to hold perpetrators accountable
and to take immediate measures to ensure the protection
of victims and their families. Protecting the lives and
welfare of children must be a priority of all.

We also continue to strongly support the role played
by Afghan women in Afghanistan's economic, political
and social advancement. As we have heard today,
Afghanistan has a powerful female voice here at the
United Nations in Ambassador Raz, which is a testament
to the Afghan Government's efforts to promote female
leadership in the country. We commend Afghanistan's
national action plan on women and peace and security
and emphasize the importance of implementation as
one of the many concrete steps necessary to enhance
women's meaningful participation in building an
Afghanistan that works for everyone. The United
States recently joined the Group of Friends of Women
in Afghanistan, which, as mentioned earlier, by the
United Kingdom and Afghanistan. We look forward
to working with other Permanent Representatives
in the United Nations to lift the voices of women in
Afghanistan and ensure they are heard.

We have heard directly from the citizens of
Afghanistan that they are ready for a peaceful and
democratic future. For our part, the United States
continues to support an inclusive Afghan peace
process. The goal of our efforts remains to enable direct
intra-Afghan negotiations among Afghan stakeholders,
including the Afghan Government, opposition political
leaders, civil society, particularly women, and
the Taliban. The purpose of those negotiations is for
Afghans to chart a political road map for the future
of their country, end the conflict, ensure Afghanistan
is never a platform for international terrorism and
preserve the gains of the past 18 years.

To that end, we restarted talks with the Taliban last
month. In order to create an environment conducive to
negotiations, we urge all sides to immediately reduce
the level of violence, culminating in a ceasefire.
Additionally, we call on the Government of Afghanistan
to swiftly appoint an inclusive national negotiating team
that will negotiate a comprehensive and sustainable
peace settlement with the Taliban. Peace in Afghanistan
is possible and we must all seize this opportunity.

In conclusion, let me again express my appreciation
to Special Representative Yamamoto for his work
over the years and his commitment to strengthening
the legitimacy of Afghanistan's electoral process and
supporting the country's peace process.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

As there are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers, I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.
