Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): We thank the presidency
of China for convening this important debate. My
appreciation goes to Mr. Antonio Guterres, the
Secretary-General, for his leadership and commitment
to peace and security in Africa, as well as his insightful
remarks. I am also grateful to Mr. Sma'il Chergui,
the African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and
Security, for his illuminating presentation.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report on
United Nations-African Union cooperation on African
Union-led peace support operations, as well as the
laudable adoption of resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378
(2017), which focus on the need for sustained, predictable

and flexible funding for African Union-led peace
support operations authorized by the Security Council.

The root causes of conflicts in Africa are
multifaceted. A comprehensive approach is required
for their resolution. Above all, our response must be
situated within the rubric of the quest for collective
security, which does not rest on any one country or
region but on the international community acting in
concert. We must therefore have a shared strategic vision
of our goals, recalling that peacekeeping in Africa is
an integral part of the maintenance of international
peace and security, for which the Security Council has
primary responsibility.

Nigeria's experience in Sierra Leone and Liberia has
taught us a great deal about the challenges of regional
peacekeeping, principally in financing, equipping and
mission-support arrangements. Africa constitutes a
majority of matters on the Council's agenda. Invariably,
those matters are also on the agenda of the African
Union, which is frequently called upon to respond. Such
demands placed on the AU far outweigh its resources
and capacities to respond effectively. The consequences
of ineffective response would include mission failure,
increased instability and a reluctance among potential
partners to contribute to what is perceived to be a
failing system, among others. Therefore, we must use
our political authority to ensure that, where regional
capacities exist, appropriate support follows. Without
a truly strategic partnership, the enormous investments
in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding
will continue to be arbitrary and will not achieve the
desired end.

Although financing AU peacekeeping operations
remains a daunting challenge, the landmark Prodi report
of the African Union-United Nations panel on modalities
for support to African Union peacekeeping operations
of 2008 (S/2008/813), the Brahimi report of the Panel
on United Nations Peace Operations (S/2000/809) and
the report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (S/2015/446) remind us that financing
options are not difficult to identify. The problem
persists because stakeholders have failed to adopt the
far-reaching and creative alternatives required. Given
that the current financial frameworks for partnership
in peacekeeping are not conducive to building a
sustainable long-term strategy, it is imperative that the
Council endorse a financing option that guarantees the
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of funding
for AU peacekeeping operations mandated by the
United Nations. In that regard, Nigeria welcomes the
Action for Peace initiative ofthe Secretary-General and
looks forward to its implementation.

We encourage the AU to continue with its
institutional reform process, as well as the development
of a long-term capacity-building road map. We believe
that the United Nations Secretariat can play a key role
in pulling that framework together in order to improve
the technical support to the African Union. There may
also be scope to support initiatives such as the Nigerian
Army Peacekeeping Centre, in Jaji, Kaduna state, to
enhance its capacity to train and prepare AU troops for
the planned African Standby Force.

Nigeria recognizes the increasingly important role
women play in conflict resolution and in building stable
communities. It welcomes their increased participation
in peacekeeping operations, as they have no doubt
brought a critical skill set to peacekeeping, particularly
in addressing gender-based issues in the various
missions that they serve.

Incidents of sexual exploitation and abuse continue
to occur in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Nigeria strongly condemns that abhorrent practice of a
few who take delight in abusing those they are meant to
protect. Last year, our President Muhammadu Buhari
joined the Secretary-General's circle of leadership
to champion the fight against that menace. Nigeria
will continue to lend strong support to ending sexual
exploitation and abuse in all its forms and ramifications.

We strongly urge the Secretary-General, with the
support of all Member States, to continue to intensify
efforts to find sustainable funding for peacekeeping
missions in Africa. It is only by acting together that
we can demonstrate the shared responsibility of the
international community for the maintenance of peace
and security.

In conclusion, we would like to pay tribute to all
those who have made the supreme sacrifice in serving
as Blue Helmets around the world. We also offer
our deepest condolences to their families, friends
and Governments. Nigeria salutes the courage of
peacekeepers, humanitarian workers, non- governmental
organizations and other stakeholders for their hard
work, often in difficult circumstances, to ensure the
safety and security of the world.

