Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): In recent days, Israeli forces have clashed with
Palestinian demonstrators in the areas of Palestinian self-
administration, resulting in bloodshed and the wounding
and killing of several hundred Palestinians. The
international community has expressed its grave concern
over these occurrences. The Chinese Government and
people deeply deplore these unfortunate events and offer
their profound sympathy and condolences to the innocent
victims and their families. We believe that these acts of
the Israeli forces are clearly not conducive to peace and
stability in the region. We urge the parties concerned to
take immediate measures to halt the conflict and prevent
further bloodshed.

 

The Palestinian-Israeli peace talks are now at a critical
juncture. We urge the parties concerned to exercise restraint
and to keep calm, to cherish the hard-won peace and to
comply strictly with the agreements concluded between
them, including the agreement on the resolution of the final
status of Jerusalem. They should refrain from any action
that would further aggravate the situation and impair the
peace process in the Middle East, thus establishing a
favourable atmosphere for the prompt resumption of
Palestinian-Israeli peace negotiations.

The international community is disturbed at the
difficulties facing the Palestinian-Israeli peace talks. We are
of the View that, in order to break the current impasse and
prevent a set-back of the whole peace process in the Middle
East, the parties concerned must make greater efforts to
overcome interference and obstacles with a view to
implementing the concluded agreements as soon as
possible. Only in this way will it be possible to consolidate
the progress that has been achieved in the peace talks and
push forward the peace process in the Middle East.

The question of Palestine is at the core of the Middle
East question. The early settlement of the Palestinian
question in a just and reasonable manner, as well as the
restoration of the legitimate national rights of the
Palestinian people, are the keys to the achievement of
peace, stability and development in the Middle East region.

China has consistently supported the Middle East
process. We have maintained that a political settlement to
the Middle East question should be sought on the basis of
the relevant United Nations resolutions and in accordance
with the principle of "land for peace". We believe that the
achievement of peace in the Middle East is the common
aspiration of the peoples of the region. It is in keeping with
the fundamental interests of the peoples of all countries in
the region, as well as with peace and stability in the world
at large.

