Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): It is a great honour to see
you, Mr. President, presiding over the Security
Council. This is a clear sign of the commitment of
Ireland to the cause of peace and security in the world.
Allow me to pay tribute to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Sergio Vieira de Mello,
whose hard work and wisdom in preparing East Timor
for independence deserves the praise of the whole
international community. I would like to thank him for
his comprehensive briefing, as well as to echo his
words this morning concerning the need to ensure an
exit with strategy in East Timor so as to avoid a
premature and destabilizing withdrawal.

Brazil welcomes the presence among us of Chief
Minister Mari Alkatiri, the first elected East Timorese
official to address this Council.

The work of Sergio Vieira de Mello and his team
has been made easier thanks to the vision of leaders
such as Mari Alkatiri, Xanana Gusmao and Jose
Ramos-Horta. But, above all, the progress achieved so
far would not have been possible without the active
involvement of the heroic East Timorese people, whose
resolve to achieve self-determination we have all
learned to admire. They have given us lessons in
democracy and tolerance.

Let me also thank the representatives of the
World Bank and the United Nations Development
Programme for their important statements.

It is appropriate to recall once more resolution
1338 (2001) of 31 January 2001, by which the Council
stressed the need for a substantial international
presence in East Timor after independence. Indeed, we
agree with a number of delegations that have
highlighted the Secretary-General's view regarding the
essential requirement in East Timor, which is to ensure
that the enormous sacrifices of the East Timorese, the
investments of the international community and the
cooperation of the parties to bring about a successful
transition are not squandered for lack of international
support for the new State.

We must ensure a smooth transition to
independence, one that preserves stability, security as
well as continuity in the Public Administration. For
that to happen, we cannot rely solely on voluntary
contributions. It is necessary to secure a predictable
source of funding, as rightly pointed out by the
Secretary-General. I am particularly pleased to note
that the consultations of the Security Council have led
to the text of a draft presidential statement that does
not shy away from endorsing the recommendations put
forward by the Secretary-General in the report under
consideration.

We have witnessed important progress in the
implementation of UNTAET's mandate over the last
six months. The election for the Constituent Assembly
was a huge success that bodes well for the future of
party politics and democracy in East Timor. The
Constituent Assembly has begun its deliberations and
the all-East Timorese Council of Ministers has been
sworn in. Strides have been made in the Timorization
of the Public Administration.

All these positive aspects notwithstanding, it is
clear that there remain important deficiencies that must
be addressed with the continued support of the
international community. The security situation is now
stable, but it is advisable to remain vigilant regarding
potential threats, especially in light of reports of
intimidation and disinformation campaigns in refugee
camps located in West Timor. Regarding the refugees,
it is good news that there has been an increase in the
number of repatriations. This is also a sign that the
efforts of Xanana Gusmao with a view to healing the
wounds of past animosity are starting to bear fruit.

We look forward to the signing of a memorandum
of understanding between the United Nations and
Indonesia concerning security arrangements in order to
allow international agencies, including the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
to return to West Timor. Brazil appreciates the efforts
of the new Indonesian Government to solve pending
issues and to build strong bilateral ties with East Timor
based on friendship and mutual respect.

Another critical area for the future of East Timor
is the strengthening of the rule of law. This is a
precondition not only to realizing human rights, but
also to providing a solid basis for the functioning of a
sound economic system.

In the field of criminal justice, East Timor still
faces a dearth of judges, prosecutors, lawyers,
investigators, forensic experts and interpreters. We
have taken note with appreciation of Mr. Vieira de
Mello's remarks on the efforts of his office to address
the problems facing the Serious Crimes Unit. It is also
important to address other legal problems that might
inhibit economic recovery and development,
particularly the need for clear and stable legislation on
property rights, as well as a commercial code.

As independence approaches and the downsizing
of the mission in East Timor is carried out, an
important source of hard currency will certainly start to
dry up. In this context, it becomes even more important
to continue to put in place income-generating projects
to minimize the adverse impact of the decrease in
United Nations personnel and expenditure. In addition,
it is essential to keep the current level of public
services after independence. The deterioration of such
services, which include health and education, would
hurt the most vulnerable and could constitute a blow to
public confidence in the future State.

The independence of East Timor should not be
seen as the only objective of our efforts. It is for sure a
fundamental step, a precondition for a better life for all
East Timorese, but it should not be an excuse for
precipitous withdrawal. It must be an opportunity to
display a real commitment to a stable and democratic
East Timor. The Security Council should act with
determination to guarantee the stability of the transition
through a strong successor mission, as proposed by the
Secretary-General, and the international community as
a whole must continue to provide generous support for
the rehabilitation, reconstruction and development of
East Timor.

The international community has undertaken the
commitment to help East Timor to build a solid
democracy. If we want to do justice to the sacrifice of
the East Timorese people, we must go beyond the mere
rhetoric of support. It is true that a mission with a
mandate as broad as UNTAET's requires a huge
investment, but anyone who is familiar with the
complexity of building democracy and helping a
people to stand on its own knows that such goods do
not come cheap.

Now it is time to protect the huge investment we
have made. We cannot afford to put at risk the progress
achieved. We hope that the Security Council and other
organs of the United Nations will continue to attach
high priority to East Timor. This will require matching
our words of support with meaningful decisions and
actions.

