Mr. Kafando (spoke in French): We thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting of the
Security Council on the situation in the Middle East, in
particular the serious crisis currently taking place in
Gaza. We have greatly appreciated the presence here of
the President of the Palestinian Authority in this
debate. We also welcome the presence of the Secretary-
General and of all the ministers and representatives
here today.

The unprecedented mobilization of the
international community that we are witnessing
unquestionably demonstrates the clear awareness that
we all have of the seriousness of the situation and of
the urgent need to find an appropriate and timely
response to it. We are deeply concerned by the ongoing
hostilities between Israel and Hamas, which have
worsened since Israel launched military ground
operations in Gaza on 3 January.

Whatever can be said in terms of the
responsibilities of the various parties, we must
acknowledge that recourse to force, whoever
undertakes it and in whatever way it is used, cannot be
the appropriate solution to any conflict, much less the
current crisis. Quite the contrary, it has no other effect
than to further worsen tensions. We are particularly
distressed by the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Gaza, which was already of great concern.
As hostages to the situation, the civilian population is
paying a very heavy toll for those confrontations.
This is why my delegation calls for an immediate
ceasefire, with a reliable monitoring mechanism, the
opening of crossings to allow for humanitarian access,
the rejection of the military option and the re-Iaunching
of a political process that is credible and carried out in
good faith.

The urgency of the situation requires effective
and rapid action by the Security Council. Everyone has
acknowledged this. The Council owes as much to the
Palestinian people, in particular the people in Gaza,
who are under embargo and whose untold suffering
challenges our conscience as human beings. It owes it
to the Israeli people who have been victims of Hamas
rocket attacks. It owes it to stability in the region and
to international peace and security.

We would like to commend the many and varied
initiatives under way to bring about a settlement to the
crisis. No effort or expression of goodwill is or will be
superfluous in terms of contributing to putting an end
to the tragedy unfolding before us.

The results that we hope to achieve in the short
term must be followed up and sustained by a firm
commitment by all parties to undertake a search for the
ways and means to bring about a lasting solution. To
that end, we need to take into account the important
gains already achieved on the path to peace, in
particular the Arab Peace Initiative, the Quartet road
map and the relevant Security Council resolutions.

But it is, above all, up to the parties themselves to
demonstrate greater political will, which requires that
they fully comply with their commitments. The parties
need to establish the minimum conditions for trust that
will be necessary for building a solid and lasting basis
for peace. In particular, we urge Israel to put an end to
the settlements and the blockade of Gaza. At the same
time, we call upon Hamas to end the rocket and mortar
attacks against Israeli territories.

Clearly, the settlement of the crisis in the Middle
East, including the current crisis, is a collective and
shared responsibility. The direct actors in the
international community need to play their respective
parts. We reiterate our full support for all negotiating
efforts under way currently, particularly the most
recent efforts undertaken by President Mubarak and
President Sarkozy to bring about a rapid ceasefire and
the restoration of calm.

For its part, the Security Council needs to take
action, and take it quickly, not only to help to put an
end to the human and humanitarian tragedy under way,
but also to avoid others in the future. We are prepared,
along with all the other members of the Council, to
provide our modest contribution to this.

