Throughout our engagement in fighting the spread of this pandemic, we have consistently emphasized the need for complete transparency, objectivity and the timely sharing of public health data and information with the international community. We have also stressed the importance of collecting accurate, science- based data and analysing the origins, characteristics and spread of the virus. While the United States generally supports resolution 2532 (2020), adopted today, we would like to note that it does not include crucial language to emphasize transparency and data-sharing as critical aspects in fighting this virus. We consistently expressed this concern throughout the consultation process on the resolution. Additionally, we would like to note that the United States supports the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire, while recognizing the imperative for critical counterterrorism operations to continue the fight against terrorists who seek to exploit this pandemic and that of course nothing in this resolution can or is intended to prejudice actions by States in the exercise of their inherent right of sovereignty and self-defence, consistent with international law. We welcome the efforts of parties to armed conflicts to respect existing ceasefire agreements and urge continued efforts to negotiate new humanitarian ceasefires in implementation of the political commitments expressed in the resolution. The United States continues to lead the world's humanitarian and health response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We are working directly with Governments and authorities, multilateral organizations within their existing mandates, non-governmental organizations, the private sector, faith-based and other organizations responding on the ground to combat this virus. That said, the United States remains seriously concerned about terrorist groups posing as humanitarian actors to exploit and benefit from humanitarian assistance, which is why Member States must remain committed to fulfilling their counterterrorism finance-related obligations, including by implementing appropriate domestic legislation, in compliance with resolution 2462 (2019) and other international obligations. Therefore, we note that nothing in this resolution is meant to call into question the lawful application of domestic laws, as required by and in a manner consistent with international law, to prevent the provision of financing and other material support to terrorists and terrorist groups, or to call into question non-arbitrary restrictions on humanitarian assistance that may be imposed consistent with international humanitarian law. The United States has already made available more than $1.3 billion in emergency health, humanitarian and economic assistance to combat COVID-19, in addition to the funding we already provide to non-governmental and international organizations. This assistance is part of more than $12 billion allocated by agencies and departments across the United States Government to benefit the global response, including vaccine and therapeutics development, preparedness efforts and humanitarian assistance.
