The Secretary-General: I thank you, Mr. President,
for your presence here today for this important meeting
on South Sudan.

Before we turn to today's agenda, I would like
to once again express our sincere condolences to the
people and the Government of the United Kingdom
on the loss of life and injuries suffered in yesterday's
terrorist attack in London. The United Nations stands
with the people of the United Kingdom, as we do
with all those who have suffered from the menace of
terrorism around the world. Our thoughts are with the
victims and their families.

The conflict in South Sudan continues to generate
profound suffering. The Sudan People's Liberation
Army (SPLA) and the opposition are conducting
military operations in a number of areas, with
devastating consequences for civilians, who face
seemingly endless violence and are being forced to
flee their homes. At present, the situation is especially
alarming in the greater Upper Nile area, with military
clashes along the banks of the River Nile in and around
Malakal, in the famine-affected counties of Unity
and in previously stable areas of northern Jonglei. In
the past three months, the greater Equatoria region
has also continued to see high levels of fighting and
insecurity, with retaliatory operations by the SPLA and
its allied militias against suspected rebel groups and
communities that are perceived to support them.

Civilians continue to be subjected to horrendous
attacks, including rape and the recruitment of children.
More than 1.9 million people have been displaced
internally, more than 220,000 of whom are seeking
safety in protection sites of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS). Some 1.6 million people
have sought refuge in neighbouring countries. The
humanitarian crisis continues to deepen, with 100,000
people enduring famine, 1 million on the verge of that
fate and 5.5 million who may be severely food-insecure
by the summer. At least 7.5 million people across South
Sudan - almost two thirds of the population - need
humanitarian assistance. Three years of conflict have
eroded livelihoods and disrupted farming, including in
the Equatorias, the country's breadbasket. Humanitarian
compounds and supplies have been repeatedly looted.
The Government continues to impede deliveries of
lifesaving assistance, including through denial of
access and bureaucratic impediments. Most recently,
the Government decided to institute a massive hike in
the price of work permits for aid workers.

Yet despite the alarm sounded by the United Nations
and the international community over the crisis, the
Government has yet to express any meaningful concern
or take any tangible steps to address the plight of its
people. On the contrary, what we hear most often
are denials - a refusal by the leadership to even
acknowledge the crisis or fulfil its responsibility to
end it. The peace process remains at a standstill. While
President Kiir's statements regarding his intention to
hold a national dialogue are welcome, they are not
convincing in the context of the ongoing hostilities,
the absence of consultations with key stakeholders, the
systematic curtailment of basic political freedoms, the
restrictions on humanitarian access and the growing
fragmentation on both sides of the conflict.

Under-Secretary-General Herve Ladsous returned
just yesterday from a trip to South Sudan, where he
visited the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and
acknowledged the important work that our courageous
staff are undertaking in the country. He was
accompanied by the Under-Secretary-General-designate
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
who will take up his duties after 1 April. Mr. Ladsous
met with President Kiir, the First Vice President
and Cabinet Ministers, and emphasized the critical
importance of an inclusive political process for ensuring
the well-being of the country's people. Indeed, credible
dialogue cannot take place at the point of a gun. When
civil-society and opposition members cannot meet
or speak freely, when a significant proportion of the
population cannot participate in discussions and
when numerous communities are displaced or facing
starvation, dialogue efforts are unlikely to succeed.
The same holds true for elections, which can take place
only once stability has returned.

The United Nations is working with the African
Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) to reinvigorate the political
process and to resolve long-standing intercommunal
disputes in South Sudan and the subregion. We support
both the Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, President Festus Mogae, and the African
Union High Representative for South Sudan, President
Alpha Konare, in their respective roles. The United
Nations Mission in South Sudan and the United Nations
country team are supporting intercommunal dialogue
and local peace conferences. We also continue to work
for the deployment of a regional protection force, despite
continuing obstacles imposed by the Government of
South Sudan.

But no such force and no amount of diplomacy can
substitute for a lack of political will among those who
govern the country. There is a strong consensus that
South Sudanese leaders need to do more to demonstrate
their commitment to the well-being of the country's
people, who are among the poorest in the world. If
there is to be any hope that those leaders will change
their current calculations, greater pressure is needed.
That means, first and foremost, that the region and the
Security Council must speak with one voice.

Let us not underestimate the dangers of South
Sudan's trajectory. Atrocity crimes have occurred with
impunity, and the potential for serious deterioration
remains very real. Credible mechanisms for
accountability are a must. For every child who dies,
for every woman or girl raped with impunity, for every
young boy conscripted into fighting and fed only
hatred, there is an angry mother, father, sister or brother
plunged into sorrow, feeding the cycle of vengeance.

To pull the country back from the abyss and back
from a widening famine, we must collectively focus
our energies on three immediate objectives. The first
is achieving an immediate cessation of hostilities. The
second is restoring the peace process, which means
ensuring the representation of and consultation with
the opposition, civil society and all South Sudanese,
regardless of ethnicity, in the transition and in the
proposed national dialogue. The third is ensuring
unrestricted humanitarian access, including freedom
of movement for UNMISS and a future regional
protection force.

In two days, the IGAD Heads of State will meet in
Nairobi. I urge the members of the Security Council
and the leaders of IGAD to unanimously declare their
support for those three objectives and to press the
South Sudanese parties to implement them. All of the
optimism that accompanied the birth of South Sudan
has been shattered by internal divisions, rivalries and
the irresponsible behaviour of some of its leaders. As a
result, a country that saw a brief glimmer of hope for a
better future has plunged back into darkness. We have
to do everything in our power to change that.

