Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation is grateful to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on
progress made in the settlement process in Sierra
Leone. We also associate ourselves with the words of
gratitude expressed to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Adeniji, for his
comprehensive and very informative briefing. We
appreciate the opportunity to receive first-hand
information and evaluation of the developments of the
situation.

We are pleased at the way the peace process is
proceeding in Sierra Leone. The ceasefire is holding;
the parties are cooperating with the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) in deploying the
contingent of the Mission; and, without a doubt,
success has been achieved in disarmament. In our view,
this progress confirms the correctness of the strategy
for settling the conflict in Sierra Leone that was
selected by the Security Council.

Now it is important to strengthen the tempo of the
peace process, primarily by ensuring strict compliance
with the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) timetable and extension of State administration
deep into the heart of the country, including to the
diamond-producing areas.

We believe that the arrival in Sierra Leone of new
UNAMSIL contingents will make it possible to create
the necessary conditions for this. We agree with the
View of the Secretary-General regarding the need for
an immediate increase in financial support to the DDR
programme in Sierra Leone by the international
community.

We are pleased that in Sierra Leone preparations
for the elections are being stepped up. We support the
intention of the Secretary-General to provide financial
and technical assistance during the election campaign
and the elections. We are convinced that in order to
establish a solid foundation for peace in Sierra Leone
the elections must be democratic and must include all
political forces of the country, including the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF), provided that the
members of that movement are disarmed and that the
organization is transformed into a political party.

In the long term, dealing with the aftermath of the
conflict will depend on national reconciliation. There is
no doubt that obtaining such a goal will require the just
punishment of the principal perpetrators of crimes
against humanity committed during the years of
conflict in Sierra Leone. At the same time, we deem it
appropriate that stress should be placed precisely on
reconciliation and on finding out the truth, including
through the use of traditional structures and methods.
We are convinced that the lessons learned from the
bitter experience of the conflict will help the people of
Sierra Leone to overcome the aftermath more quickly
and to restore a life of peace.

