Mr. Al-Moumani (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me first to congratulate you, Madam President,
on Uruguay's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I thank the delegation
of the United States for presiding over the Council
so skilfully last month. I also congratulate the new
members of the Security Council. Jordan fully supports
all the efforts of the sisterly Arab Republic of Egypt,
the Arab member of the Security Council.

Fundamental changes have taken place in the
international security architecture over the past several
years. Civil wars have spread throughout the world.
Conflicts are by their very nature more complex,
entailing terrible humanitarian consequences. In 2015,
the crisis in the Middle East accounted for 35.5 per cent
of the Security Council's meetings on specific States
or situations in the region. Furthermore, the region
was discussed in numerous other thematic meetings
under other items concerning terrorism and defending
religions, civilizations and cultural heritage. The
situations in the occupied Arab territories, Syria and
Yemen were among the subjects most debated during
the closed consultations of the Security Council last
year and they year before.

Those statistics reflect the gravity of the situation
in the Middle East, where millions of people are living
through a conflict - the Arab-Israeli conflict - that
dates back more than 60 years, with the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict at its core. The international
community, through various resolutions, has laid out
the parameters for a solution that have been ignored
rather than implemented. To live in peace and security
is a fundamental right and need for all peoples wishing
to build a future based on dignity. We therefore believe
that the failure to achieve such a future would have
terrible consequences for the region and world, in
general.

The only way to achieve peace in the Middle East
and to prevent bloodshed is for the Palestinian people
to recover their legitimate right to live in security,
dignity, freedom and security without occupation, in
an independent and viable State within its pre-l967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital and in
accordance with the terms of reference of the peace
process and the Arab Peace Initiative, in peace and
security with all the States and peoples of the region.

Jordan is living the question of Palestine; we are
not just outside observers or mere mediators. We have
a historic role in that cause and its service. We will
continue our efforts on behalf of negotiations leading
to the two-State solution within a set time frame, and
take up all of the final status issues, in accordance with
international initiatives and the Arab Peace Initiative.
We shall do so in a way that meets all of Jordan's vital
interests with regard to those issues, particularly with
regard to the refugees and Jerusalem.

Unilateral and provocative measures, especially
settlement policies, must be abandoned. The Israeli
occupation authorities must cease all unilateral
measures in occupied East Jerusalem and all Islamic
and Christian sites in Jerusalem. In that context, let
me stress that Jordan will continue to confront all
Israeli violations, provocations and aggressions that
target Islamic and Christian holy sites, in particular the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, because His Majesty King Abdullah
II ibn Al Hussein is the trustee of all Islamic and
Christian holy sites in Jerusalem. Israel must cease its
illegal behaviour. The international community must
reject all illegal unilateral measures that block the path
to peace.

Jordan stresses the need to maintain and increase
the diplomatic momentum aimed at finding a
comprehensive political solution to the tragic situation
in Syria. Jordan's position under the leadership of King
Abdullah II has been clear. We have stressed the need
to work for a political solution that maintains Syria's
territorial integrity and political independence, restores
peace and stability, repairs its social fabric and ensures
the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). As a
step towards achieving the solution set forth in the
resolution, the announcement of the commencement of
negotiations on 29 January is very encouraging.

My country is hosting a very large number of
Syrian refugees, with whom we are sharing our meagre
resources. The international community must be aware
of all the burdens we are bearing in that regard and
it should help us bear them. We therefore call on the
international community to support Jordan's appeal for
$10 billion for the next three years.

The dangers of terrorism have spread throughout the
world under different names and those terrorist groups
are now using different means of war. A coalition has
been established and His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn
Al Hussein has stated that this is our war, as Muslims,
against those who distort our noble religion. It is of the
utmost importance to coordinate and cooperate at the
international level to combat extremist thinking and
ideology for the long term.

We are convinced that peace, security and stability
can be achieved in the Middle East for the prosperity of
our people. We in Jordan are committed to playing our
role in that endeavour.

