Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
allow me to thank Ukraine and its Minister for Foreign
Affairs for convening this important open debate on the
protection of critical infrastructure. Iraq also welcomes
today's adoption of resolution 2341 (2017) , which Iraq
co-sponsored.

We must not attribute terrorism to any religion,
culture, nationality or geographical region, as affirmed
by numerous Security Council resolutions, the most
recent of which being resolution 2253 (2015). The
challenges represented by terrorist organizations,
such as the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
terrorist gangs, emanate from their high organizational
capacity, which allows them to perpetrate terrorist
attacks in cyberspace that have a direct physical
impact on critical infrastructure. The attacks destroy
and impede the functionality of critical infrastructure
and cause serious damage. ISIS gangs are working to
strengthen their organizational capacities and strategies
aimed at recruiting supporters from developed
nations who have received an education in prestigious
Western universities. These highly educated recruits
allow terrorist organizations to carry out transborder
cyberattacks that evade all national restrictions, thereby
creating a reality in which there are in fact no borders.

Strengthening international cooperation in the
area of counter-terrorism is extremely important, in
particular because ISIS perpetrates its crimes through
decentralized networks. These gangs have increased
their technical capacities for the purpose of carrying out
cyber attacks and have recruited foreign terrorists who
have advanced skills to carry out such complex attacks.
Among the most important trends that can be
observed in the conduct of terrorist organizations, in
particular of Da'esh terrorist gangs, is the continued
targeting of critical infrastructure in Iraq, including
bridges, power lines, telecommunications towers and
oil pipelines. Terrorism has impacted many projects
that constitute the backbone of Iraq's infrastructure.
Terrorists have also burned monuments, mosques and
universities. Such terrorist attacks have increased the
cost ofdevelopment projects because ofthe growing cost
of security measures necessary to protect construction
sites. The targeting of oil facilities and refineries in
Iraq in areas that witness many terrorist attacks is
one of the most serious attacks on Iraq's economy and
infrastructure because the country depends primarily
on revenue from oil.

The liberation of Iraqi cities that were previously
controlled by Da'esh gangs usually comes at great
economic cost. In the battle to reclaim Mosul, ISIS
gangs planted mines and explosive devices in citizens'
homes and in public buildings and on bridges to destroy
them and prevent security forces from advancing
towards these cities and towns. These challenges have
grown as oil prices have fallen on the global market,
since petroleum revenues form the core of Iraq's
national budget.

In conclusion, my Government is deeply grateful
for the active role and efforts of the global coalition,
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and
other international organizations, particularly the
United Nations Development Programme. We call on
the international community to make further efforts to
reconstruct the liberated areas of my country, restore
stability and rehabilitate our infrastructure, including
schools and hospitals.

