Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
First and foremost, I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for having requested this public debate on
children and armed conflict. I know to what extent you
personally are interested in this matter. You and I both
witnessed the devastating consequences of armed
conflict on children in Sierra Leone.

The events of the last two months have reminded
us all how important it is to protect civilians, more
specifically, children, and they have also reminded us
that this task is highly relevant to the work of the
Council. Peace is only possible if we give priority to
human security.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his detailed and far-sighted report on children and
armed conflict. He emphasizes the fact that despite
laudable progress achieved, thanks to efforts made
recently, the task of the Council in this respect is far
from over.

(spoke in English)

Security Council resolutions 1261 (1999) and
1314 (2000) on children and armed conflict have
outlined the steps to be taken, the actors to be engaged
and the mechanisms to be used to increase the
protection of the rights of war-affected children and
their communities. We commend the Council for acting
on these guidelines with respect to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Sierra Leone. We need now
to focus more systematically on further implementation
of these provisions in the two landmark resolutions.

Doing so requires significant political will and
significant resources. The Secretary-General was right
to highlight this inescapable reality in his
recommendations throughout the report.

We welcome the adoption today by the Council of
this further, very significant resolution on this issue,
responding to the Secretary-General's
recommendations and reaffirming the Council's
commitment to protect children.

I would also like to congratulate Mr. Otunnu, the
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, and the United Nations Children's Fund, in
partnership with non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and other United Nations agencies, for
integrating child protection into the peace and security
agenda. In particular, we encourage the United Nations
agencies to continue their efforts to improve training
on children's rights for United Nations staff and to
evaluate the lessons learned from the incorporation of
child protection into peacekeeping operations despite
the meagre resources at their disposal to do so.

We need to continue to cooperate with NGOs on
the front lines of protecting children. In this regard, we
welcome the establishment of the NGO "watchlist" on
children and armed conflict. This initiative should
improve protection for the rights of children in specific
situations of armed conflict through better monitoring,
better reporting and better follow-up action before,
during and after conflicts.

In September 2000, Canada hosted in Winnipeg
an International Conference on War-Affected Children.
Many of you who are here today were present at that
Conference, and you will remember that it brought

together over 1,500 delegates - including
representatives of Governments, NGOs, United Nations
agencies and young people themselves - many of

whom have had first-hand experience with children in
armed conflict. The priorities for action outlined in
Winnipeg have had beneficial effects here. For
example, one of the promising outcomes of last
summer's United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons was its
recognition of the devastating impact of small arms on
children.

Progress on child protection extends well beyond
the United Nations, of course. The Economic
Community of West African States has established a
child-protection unit within its secretariat; such
measures, I see, are called for in the resolution itself.
We believe that this is a potentially very important
initiative, and we hope it will serve as a model for
other regional organizations for integrating child
protection into their work.

It has been over a year since the Assembly
adopted the Optional Protocol to the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child. Many States
have subsequently signed this new instrument, and 11
others have ratified it, moving us closer to a global ban
on the use of child soldiers. We encourage all
Governments present here to sign and ratify the
Protocol. Its universal ratification and implementation
are important steps for the protection of children.

One of the most pernicious violations of
children's rights is the abduction, conscription and use
of children in armed conflict. Human Rights Watch
reports that earlier this month more than 100 primary
school students were abducted to serve as soldiers by
the Burundian rebel movement "Forces for the Defence
of Democracy". Forces for the Defence of Democracy:
using child soldiers in its interpretation of democracy!
While several students escaped, dozens remain in rebel
hands. We call upon the perpetrators to release the
children, and we call upon the Council to condemn this
crime and to punish its authors.

Finally, a word about Graca Machel's report,
"The Impact of Armed Conflict on Children". The
Government of Canada, along with the Government of
Norway, helped commission the Machel review, an
update of Mrs. Machel's ground-breaking 1996 study.
In it, she clearly reminds us all that there is still much
to be done to fulfil our promises to each other and to
the children.

Next spring's special session on children will be
an important opportunity for us all to redeem those
promises. Let us together guarantee that the special
session will strengthen our commitment to children and
protect them. Let us progressively establish a new and
humane international norm of behaviour: no more child
soldiers.

