Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank you, Sir,
for convening this debate. We thank the briefers, the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Herve Ladsous, and the Police Commissioners of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the African
Union/United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. We also acknowledge
the extraordinary work carried out by each of those
missions and welcome the various official groups that
are present today in the Chamber.

This debate highlights the importance of police
components in United Nations peacekeeping operations
in achieving stability on the ground, generally
following armed conflict, and in developing and
creating capacities to strengthen police services in
host States. Host States must take ownership of their
own peace processes and rebuild their institutional and
social fabrics, which is an important objective.

With respect to developing police services, we must
bear in mind that a national police force that enjoys
legitimacy within society is a key element to sustaining
peace in societies that have been divided by conflict.
Likewise, we believe that the creation or reform of
solid police institutions is a complex undertaking
that requires continued efforts over time. The process
goes beyond police training, which is key, to include
the development of relevant institutions that are able
to provide political support, guidance, oversight,
budgets and the required legal framework for police
work. Furthermore, building operational capacity also
requires a wide range of managerial and administrative
roles in the police force. Police contingents must also
be given due social and political protection, as well as
incentives and recognition for their work in protecting
the population and enforcing the law.

However, United Nations reports on peacekeeping
operations point to the fact that United Nations police
are not always in a position to develop or reform police
institutions, as reflected, among other things, in the
fact that the United Nations police recruitment model
does not meet the requirements for the institutional
development of host States. Such reports recommend that
the recruitment of United Nations police officers must
be based on the mandate agreed by the Security Council,
which means that those missions with stabilization
and protection mandates must recruit numerous police
officers accompanied by protection officers. Those
contingents that are geared towards reforming the
police institutions of host States must recruit fewer
numbers of specialized personnel that enjoy backing
of civilian staff who work in institutional development.
However, it would seem that all recruitment models
continue to be based on the legacy of huge contingents
inherited from the models of peacekeeping operations.
As a result, host States do not receive the support they
need to reform their institutions.

One of the key components in the process of
recruitment is linked to gender equality. We are
convinced that women, given their fundamental role
in society, are the best agents to protect women and
children from abuse and to heal the deep wounds caused
by divisions in a society. Likewise, it is also critical
to train police forces using personnel or contingents
from the host State, who should not have a history of
or links to abuse or violence perpetrated against the
civil population. They should also have the ability to
effectively lead and discharge their mission.

Furthermore, Venezuela fully supports the need
for an ongoing dialogue between the Security Council
and the countries that contribute contingents related
to all aspects of activities in peacekeeping operations,
especially in the planning stages and in the drafting of
mandates, pursuant to Article 44 of the Charter of the
United Nations.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate the importance
of the role of police contingents in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. However, it is necessary that
the Security Council bear in mind that United Nations
police officers are an integral part of those operations.
As such, the Council must respect the prerogatives of
the General Assembly, especially the mandate of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.

