Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we would like to express our appreciation in
seeing you, Mr. President, once again in New York to
preside over this meeting. We welcome your initiative in
convening this open debate and in preparing the concept
note (S/2016/22, annex) to guide our discussions.

Seventy years after the establishment of the
Organization, we still face significant challenges as
an international community, including new threats
to international peace and security. That is evident
in the fact that the Security Council is increasingly
discussing the actions of non-State armed actors who
attack civilians. That growing concern on the part
of the Council to protect civilians who are victims
of armed conflict is reflected in the fact that every
peacekeeping operation established in the past decade
is multidimensional in nature and has a mandate that
includes protection-of-civilians tasks.

Peru has broadened its perspective on participation
in peacekeeping operations in the light of that
multidimensional character. In addition to our joint
participation with Uruguay in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, Peru has deployed
a contingent for the construction and maintenance
of airfields in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic. That is the first time that a Peruvian
contingent has been deployed in Africa.

Peacekeeping operations face serious challenges in
fulfilling their duty to protect civilians. My delegation
would like to highlight three points in that regard.

First, the establishment of operations with
multidimensional mandates means greater complexity
in planning and implementing those mandates. In that
regard, better coordination among the Security Council,
the Secretariat and troop-contributing countries
is required so that the vision and views of troop-
contributing countries can be duly heard, given that
their contingents will be responsible for implementing
the mandate on the ground.

Secondly, at the operational level, missions with
an explicit mandate to protect civilians should have the
necessary capacity and command structure to fulfil the
task effectively. To that end, uniformed personnel need
to have access to better training facilities, awareness-
raising and access to new technologies to make it
possible for them to detect potential threats to their
security and improve their ability to protect civilians. In
that context, it is essential that peacekeeping operations
be provided with adequate and predictable financial
resources.

Thirdly, Peru believes that, when there are specific
threats of physical violence against the populations
they seek to protec, the use of force by troops involved
in peacekeeping operations in accordance with their
mandate to protect civilians must be strictly preventive
and tactical nature. In that regard, while we recognize
the progress made by the Force Intervention Brigade of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to protect
civilians, my delegation believes that the perception
of impartiality on the part of peacekeeping missions is
essential for their legitimacy on the ground, the safety
ofits personnel and a mission's long-term effectiveness.

Peru believes it is crucial to promote political peace
agreements as a central element in preventing and
resolving conflicts and protecting civilians. Similarly,
it is important to ensure accountability. In that regard,
when a State fails to prosecute perpetrators of crimes
against civilians, the Security Council must assume its
role with regard to impunity at the international level
and refer such acts to the International Criminal Court.

Given that peacekeeping operations are responsible
for performing the tasks of protecting civilians on the
ground, I would like to conclude by stressing the urgent
need to review the performance of such operations in
the light of the recommendations contained in the report
(see S/2015/446) ofthe High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations and in the report (S/2015/682) of the
Secretary General in that regard, so that peacekeeping
missions are able to effectively carry out those tasks.

