Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to begin
by thanking Ambassadors Kim Sook, Gary Quinlan
and Mohammed Loulichki for their briefings and
extensive updates on actions taken over the past six
months. We are grateful for their excellent work and
leadership of the Security Council Committees with
counter-terrorism mandates.

Although the international community has
achieved remarkable progress in countering terrorism,
more should be done to prevent and combat that
scourge. Terrorism continues to pose a serious threat
to international peace and security and to the political
independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity
and social and economic development of all States.
Azerbaijan has consistently and continually taken
measures to implement its respective international
obligations and to contribute to international counter-
terrorism efforts.

We know all about the scourge of terrorism, and
not from hearsay. My country has repeatedly been
a target of terrorist attacks that have claimed the
lives of thousands of our citizens. It was therefore
no coincidence that Azerbaijan decided to focus
on strengthening international cooperation in the
implementation of counter-terrorism obligations as a
central theme of its presidency of the Security Council
in 2012. As an important outcome ofthat, a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2012/17) was adopted.

On 18 and 19 March, we hosted an international
conference on strengthening cooperation in preventing
terrorism, which was jointly organized by the
Government of Azerbaijan, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and the Islamic Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, and attended
by representatives of over 50 States and international
organizations, including the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). The
objective of the conference was to focus on cooperation
in developing and undertaking measures to address
the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism,
dialogue, understanding and countering stereotypes
and the appeal of terrorism, and the role of international
partners in building State capacity to prevent and
combat terrorism.

The role and work of all three Committees in the
prevention and response to terrorist threats remain
vitally important. Azerbaijan strongly supports the
close cooperation and effective coordination among the
Committees and their groups of experts.

During the reporting period, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) continued
to successfully implement its mandate by supporting
and assisting Member States in preventing terrorist
acts, both within their respective territories and across
regions. We commend CTED for its close interaction
with Member States, including country visits, which
continue to contribute to the effectiveness of both
the Committee's work and the full implementation of
counter-terrorism commitments. Azerbaijan supported
the proposed subjects for the special meeting and two
other special events that covered emerging issues of
international concern, and we are confident that they
will help to raise awareness and reveal the shortcomings
in the fight against terrorism.

The revision of documents and procedures related
to the assessment of Member States' implementation
of the Security Council's counter-terrorism resolutions
was an important milestone in the Committee's work
during the reporting period. We agree with the Chair of
the Committee that the revised documents will facilitate
the identification of challenges faced by Member States

and the delivery of targeted technical assistance in that
regard.

Significant steps were taken during the reporting
period to reinforce the procedures of the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime. We note some important changes
introduced by the adoption of resolution 2083 (2012),
in particular the extension of the mandate of the
Monitoring Team and the Office of the Ombudsperson,
which will contribute to strengthening due process and
transparency. We reiterate the importance of the Office
ofthe Ombudsperson as an essential element of fairness
in the application of the sanctions regime.

The work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) remains of vital importance.
We take positive note of a number of important events
held during the reporting period in various countries,
focused on promoting the goals of resolution 1540
(2004) and on capacity-building and assistance. I take
this opportunity to express our gratitude to the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia for having organized, last month, a
high-level event on preventing the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction to non-State actors and
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in the
Arab world.

Areas ofarmed conflict, especially territories under
foreign military occupation, often create conditions
conducive to exploitation by terrorist, separatist and
other non-State actors. The accumulation of a great
number of armaments and munitions in places beyond
the reach of international control and the risk of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and related
materials to non-State actors pose a serious threat
to international peace and security that requires the
diligent implementation by all States of their respective
commitments and strengthened cooperation among
them in order to effectively address such challenges.

Last but not least, the war on terrorism should
not be used to target any particular religion or
culture. That principle must be part and parcel of any
counter-terrorism strategy. We stress the vital need
for joint efforts and dialogue to counter defamatory
manifestations and misconceptions, in particular within
the framework of such initiatives as the culture of peace
and the Alliance of Civilizations.

