Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.

Today's debate on the Middle East and the
Palestinian question is not a mere ritual on the Security
Council's agenda. In recent months, we have witnessed
a process of political and social clamor in which
citizens, particularly in the Arab world, have called
for recognition of their fundamental rights and for an
institutional change to pave the way for democratic
practices and the strengthening of the rule of law.
Although significant progress has been made, we also
note that, in some countries, violence and repression
have been imposed. In response to that dynamic, we
believe that this discussion should serve to underline
the increasingly urgent need to engage in dialogue and
actions conducive to establishing peace in the region.

In the case of Syria, the high level of violence and
destruction and the constant flow of arms to all parties
is disturbing. We believe that the militarization of the
conflict is only aggravating the situation and putting
civilians in ever more serious danger.

We regret the ongoing deterioration of the
humanitarian situation, not only in Syria, but also
in neighbouring countries, due to the impact of the
thousands of terrorized refugees fleeing the violence.
Despite the appeals of the international community,
Syrian forces continue to attack densely populated areas
and to make indiscriminate use ofheavy weapons, tanks
and air assets against civilians, while the opposition
undertakes actions that deepen hostilities.

We maintain our position of support for a political
solution to the situation in Syria, and we therefore
reiterate our support for the work of the Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and the League
of Arab States for Syria, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, to
put an immediate end to the violence and to obtain
humanitarian access in order to facilitate a transition to
a democratic and plural political system, in accordance
with the six-point plan, resolutions 2042 (2012) and
2043 (2012), and the 30 June final communique of the
Action Group on Syria (S/2012/522, annex) and with
the support of the international community.

We call on the Government and opposition of
Syria to cease their fire and allow for dialogue and
reconciliation, as expressions of coexistence in
search of a better future. This is even more urgent as
we see the impact of the crisis leading to increased
hostilities towards neighbouring countries. That must
be immediately controlled in order to avoid the spread
of disastrous consequences.

I would like to address the question of Palestine,
since we believe that, due to the dramatic developments
in the Middle East, it is urgent to achieve progress in
the peace process between Israel and Palestine. That
is a concept that all members of the Security Council
endorse. It is appalling that the guidelines established
by the Quartet on 23 September 2011 have not yet been
implemented. It is important that the parties resume
meaningful talks with the support of the international
community. We believe that the parties should make
their best efforts to create an environment conducive
to the resumption of direct negotiations for a two-
State solution, with a viable Palestinian State living
in peace alongside Israel within defined, secure and
internationally recognized borders.

The fragility of the situation is clear. There have
been repeated incidents, such as the firing of rockets
from Gaza into Israel, some of which have been directed
towards urban centres. Such indiscriminate attacks must
absolutely cease. We insist that all settlement activity
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, is contrary to international law. The status
of Jerusalem requires a negotiated solution. There is an
urgent need to find special arrangements that ensure
full respect for all religious and cultural rights of the
parties and for their holy sites.

From the institutional standpoint, the viability of a
future Palestinian State requires continued international
support for the efforts of the Palestinian Authority
to strengthen its institutions and improve its serious
financial situation in order to revitalize the Palestinian
economy. We must also follow the Palestinian
reconciliation process under the leadership of President
Abbas, as a unified Palestinian Government is essential
to achieving lasting peace.

The international community should contribute to
the creation of a legitimate and balanced framework
that facilitates a viable political process. We must
understand that our efforts will lose credibility if we
continue to fail to take the decisions necessary to enable
an environment in which human rights and international
humanitarian law serve as the basis for rebuilding
confidence and facilitating serious engagement between
the parties in order to move forward in the negotiations.
My delegation shares concern over rising tensions
in Lebanon, the Syrian-Lebanese border incursions,
dual-track arms trafficking and the increasingly
frequent presence in Syrian territory of elements
associated with Hizbullah. It is urgently necessary to
adopt measures to prevent such practices as kidnapping
and hostage-taking as a means of retaliation against
certain communities in Lebanon.

We highlight the policy of President Sleiman to
dissociate himself from the Syrian crisis, as well as the
actions taken by his Government and other countries
of the region assist the thousands of Syrians who have
sought refuge in those countries. In that regard, we
welcome the talks of the Special Coordinator of the
Secretary-General for Lebanon, Mr. Derek Plumbly,
with Prime Minister Mikati related to the support that
the Lebanese Government provides to thousands of
Syrian refugees who are currently on its territory.

In conclusion, we wish to express our concern
over the recent increase in violence in Iraq, and we
urge all Iraqis to commit themselves to a search
for effective solutions of their differences through
dialogue and reconciliation. In that context, we
welcome the appointment of the members of the Board
of Commissioners of the Independent High Electoral
Commission, which will clear the way for the holding
municipal elections.

We welcome the culmination of the process of
relocating the residents of Camp Ashraf, as it paves
the way for the camp's peaceful and definitive closure
under the terms of the memorandum of understanding.
We also thank the residents for their cooperation and
the Government of Iraq for providing the guarantees
necessary for their transfer to Camp Hurriya.

