Mr. Holliday (United States of America): The
United States would like to join others in
congratulating Ambassador Arias on his work, and we
wish him well in the future. My delegation would also
like to pay tribute to the United Nations staff who
contribute so courageously to peacekeeping and
peacemaking efforts and to the contributors of troops
and police to peacekeeping operations. All play a vital
role in helping the United Nations to carry out its
mandate of maintaining international peace and
security. The tireless work of United Nations
humanitarian and bilateral assistance agencies, non-
governmental organizations and regional actors merits
recognition, and the work of journalists in shining the
spotlight on the forgotten conflicts that destroy so
many lives should be applauded as well. We salute
Pakistan for holding this discussion and for its role as
the leading contributor of troops to the United Nations,
and we welcome your participation, Mr. Minister,
which highlights the degree of importance that you
attach to these issues.

The United States Views the peacekeeping
operations and activities of the United Nations as most
significant in furthering the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter. The United States is
pleased to be the largest financial contributor to
peacekeeping operations worldwide. This year, exigent
circumstances have led to the creation of new
peacekeeping missions in Cote d'Ivoire and Haiti;
another, for Burundi, is under active consideration in
the Security Council. All build on efforts by regional
organizations to support the restoration of peace and
stability. Those new missions will tax existing
capabilities and budgets.

Today, other delegations have described some of
the capacity challenges that will affect the United
Nations and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and how those challenges can be
addressed. We support exploration of innovative
solutions to address some of those complex issues. We
are also looking at ways to address these needs. Last
Friday, Secretary of State Powell announced that the
Group of Eight (G-8) Foreign Ministers had agreed to
advance an initiative at the Sea Island Summit to
increase the world's capacity to deal with post-conflict
situations, especially in Africa. The Council will be
hearing more about these initiatives in the coming
months. They will focus on training peacekeepers -
particularly in Africa - in addition to the development
of a gendarmerie training centre and a logistics support
arrangement.

The member States of the Security Council
carefully consider each new mission, drawing on
important assessments provided by DPKO regarding its
mandate and composition. We appreciate DPKO's
input most when it presents the Council with a range of
possible choices at decision points such as the
establishment of missions and the renewal of mandates.
Planning for and managing a multinational military
mission are tasks of great complexity. We commend
DPKO for getting the United Nations in Liberia
(UNMIL), the world's largest United Nations
peacekeeping operation, up and running in just six
months. In that regard - and with regard to other
missions, such as that in Cote d'Ivoire - we would
like in particular to focus on and salute the work of
regional organizations such as the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), which
provide valuable augmentation for our peacekeeping
forces.

The United Nations is expected to have a wide
array of services available in its toolbox for
international crises. Often, the United Nations is called
in to monitor a ceasefire between two States or
between groups within a State. That is traditional
peacekeeping. Now, of course, as we have discussed
today, there are new multidimensional missions that
respond to threats presented by failed States and to the
need for assistance with the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and rehabilitation
(DDRR) of former combatants. The DDRR tasks we
assign to some of our United Nations peacekeepers are
daunting. The most important thing they must do is to
provide a sense of hope - a sense that things will
improve in the long run. Job training, schooling,
counselling, stipends and dialogues between ex-
combatants for their new or former communities all
have a place in creating that sense of hope and a new
beginning.

But, just as there is no single factor that causes
war, there is no single factor that guarantees a lasting
peace. While it is tempting to expand United Nations
peacekeeping mandates to respond to all aspects of
complex crises, we must be careful not to assign to
peacekeepers tasks for which they are not prepared or
that they are not adept at doing. We must recognize
that there are many other players in the DDRR process,
including United Nations agencies, regional
organizations and non-governmental organizations.

For example, in the reintegration process,
humanitarian aid workers and agencies are among the
heavy lifters. After a uniformed peacekeeper receives
surrendered weapons from combatants and registers
those weapons, it is usually humanitarian workers who
begin the long and complex task of helping the new ex-
combatant to find a place in the civilian population.
The fact that uniformed peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers derive their funding from different sources and
operate under different sets of rules frequently causes
disconnects. Greater numbers of moving parts provide
greater numbers of opportunities for breakdown. Yet it
is particularly vital that the handover of newly
disarmed combatants to their new life beyond the
barrel of a gun be as smooth as possible. If the task is
mishandled, memories of the previous life are close
enough to draw the ex-combatant into a life of crime,
with or without a weapon.
Smoothing over the bumps requires sufficient
logistical funding and preparation; it requires that the
message about the DDRR process be transmitted to
combatants as early as possible; and it requires that
those administering the process - be they uniformed
soldiers or not - have a degree of confidence in all
others involved in the trust. It also requires that all
concerned treat ex-combatants with a sense of dignity.

Reintegration alone cannot succeed in making a
gun-toting rebel into a productive member of his or her
society. Economic development alone cannot work, for
it can take too long to produce new jobs for ex-
combatants ready to commence a new life. Both are
necessary, and ex-combatants must be made to
understand that DDRR is a process that takes time to
complete. The expertise of various organizations,
including non-governmental organizations, and of
various United Nations agencies outside the realm of
peacekeeping proper needs to be recognized, for many
of those groups and agencies will be on the ground
long after the last United Nations peacekeeper has left.

In closing, we look forward to studying the
recommendations that have been brought forth in this
important debate. For our part, we will continue to
support effective, focused, secure and successful
peacekeeping operations, and we look forward to
supporting the draft presidential statement.

