Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We have taken note of the twenty-fourth report
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) on the investigation of the situation in Darfur.

First of all, we are rather taken aback by the
demands made to the Security Council during the so-
called follow up on the situation in Darfur. We consider
such attempts to lecture the Council to be inappropriate.
Even among States parties to the Rome Statute there
has been no unity when carrying out certain ICC arrest
warrants. In particular, certain members of the African
Union have repeatedly pointed out that requirements
of the ICC in a number of cases are at odds with the
commitments derived from international legal norms
regarding the immunity of State officials.

Our delegation has always been considerate of
that position. However, certain States, as well as the
Court itself, have preferred to exert pressure on African
countries, instead of taking on board their concerns.
In the light of that, the recent decision by a number
of countries to withdraw from the Rome Statute is no
surprise. The political and legal rationale for those
steps is understandable and should be respected. That
again Vindicates the criticism that is increasingly been
aimed at the work of that legal body.

The report of the Prosecutor again raises the issue
of the resource support for the Court from the United
Nations. In that regard, we would like to reiterate once
more that the main initiators of transfer by the Security
Council to the ICC of the situation in Darfur, and in
Libya, were certain States parties to the Rome Statute
and of the Prosecutor, who should have recognized the
financial implications of such a step. Attempts to shift
that burden onto the United Nations are unjustified.

As to certain factual elements in the report, it rightly
notes the significant decrease in the levels of violence
in Darfur recently. According to the United Nations,
the situation in four of the five states is relatively calm.
Thanks to the efforts of the authorities, the number of
inter-communal clashes has fallen, as has the crime rate
in towns. The exceptions to that are various parts of
J ebel Marra, in central Darfur, where there is continued
resistance from the Sudan Liberation Movement-Abdul
Wahid faction, which has rejected any possibility of
dialogue with the Government.

We should also recall that the Panel of Experts of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, has
confirmed Sudanese rebels' violations of international
humanitarian law, including the recruitment of child
soldiers. Nevertheless, the report places particular
emphasis on assertions about the allegedly ongoing
attacks on civilians by Government forces. The ICC's
one-sided assessments, which are exclusively directed
at the legitimate Sudanese authorities, can hardly
improve that judicial body's credibility or contribute to
the reconciliation process.

The same can be said ofthe Prosecutor's assertions,
borrowed from Amnesty International, on the use of
chemical weapons in Darfur. It is well known that
they are based on phone and Internet interviews with
unnamed people, as well as photographs and Videos.
We are in agreement with the competent opinion of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
that at the moment we cannot draw any conclusions
from this report in the absence of further information
and evidence. The African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, whose representatives are
in constant contact with thousands of displaced persons
from Jebel Marra, has not confirmed those rumours.

In our View, if chemical weapons were being
repeatedly used in the area, it would be impossible
to hide the fact. The accusations have also been
categorically rejected by Khartoum. The Sudan acceded
to the Convention on Chemical Weapons in 1999 and
has officially announced that it is complying with its
obligations by refraining from producing or storing
chemical weapons on its territory.

In conclusion, and speaking not just to the Darfur
investigation but more generally, we would like to
emphasize once again the importance of reaching a
delicate balance between the interests of dispensing
justice and of achieving sustainable peace and a stable
situation. The two problems are equally important,
and an integrated, balanced approach is needed to
solve them.

