Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I wish to
thank Special Envoy Kafando and Ambassador Lauber
for their briefings. We deeply appreciate the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Burundi
dated 15 November (S/2018/1028), submitted pursuant
to resolution 2303 (2016). We look forward to the next
written report.

The United States is disappointed, as are so
many others, that the Government of Burundi did
not participate in the fifth round of the East African
Community (EAC) inter-Burundi dialogue in
October. Among the reasons cited for its absence, the
Government said that it was unable to attend due to a
period ofnational mourning to remember fallen national
heroes: Prince Rwagasore and President Ndadaye. For
our part, we can think of no better way to honour their
memory than by seeking to bridge Burundi's political
divides and putting the country on the path to peace
and sustainable development. In their own way and in
their own time, both of those men attempted to promote
mutual understanding, leading to independence, peace
and development and inspiring millions of Burundians,
giving us all hope for Burundi's future.

We welcome the efforts of the EAC dialogue
facilitator and former President, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa,
to seek consensus on a road map to elections in 2020.
We encourage the Government of Burundi and the
opposition parties to renew their commitment to the
dialogue in order to reach consensus on such a road
map. In the aftermath of the fifth round of the dialogue,
we also encourage leaders in the region to send a clear
signal of their continued engagement and support for
peaceful, free, fair and credible elections in 2020.

The situation in Burundi has undermined the
significant gains achieved through the Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement. We encourage the
Arusha guarantors to reinvigorate their diplomatic
engagement in support of the Agreement. Additionally,
we take note of the Secretary-General's report reference
to the fact that the United Nations continues to receive
allegations of human rights violations and abuses. We
are particularly disturbed that more than 45 bodies
were discovered throughout the country in the wake of
various attacks, murders and disappearances. We also
remain deeply concerned about restrictions on civic and
political space in Burundi, especially in the media and
through the use of harsh prison sentences to intimidate
human rights defenders. We are worried by reports of
the increasing role of the ruling party's youth wing, the
Imbonerakure, in committing human rights abuses.

We are deeply concerned by alleged cross-border
attacks by individuals or groups operating between
Burundi and Rwanda. That situation remains volatile
and requires the Council's attention in the lead-up to
elections. We also remain concerned by constitutional
provisions adopted this year that imposed restrictions
on the opposition, and we call on the Government of
Burundi to respect the rights of opposition members.
At the same time, we encourage opposition political
actors to commit to non-violent participation in the
2020 elections. With that in mind, we once again renew
our call for the Government of Burundi to resume
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. The Government of
Burundi's decision to ban three members of the United
Nations commission of inquiry from accessing the
country by deeming them persona non grata represents
another example of a prolonged unwillingness to
cooperate with the United Nations on human rights
issues, despite the extension of the commission's
mandate by one year.
The United States also remains deeply concerned
by the Government of Burundi's suspension of all
international non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
That decision has adversely affected long-standing
initiatives that aim to improve conditions for the
Burundian people, including programmes to prevent
and treat malaria, HIV/AIDS and malnutrition. We
recognize that more than 30 NGOs have had their
suspensions lifted. We urge the Burundian Government
to lift all remaining suspensions to ensure the
continuation of vital services to the Burundian people.

There is significant will in the Council to work
with the Government of Burundi and the region to
address old wounds and to build a brighter future. The
elections represent a clear opportunity for Burundi's
leaders to reset their relationship with the international
community by engaging in good faith in a political
process that includes all Burundians. We hope that they
will seize it.

