The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as representative
of Togo.

For my part, I should like to thank the High
Representative forBosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin
Inzko, for his six-month report (S/2013/263, annex) on
the political and social situation in the country. I shall
limit my statement to a few comments and observations
on the political situation in the country, the state of
its institutions, the reforms to be undertaken and the
matter of conditions to be met for the closing of the
Office of the High Representative.

Regarding the political situation, my country
notes with regret the ongoing inability of the Bosnian
political class to achieve a lasting political consensus
on federative projects. That could explain the lack of
significant progress made over the last reporting period.
Indeed, the positive trend we saw in the beginning of
2012, which was welcomed during the debate held on
15 May 2012 (see S/PV.6771), seems to be losing steam.

During that debate, we had noted that following the
establishment of a central Government in February 2012,
after the political compromise arrived at following the
general elections of October 2010, the adoption in May
2012 of a number of measures, including the national
budget, the voting on the Census Law and State aid,
the Bosnian political class was able to go overcome its
community-based divisions so as to better tackle the
consolidation of the country's unity and move forward
with common interests. Unfortunately, the leaders of
the country were unable to continue with that positive
trend, which would have led to positive prospects for
the country, in particular Euro-Atlantic integration.

My country believes that the current stalemate,
even backsliding, on the political front, which is due
on the one hand to the reluctance of certain actors to
engage in dialogue in a spirit of compromise and, on
the other, to a desire to weaken the central Bosnia and
Herzegovina State, jeopardizes the implementation
of the Dayton Agreement. That Agreements, as
other speakers have stated, must be safeguarded and
implemented in good faith so as to allow the country to
make further progress,

We condemn the nationalist discourse, which could
exacerbate existing political tensions among the various
communities, erode central State institutions and the
efforts of the international community to promote peace
and stability in the country and in the region. We urge
once again the leaders of the country to act with greater
political responsibility by decisively committing to

building a multi-ethnic, multi-confessional Bosnian
State, one that upholds the rule of law.

On that last point, my country shares the concern
of the High Representative that nothing can be achieved
without shoring up the rule of law and respect for State
institutions and their decisions. In that connection, we
regret the attitude of defiance shown by some entities
and individuals ofthe Bosnian State, which, in violation
of the Dayton Agreement and the Constitution of the
country, continue to take political and legal measures
that go against the central institutions in areas that fall
under the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina's mandate.

It is important that the Central State institutions
responsible for upholding the rule of law, in particular
the Constitutional Court, be respected and implemented.
It is therefore unfortunate that in spite of the ruling
handed down by the Court in 2011, the electoral law
has yet to be implemented, which prevented the calling
of elections in Mostar during the local elections held on
7 October last.

Moreover, we call on the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliamentary Assembly to swiftly adoptthe constitutional
amendments that would allow non-constitutional
communities to fully participate in the political life of
the country.

Furthermore, given the very complex institutional
organization of the country, which can only hamper its
smooth running, Togo believes that it might be useful to
resume the debate on the streamlining and transparency
of those institutions. Here a consensual happy medium
should be found between those advocate for a largely
decentralized Constitution and those who would like to
strengthen the Central State.

Regarding the five objectives and two conditions
for the closure of the Office of the High Representative,
we regret that substantive progress was not made during
the reporting period. Nevertheless, we are pleased that
the Office of the High Representative in Brcko put an
end on 31 August 2012 to its mandate of supervision
in the district, in line with the recommendations
of the 23 May 2012 recommendations of the Peace
Implementation Council.

We welcome also the initial steps taken by Bosnia
and Herzegovina regarding the implementation of the
political agreement of 9 March 2012 regarding the
registration of military property as an asset of the State.
We call upon the political authorities of the country
to continue their efforts to work constructively to
implement the agreement without further delay.

Given the significant challenges facing the country,
Togo believes that the international presence in Bosnia
and Herzegovina should be maintained so as to help
the country achieve a lasting political settlement that
can strengthen central institutions and ensure peace
in the country and in the region. However, it is the
responsibility of the political leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to take the initiative to coexist. That
means that frank dialogue and compromise must be
sought, as those are the only solutions that can lead to a
lasting and definitive settlement of disputes.

Finally, I should like to conclude by reiterating
my country's support for the efforts of the High
Representative and the civilian and military personnel
who are working for the implementation of the Dayton
Agreement and stability in the country.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

