The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
April 2009, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Abdurrahman Shalgham, Permanent Representative
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of
March 2009. I am sure that I speak for all members of
the Council in expressing appreciation to Ambassador
Shalgham for the great diplomatic skill with which he
conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The question concerning Haiti

Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(S/2009/129)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Cuba, the Czech Republic, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Haiti, Peru, Uruguay and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the consideration of the item without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Merores
(Haiti) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
With the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Hedi Annabi,
2
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend invitations under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ambassador Sylvie Lucas, President of the Economic
and Social Council; Mr. Albert R. Ramdin, Assistant
Secretary General of the Organization of American
States; Mr. Pedro Medrano, Director for the Bureau for
Latin America and the Caribbean of the World Food
Programme; Ms. Yvonne Tsikata, Country Director for
the Caribbean of the World Bank; Ms. Dora Currea,
General Manager of the Department of the Caribbean
Countries of the Inter-American Development Bank;
Mr. Niky Fabiancic, Deputy Regional Director,
Regional Bureau for Latin America and the Caribbean
of the United Nations Development Programme; and
Ms. Corinne Delechat, Mission Chief for Haiti of the
International Monetary Fund.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/l29, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti. Council members also have before
them photocopies of the report of the Security Council
mission to Haiti, which will be issued as document
S/2009/ 175.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Hedi Annabi, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti. I now give him the floor.


