Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Last
Saturday's extrajudicial execution of the Palestinian
leader Mr. Abdel Aziz Al-Rantisi deserves our
condemnation. As we have maintained in the Council,
extrajudicial executions are reprehensible acts that not
only violate international law but also hamper
reconciliation between the parties and the peace
process based on the road map. Our condemnation
extends to all acts of violence or terrorism, most
particularly to those that have affected innocent
persons, be they Israelis or Palestinians.

Today, the central issue centres on the
announcements made by the Government of Israel's
Prime Minister with a view to proceeding with a plan
of withdrawal from the settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories of the Gaza Strip and, possibly,
from some in the West Bank. Its ultimate meaning is
not sufficiently clear, let alone its precise connection
with the road map - an instrument that both parties
have pledged to respect.
In March's monthly report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in the Middle East, which was
brought to the Security Council's attention, it was
stated that a successful Israeli withdrawal from the
Gaza Strip must include the following aspects: be part
of the actions envisaged in the road map, be carried out
in consultation and association with the Palestinian
National Authority, be total and complete and be a first
step towards full compliance with United Nations
appeals to Israel to put an end to its occupation, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002). Consequently, we
would want the Israeli withdrawal to be consistent with
those parameters.

Chile's position on the Middle East conflict is
based essentially on unrestricted attachment to the
norms and principles of international law and to full
implementation of United Nations resolutions. In that
connection, resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002) and 1515 (2003) are of particular importance.
The latter resolution, which supported the road map,
was co-sponsored by Chile.

In its capacity as a member of the Security
Council, Chile has promoted actions in the Council
aimed at strengthening unitary agreements among
Council members in the face of the latest acts of
violence in Israel as much as in Palestine. Such was the
case with the unsuccessful effort during Chile's
Council presidency to get a Council press statement
condemning the Palestinian suicide bombing in
Jerusalem and, more recently, the proposed
amendments to the Council's draft resolution
condemning the killing of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin,
which was not adopted by this body. We view the
immediate future with scepticism.

With regard to extrajudicial executions, who will
decide where the limit will be established, and
according to what criteria? How long and against
whom will that use of violence be resorted to? The
spiral of extrajudicial killings, terrorist attacks, new
acts of reprisal with the disproportionate use of force
and new acts of vengeance cannot lead to
implementation of the peace plan. The members of the
Quartet must make renewed efforts to keep the road
map alive and to ensure that the unilateral withdrawal
actions announced by Israel are within that framework.
We hope that that will happen for the benefit of both
peoples, Palestinian and Israeli.

