Ms. Pedros Carretero (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
It is an honour once again to have with us the Presidents
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and of the International Residual Mechanism
and the Prosecutor for both bodies. I congratulate Judge
Meron and Prosecutor Brammertz on their respective
appointments. I would also like to take this opportunity
to thank the Ambassador of Uruguay and his entire
team for their outstanding work at the helm of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals. I
also thank Judge Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for
their detailed briefings on the work of the Tribunal over
the past six months, which have included very notable
progress.

The sentencing of Radovan Karadzic' illustrates
that it is possible to bring to justice those responsible
for violations of international humanitarian law. As
stated by the Government of Spain in a press release on
that occasion, his sentencing was

"a resolute response to condemnable acts rooted in
violent, exclusionary nationalism".

It is noteworthy that the three sentences handed down
in the reporting period took place in the time frame
stipulated in the previous report. That is a positive
sign that attests to the credibility of the Tribunal's
commitment to abide by the December 2017 completion
date. We note that the circumstances are not easy, but
we urge the Tribunal and its personnel not to let up in
their efforts. The Tribunal's proposals for addressing
the ongoing loss of essential qualified personnel in
this final stage should be duly considered. The support
of the United Nations and of the Security Council
continues to be essential in order that the Tribunal can
complete its mandate.

We cannot fail to express our concern about
the decrease in cooperation with the Tribunal by the
States of the former Yugoslavia, as well as about
the insufficient number, pace and effectiveness that
continue to characterize the trials under way at the
national level. That is specifically the case with regard
to cases ofmid- and high-level accused. Once again, we
agree with the Prosecutor that more can, and should be,
done. We urge those Governments to take the necessary
measures to that end.

Combating impunity is, and should be, a joint
undertaking. As important as it might be, the work
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia cannot alone serve the goal of ensuring
justice and accountability for those responsible for
violations of international humanitarian law during the
conflict in the former Yugoslavia. As the Tribunal's
closing date approaches, therefore, it is more important
than ever that national judicial systems take over
in order to continue the effort carried out to date by
the international community as a whole. That is an
inescapable responsibility, both out of respect for the
victims and as a legacy to future generations.

Serbia, which on many ocassions has cooperated
with the Tribunal in its more than two decades of
operation, should continue to do so and carry out the
three arrest and surrender orders issued in January
2015. Respect for the rule of law at the national and
international levels alike demands compliance with the
Tribunal's decisions, including those with which one
may disagree.

Just a few weeks from concluding its initial
period of operations, the Residual Mechanism has
consolidated itself as small, temporary and efficient
structure, thereby meeting the Council's mandate. Its
active cooperation with the Office of Internal Oversight
Services is evidence of its determined commitment
to a model of international criminal justice that is
compatible with seeking efficiency while also ensuring
due process guarantees for the accused. We hope that
trend will continue as this new phase of intensive and
important judicial activity gets under way.

We urge the Mechanism not to give up on its efforts
to find the eight persons indicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda whose whereabouts
remain unknown. During the previous debate here in
the Council (see S/PV.7574) we learned of the arrest of
Mr. Ntaganzwa, whose handover to Rwanda is excellent
news. However, it is not enough. We reiterate our call
to States where fugitives may be found or that may
have information as to their whereabouts to cooperate
without delay in finding, arresting and immediately
handing them over to the Mechanism or to Rwandan
authorities. Every day they remain at large is a genuine
affront to their victims.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Spain's
firm commitment to international criminal justice and
our resolute support for the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and for the Residual
Mechanism. In the face of the impunity that prevails
in the majority of today's conflicts, their work helps
us to continue to have faith in justice. Their legacy
goes beyond Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia. It is a
Vindication of the dignity of all victims in all conflicts.
It is a source for hope that, in spite difficulties, justice
is possible.

