Mr. Keegel (Sri Lanka): Permit me at the outset
to congratulate you, Madam, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. We also wish to
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Lynn Pascoe, for his briefing this morning. My
delegation appreciates the opportunity given to us to
once again to address the situation in the Middle East,
particularly, the Palestinian question.

My delegation believes that a resolution of the
Palestinian issue is crucial for restoring peace in the
entire Middle East and would have implications
elsewhere. My delegation has consistently supported a
peaceful settlement of the Palestinian issue and has
called on all sides to fully implement the resolutions
adopted by the Council and the General Assembly
regarding the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people and the realization of the two-State solution.

We remain deeply concerned about the
widespread suffering and hardship the Palestinian
people continue to endure due to the economic
blockade and about the ensuing grave situation in the
occupied territories. While we note the relaxation of
some restrictions by the Israeli Government, we call
for the removal of all restrictions. Further relaxations
could enhance the confidence level of all concerned
and facilitate efforts to bring peace to the region. The
Palestinian people have suffered for too long and
continue to live under occupation. The denial of their
fundamental right to statehood, recognized by the
United Nations, due to the continued Israeli occupation
has seriously affected progress on socio-economic
indicators for the population in Gaza and the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem.

In that context, my delegation reiterates its long-
held position that for peace to be viable and sustainable
in the Palestinian territory, the occupying forces must
withdraw to the 1967 borders and must end the
economic blockade. We support a complete stop to the
illegal expansion settlements. Changing the
demographic character of the Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, would only increase tensions
and animosities in the entire Middle East region.

The Palestinian Authority needs to continue the
implementation of its security plan and make every
effort within its abilities to improve law and order and
to ensure its territory is not used for illegal attacks on
Israel. Allegations of illegal arms flows must be
investigated. Both sides must do everything possible to
ensure the safety and security of civilians.

Sri Lanka reiterates its support for the Palestinian
National Authority under the leadership of President
Abbas. We stress the need to preserve and protect the
national and democratic institutions that are vital to a
future independent Palestinian State. We therefore urge
the Palestinian groups to act speedily to reconcile and
reunite within the framework of the Palestinian
National Authority. Unity among the Palestinian people
is its strength.
10-45934

My delegation supports international efforts for

the early resumption of direct negotiations, and

believes that the unity of the Palestinian people is

essential to this endeavour. We also remain concerned

by the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan,

including the plight of Syrian detainees. We call for the

implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions.

My delegation reiterates its support for a lasting
peace in the Middle East, including an early settlement
of the Palestinian issue.

