The President (spoke in Chinese): Following
consultations among members of the Security Council,
I have been authorized to make the following statement
on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council expresses deep
concern in regard to the deterioration of the
political, security and humanitarian environment
in Haiti. It deplores the loss of life that has
already occurred and fears that the failure, thus
far, to reach a political settlement may result in
further bloodshed. Continued violence and the
breakdown of law and order in Haiti could have
destabilizing effects in the region.

"The Security Council commends the
Organization of American States (OAS) and the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) for their lead
role in promoting a peaceful solution and for
trying to re-establish confidence among the
parties, in particular through their Plan of Action.

"The Council supports CARICOM. and the
OAS as they continue to work towards a peaceful
and constitutional solution to the current impasse.
The principles outlined in the CARICOM/OAS
Plan of Action represent an important basis for a
solution to the crisis. The Council calls upon the
parties to act responsibly by choosing negotiation
instead of confrontation. An accelerated timetable
now seems necessary.
"The Security Council is deeply concerned
with the prospect of further violence in Haiti and
acknowledges the call for international
involvement in Haiti. The Council will consider
urgently options for international engagement,
including that of an international force in support
of a political settlement in accordance with the
United Nations Charter.

"The Council calls upon all sides in Haiti's
conflict to facilitate the distribution of food and
medicine and ensure the protection of civilians. It
calls upon all sides to respect international
humanitarian personnel and facilities and to
ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches those
who need it.

"The Council calls upon the Government
and all other parties to respect human rights and
to cease the use of violence to advance political
goals. Those responsible for human rights
violations will be held accountable.

"The Security Council supports the
Secretary-General's decision to name a Special
Adviser for Haiti.

"The Security Council will continue to
monitor closely the situation in Haiti and remains
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of

the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2004/4.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my

list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.15pm.
