Mr. Nina (Albania): We appreciate the opportunity
to take the floor during this open debate on this very
important topic. We would like to thank the Angolan
presidency of the Security Council for choosing the
theme of the prevention and resolution of conflicts
in the Great Lakes region, as well as for the very
informative concept note (8/2016/223, annex) circulated
in preparation for this debate. We would like also to
thank the Special Envoy and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for their informative insights
on the situation in the Great Lakes region.

Albania aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union. Allow me to make the
following remarks in my national capacity.

We are deeply concerned about the significant
deterioration of the situation in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where activities
by the Allied Democratic Forces and by the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda, among other
groups, pose serious threats to security in the region
and beyond. Furthermore, we regret that civilians are
being caught up in the fighting and are being killed,
displaced, forcibly abducted or harassed, often on
the basis of ethnicity or perceived collaboration with
opposing groups - with an estimated more than
500 civilians killed since 2014 and more than 45,000
persons recently displaced.

In that context, we commend the steps and measures
taken by both the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and the armed forces of the
country to strengthen the protection of civilians, and we
welcome their improved cooperation. However, further
actions are obviously needed towards that fundamental
objective, including through increased outreach and
early-warning activities in the region.

We furthermore welcome resolution 2211 (2015),
which provides that any future reconfiguration of
MONUSCO or its mandate be based on the evolution
of the situation on the ground and on the protection of
civilians, stabilization and the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, including
national reforms.
Previous experience in the region has shown that
the destiny of each of the region's countries is deeply
intertwined with that of its neighbours. The crisis in
Burundi has only exacerbated the situation in that
context, as worrisome reports indicate that infiltration
by armed groups is fuelling further instability. Urgent
attention therefore needs to be paid to the regional
dynamics of the crisis in order to avoid escalation
and regionalization.

The potential for conflict to spread throughout
the region should neither be assumed nor ignored,
in particular by the Security Council. In that regard,
we welcome the steps taken by the United Nations
Stabilization Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in ensuring that contingency
plans are in place in case of an eventual escalation.
While any meaningful resolution will require a creative
combination of factors, the countries of the region,
supported by the international community, can become
key players and have the potential to comprehensively
address those regional dynamics before they escalate.

We welcome the holding of the first Great Lakes
Private Sector Investment Conference, which took
place in Kinshasa on 24 and 25 February and which
was attended by the Secretary-General, to provide a
platform for a public-private dialogue on promoting
responsible investment in the region and enhanced
networking opportunities between regional and
international stakeholders. However, responsible
investment cannot be achieved without addressing the
issue of the illegal exploitation of minerals and natural
resources. Nowhere is that such exploitation more well-
established and more dramatic than in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where that
trade is worth an estimated $1.25 billion annually.

Important lessons have been learned in past years
by realizing the fact that instability in the Great Lakes
countries has been financed by illegal mineral sourcing
and trading, prompting concrete measures such as
the Regional Initiative on Natural Resources. Illegal
exploitation and trade in natural resources in the Great
Lakes is very complex. The needed measures to address
it should necessarily include actions against impunity,
improved governance, reforming security forces, the
sustainable management of natural resources and
promoting livelihood programmes. By taking those
measures, the natural resources of the mineral-rich
Great Lakes region will have the potential to become
a very powerful tool to achieve durable peace,
reconciliation and development.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo has made
good socioeconomic progress in the past decade, in
particular since the adoption of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. The upcoming elections
in that country are of a crucial importance. The holding
of peaceful, transparent, smooth and timely elections
will greatly contribute to consolidating the progress
made in the country over more than a decade. The
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo should
have an opportunity to have their voices heard through
a democratically elected Government.

Albania welcomed the joint press statement of
16 February on the political dialogue in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo issued by the African Union,
the United Nations, the European Union and the
International Organisation of La Francophonie, which
emphasized the necessity for an inclusive political
dialogue in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
urge all Congolese political actors to spare no effort,
within the framework of the country's Constitution, to
ensure the successful holding of elections, with a view
of further advancing the progress made so far.

