Mr. Barkin (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and the Police
Commissioners for their briefings.

We talk quite a lot about peacekeeping in the
Council, although our conversations tend to focus on
the contributions of military personnel. We are grateful
for the courageous Blue Helmet troops, but I am glad
that today we have an opportunity to recognize the
important contributions of the police to strengthening
the rule of law, which is ultimately the basis for a
peaceful society. We must honour those whose work
builds the foundations of that peace.

I would like to congratulate Major Seynabou
Diouf of Senegal on receiving the prestigious 2019
United Nations Female Police Officer of the Year
award yesterday. We commend her outstanding work
as an officer and her dedication to her duties as a
leader of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO). Additionally, we were pleased to meet
with the Police Commissioner of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan during our recent trip as the
Council to South Sudan. We strongly support the
Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy 2018-2028, and we
urge police-contributing countries to embrace policies
that increase women's participation.

I would also like to praise the police officers
who served in the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti and paved the way for the Mission to
transition to a special political mission. They trained
and professionalized the Haitian National Police, which
is now a bright spot in Haiti's development, taking on
even more responsibility for peace and security in its
own country.

Our understanding of the importance of the rule
of law is why we provide extensive capacity-building
training to empower police-contributing countries.
The training helps them to deploy well-trained police
to United Nations missions. Since 2010, the United
States International Police Peacekeeping Operations
Support programme has trained more than 12,000
police peacekeepers from more than 12 countries. We
have also worked with the United Nations to develop
new training courses and strengthen performance
standards, including a long-standing partnership with
Italy's Centre of Excellence for Stability Police Units to
train police trainers and leaders.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we will
explore similar opportunities to improve the role that
United Nations police play in support of the protection
of civilian and security reform efforts of MONUSCO.
In Abyei and along the border between the Sudan and
South Sudan, we remain concerned about the stability of
the rule of law. We encourage the Sudan to immediately
grant visas for United Nations police as a first step to
establishing ajoint police force in Abyei.

To maintain peace and a global security environment
that is becoming more complex, it is important for
police forces to deploy with the right equipment. In
Mali, we are concerned that, as the last quarterly report
on the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (S/2019/782) indicated,
two formed police units lack mine-protective vehicles.
Those units play a crucial role in building local law-
enforcement capability. Without the right equipment,
their safety is threatened and their effectiveness
is limited.

One year after the unanimous adoption of resolution
2436 (2018), we reiterate our support for the United
Nations commitment to implementing an integrated
performance policy, which should be based on clear
standards for all United Nations civilian and uniformed
personnel working in and supporting peacekeeping
operations. We count on Police Commissioners to ensure
that police deployed in the field have the proper training
and equipment to carry out their mandated tasks.

We fully support initiatives to brief the Security
Council on peacekeeping performance, and we
look forward to hearing candid assessments about
performance, including shortfalls, success stories and
how Member States can assist. We also appreciate the
Secretary-General's July assessment report on the Police
Division (A/74/223). We appreciate the commitment to
ensuring the effective performance and accountability
of police personnel in the field as one of the Division's
core functions. We commend the Division's launch of an
online tool for the assessment and evaluation of formed
police units, which saw 34 evaluations of 49 deployed
units and developed 11 performance improvement plans
to address identified shortfalls.

Finally, we want to take advantage of the fact
that the Police Commissioners are with us today. We
would like to hear more about the challenges they
face with respect to equipment. I will end with three
specific questions, some of which have already been
asked. First, how is performance data used to decide
the rotation and deployment of police-contributing
countries? Secondly, I join my colleagues in asking
how we can ensure greater numbers of women in police
rotations and deployments. And, thirdly, what should
be the priorities for developing and implementing
the Strategic Guidance Framework for International
Police Peacekeeping?

