Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Feltman and Ms. Pramila Patten, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for their detailed briefings.

For our part, we note that the security situation in
Rakhine state and its environs has stabilized to a degree.
This was evidenced by the announcement on 27 October
that the numbers of military personnel deployed there
as part of a special operation were being reduced. We
note the efforts that the Government of Myanmar has
undertaken in line with the recommendations of Kofi
Annan's international Advisory Commission. The
process of issuing the Muslim minority with national
identification cards is under way. The affected areas
are receiving humanitarian assistance and access to
those areas for representatives of the diplomatic corps,
United Nations bodies and the media is improving.

Our position on the issue remains the same, which
is that there is no possible alternative to resolving
the complex issues in Rakhine state, which are based
on historical, socioeconomic, cultural and religious
factors, other than by exclusively political means and
establishing a dialogue between the representatives of
all ethnicities and faiths. We call on all parties to refrain
from violence, and we underscore the need to respect
Myanmar's national sovereignty. In that regard, we
firmly condemn the murders by extremists of Muslims
who were working actively with the authorities to settle
the conflict.

The steps being taken to establish a constructive
dialogue between Naypyidaw and Dhaka, particularly
the agreement reached on 23 November on the voluntary
repatriation of refugees, must be supported. We hope
that both sides will intensify their efforts to ensure
that this is implemented in practice, especially since
the exodus of Muslim refugees to Bangladesh is still
continuing, although now on a considerably lesser scale.
In these circumstances, it will be important to facilitate
efforts to settle the situation in Rakhine state, focus on
providing practical assistance to the Government of
Myanmar in a spirit of equality and mutual respect and
take full advantage of every opportunity for making
use of United Nations mediation efforts. The attempts
of a number of countries to put more pressure on
Naypyidaw - such as, for instance, in the resolution
adopted on 5 December at the special session of the
Human Rights Council on the situation of the minority
Muslim population (A/HRC/RES/S-27/l) - are clearly
not helping those efforts. In our view, it is essential
to refrain from counterproductive accusations and
condemnations of Myanmar and to avoid politically
and emotionally tinged speculation about the alleged
genocide of Muslims.

In our view, what is needed most of all in order to
agree on a settlement of the situation of mass movements
of people across the Myanmar-Bangladesh border is
goodwill on the part of both States. Unfortunately,
it will be impossible to resolve matters if the two of
them cannot come to a rapprochement on this age-old
problem, whose foundation was laid in the previous
century by a colonial administration, with its arbitrary
drawing of borders and shifting of populations from
one part of its colonial dominions to another. The role
of the international community, including the United
Nations, should be to assist bilateral efforts to surmount
this crisis and its consequences.

