Mr. Van Dunem "Mbinda" (Angola): Allow me to
begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on behalf of
my Government, on your assumption of the presidency of
this Council for this month.

I also extend my congratulations to the outgoing
President, Ambassador Peter Osvald, on the manner in
which he led the deliberations of the Security Council
during his term.

Let me also address a word of special recognition
and appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, to his Special Representative for Angola, Maitre
Blondin Beye, and to the troika of observer countries -
Portugal, the United States and the Russian Federation -
for their continued commitment to a peaceful and lasting
settlement of the Angolan problem.

Today, when nearly three years have elapsed since
the signing of the Lusaka Protocol, and despite all the
efforts that have been made and the resources that have
been expended, we find that Angola remains far from
enjoying the peace and stability that our people so
anxiously long for and that the country desperately needs.

 

The framework envisioned under the peace accords
has still not been fully established, and there are still two
armies: one, the Angolan Armed Forces, under the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation, and the
other at the service of a political party, UNIT A, that insists
on preserving its military wing. The country remains
divided, as the exercise of the authority of the State
continues to be blocked in the areas that UNITA insists on
keeping under its control.

A few months ago the inauguration of the Government
of Unity and National Reconciliation and the return to the
Parliament of UNITA deputies, after a long series of mixed
signals and much hesitation from that organization,
rekindled hope and gave rise to considerable expectations
regarding the quick and successful conclusion of the peace
process and the final allaying of the spectre of war.

Regrettably, those expectations have been thwarted,
due to UNITA's unilateral suspension of the
implementation of its obligations, its systematic violations
of the accords and its increasing military build-up
throughout the country. As a result, tensions have mounted
and there has been a serious deterioration of the political
and military situation throughout the country.

The range of the UNITA military preparations leads us
to believe that a return to war is imminent. In this regard,
the facts speak for themselves.

UNITA's main military units, which were never
disarmed and never reported to the United Nations, are
undergoing training and being re-equipped. Thousands of
soldiers who had been previously demobilized by the
United Nations have been recruited anew by UNITA, which
is also coercing many civilians into its military ranks.

Right now UNITA has an army of 35,000 men
deployed throughout the country, of whom 4,000 belong to
the personal security contingent of its leader, Mr. Savimbi.
The continuing occupation of portions of the country's
territory that should long ago have been unconditionally
handed over to the Government administration, as provided
for in the peace accords, enables UNITA to preserve its
military structures, as well as to exploit and smuggle out
the natural resources extracted from those areas in order to
go on financing its war machine and to serve the personal
interests of its leaders.

Concurrently, UNITA's radio is relentlessly engaged
in its hostile propaganda campaign against the Government,
inciting hatred and intolerance, with the aim of denigrating
the legally constituted authorities and trying to justify
UNITA's failure to honour its commitments.

This type of behaviour is intolerable, and a definitive
stop should be put to it. The Security Council and the
international community cannot allow UNITA to continue
to sacrifice an entire people and to hold hostage the future
of a country which is a full Member of the United
Nations.

UNITA's posture is totally incompatible with its
participation in the Government and in the Parliament,
and with the fact that Angola already has a single national
army, which owes allegiance only to the sovereign and
legally constituted authorities of the country and which
also includes thousands of soldiers who have come from
UNITA.

All this leaves little doubt that UNITA's leadership
is not at all interested in the implementation of the peace
accords and that it is merely waiting for a pretext to
launch a new war and thus force the renegotiation of the
peace accords.

If such were not the case, it is hardly conceivable
that we would have witnessed throughout UNITA's
trajectory so many repeated displays of bad faith, so
many delays and diversionary manoeuvres and so many
protestations of commitment to the fulfilment of its
obligations only when the Security Council is about to go
into a meeting. This reveals an evident lack of seriousness
and political will.

We wish to reiterate that the Angola peace accords
and the Lusaka Protocol remain the only valid, legal basis
for the settlement of the conflict. We shall not accept any
compromises or deviations that seek to go outside the
bounds of this framework.

UNITA's leaders have to be persuaded, by all
means, that the definitive rejection of war and full
compliance with the Lusaka Protocol are the only way
that can lead to a genuine national reconciliation and the
consolidation of a democratic system in Angola, and are
the only way for that organization to play an important
role on the Angolan political scene. The performance of
such a role necessarily requires its complete
dernilitarization and its transformation into a full-fledged
political party, just like the other political forces that
coexist in Angola.

 

Angola is presently facing the most serious and
dangerous threats to its peace process, which might
jeopardize all the progress made to date in the
implementation of the peace accords and bring about the
total collapse of what is currently the biggest United
Nations peacekeeping operation. We all know that UN ITA
is to blame for this situation. The time has come for it to be
called to account for its deeds.
That organization, UNITA, has systematically
challenged the very authority of this Council by
disregarding its resolutions in a reckless and arrogant
manner. Such behaviour left the Council no alternative but
to impose, for the first time ever in its history, a set of
sanctions against a political and military organization in
1994. More recently, the Security Council again urged
UNITA, through resolution 1118 (1997), to quickly adopt
certain crucial actions or face major sanctions. Still, UN ITA
has deliberately failed to do so, as the Secretary-General's
report points out, and now it is trying to convince the
international community, through belated half measures,
last-minute efforts and propaganda, that it honours its
commitments.

We trust that this time the Security Council will not
allow itself to be deluded and will impose its authority by
making clear that it will not countenance any further
obstacles to the peace process in Angola, thereby conveying
a strong signal to UNITA's leadership that the international
community will not tolerate any more stonewalling or allow
the peace process to be derailed.

It is never too redundant to underscore that it is
incumbent on the Security Council to shoulder some of the
responsibility in resolving the Angolan conflict, since it is
the body which the Charter of the United Nations endowed
with the authority and the mechanisms for the maintenance
of peace and security in the world. This Council's past
experience with the Angolan conflict, which has long been
on its agenda, has demonstrated that it is only through the
use of pressure, including the enforcement of restrictive
measures, that UNITA's leaders can be dissuaded from
their warmongering and compelled to take the path of peace
and democracy.

The time has come to apply the second package of
sanctions, which resolution 864 (1993) provided for. In this
regard, the Government of Angola fully supports the
measures set forth in paragraph 4 of the draft resolution to
be voted on today, because we firmly believe that it is an
effective instrument that will help prevent war and speed up
the peace process. Furthermore, the approval of these
sanctions will underscore in a fair manner the distinction
that should be made between those who comply with the
Lusaka Protocol and those who would rather treat it as a
dead letter. The Government of Angola has complied with
its obligations, acting in good faith and with a spirit of
great flexibility. Certain obligations could not be
honoured because of the lack of cooperation from
UNITA.

The onus is now on UNITA. It is incumbent upon
that organization to show to the international community,
through practical, credible and trustworthy deeds, that it
has indeed demilitarized, that it no longer claims and
controls any portion of the country's territory, that its
radio broadcasting system is complying with Angola's
laws, and that it has truly become a genuine political
party. Otherwise, the Security Council will have no
alternative but to resort to further measures.

The current crisis in the peace process will not be
overcome unless UNITA takes concrete steps. This would
surely also help to bring about a meaningful and
productive meeting between President Jose Eduardo dos
Santos and the leader of UNITA at a future date, within
our country. I would like to underscore this latter point.
On this subject, it is worth recalling that their previous
four meetings failed to yield the expected results because
UNITA's leader never fulfilled his commitments.

Given its difficulties and complexity, this final stage
of the peace process will continue to test and require the
perseverance and the patience of the members of this
Council. Crucial tasks for the consolidation of the
process, such as the quartering, disarming and
demobilization of UNITA forces, have yet to be fully
carried out by the United Nations. We therefore welcome
the Secretary-General's recommendation and this
Council's decision to postpone the withdrawal of the
military units of the United Nations.

My Government will continue to use its best efforts
to prevent a return to war and destruction on Angolan
soil, and it will continue to meet its responsibilities with
regard to the defence of its sovereignty and territorial
integrity and the protection of the physical safety and
property of its citizens. The population of Angola, which
has been the chief victim of the war and which has not
known peace for 30 years, eagerly expects that today's
meeting in this Chamber will be more than a rhetorical
exercise. Our people hope that other countries will do
their utmost to prevent those who are plotting to wage
war from bringing their designs to fruition.

 

I would like to reiterate, on behalf of the people and
the Government of Angola, our sincere appreciation and
deep gratitude to all the countries that have contributed to
the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA),
as well as for the humanitarian aid given by many
Governments, United Nations agencies and non-
governmental organizations to some of the most needy
members of our population. I would also like to avail
myself of this opportunity to address an appeal to all
countries to request that they grant funds for the process of
the demobilization of former soldiers.
I cannot conclude without commending to this
Council, through you, Mr. President, a country which has
played a determined role in bringing peace to Angola. Let
me recall that it was the United Kingdom that sent the first
demining contingent to Angola, knowing how badly a
single mine can affect human beings. Given the work done
since 1992, when everyone hoped that the peace process in
Angola would not take so long, it is sad today to realize
that the fragile peace is again threatened by the risk of the
resumption of the war by the leadership of UNITA and the
spectre of military hostilities, which have been a
preoccupation of this Council.

I went through all the records of the meetings of the
Security Council on Angola, and I realized that the Council
has been seized of the matter at 27 meetings. It has
sometimes condemned UNITA and requested that it comply
with the decisions of this body. This morning's meeting has
its merits, since the Council has chosen a peaceful way: to
call upon the leadership of UNITA not to allow the
resumption of war, but rather to give it one more
opportunity to say, "the killings are enough".

The tremendous mineral resources that Angola has
been given by God should be put into service for the well-
being of the country and its people. All the wars in Angola
have cost that country in southern Africa a very high level
of underdevelopment for two generations, with all the social
and cultural consequences. A powerful message for peace,
not war, is expressed in this draft resolution to be adopted
today. Let it enter the minds and spirits of the leadership of
UNITA and of countries in Africa and outside our continent
so as to ensure the prosperity of Angola. I am sure that
every one of us in this the United Nations will rejoice to
see Angola living in lasting tranquillity and understanding
with the other Members of this Organization.

I am sure that good days are not far off when Angola
will no longer appear on the agenda of the Security
Council, and the Council President will not have to use the
hammer because of a war between citizens of the same
country. The draft resolution to be voted upon today has
the full support of my Government. We hope that it will
contribute to the acceleration of the peacemaking process
in Angola.

