Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg warmly congratulates the Portuguese
presidency of the Council on its initiative in organizing

this open debate on the working methods of the
Security Council, and on its commitment to
progressing towards greater effectiveness, increased
transparency and improved interaction with
non-members of the Council. I also commend Bosnia
and Herzegovina for the results achieved under its
chairpersonship this year of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions.

Since the last open debate on this subject was
held in April 2010 (see S/PV.6300), the Security
Council has, commendably, continued to work on
applying many of the proposals in the 2010
presidential note (S/20lO/507). We encourage the
Council to continue in this direction in order to, among
other things, further entrench new forms of informal
dialogue with non-member States of the Council and
parties concerned with situations on the Council's
agenda; make more regular use of Arria Formula
meetings in order to strengthen interaction between the
Council and civil society and non-governmental
organizations, whose analyses and experience on the
ground may have particular relevance for the Council's
deliberations; organize a meaningful number of open
Council meetings in order to assure direct transparency
in the Council's deliberations for both non-member
States and the international community as a whole;
improve transparency in the deliberations of subsidiary
bodies of the Council, particularly the sanctions
committees, and encourage the chairs of those
committees to take every opportunity to seek the views
of non-member States that are actively interested in
their areas of activity and to keep them informed about
their ongoing work; and, finally, strengthen relations
with regional and subregional organizations on issues
of international peace and security, so as to benefit
more from their special expertise.

We also welcome initiatives aimed at better
preparing the Security Council to react to new threats
to international peace and security, particularly the
practice initiated by the United Kingdom of inviting
the Department of Political Affairs to brief the Council
on topics whose destabilizing potential makes them
worthy of attention. Luxembourg is also following with
great interest the work of the group of five small
nations, which has put forward concrete proposals for
making further progress in the Council's working
methods. We broadly endorse those proposals.
11-61406

Allow me to raise a subject particularly dear to
me in my capacity as chair of the Guinea country-
specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC): the importance of encouraging
ever closer relations between the Security Council and
the Commission. Guinea's case is special in the sense
that Guinea is the only country on the PBC's agenda
that is not also on the agenda of the Council. The
PBC's support of Guinea, aimed at consolidating peace
and helping democracy take root there, is nonetheless
relevant to the Council's work.

Beyond the specific situations of the countries
that are on the agendas of both the Council and the
Commission, the latter's experience and expertise can
be helpful to the Council, whether on questions of the
links between peacekeeping and peacebuilding and the
transition through the various post-conflict phases, on
preparing for elections in fragile States, or on subjects
of regional significance, such as combating
transnational crime and drug trafficking in West Africa.

The Peacebuilding Commission can also offer an
integrated and holistic perspective on the
interdependence between security and development, a
subject that the Council took up on 11 February, on
Brazil's initiative (see S/PV.6479). The PBC can help
the Security Council not to lose sight of the absolute
necessity of bettering socio-economic conditions in
post-conflict countries in order to make sustainable
peace viable.

Luxembourg, a founding Member of the United
Nations, has never been a member of the Security
Council. We are therefore particularly attentive to the
interaction between member and non-member States of
the Council, and between the Council and the other
main organs of the United Nations, especially the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. But the continuing improvement of the
Council's effectiveness is of interest to all of us who
have subscribed to the Charter, which stipulates in
Article 24 that the Council acts in the name of all
Member States to ensure the rapid and effective
response of the Organization to preserve international
peace and security. Our credibility and that of our
Organization depend on it.

