Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Zannier for his briefing. I would also
like to welcome the Serbian Foreign Minister, Mr. Vuk
Jeremie, and thank him for his statement. My thanks
also go to Ms. Vlora Citaku for her statement.

My delegation welcomes the efforts of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) to facilitate dialogue and reconciliation
among the parties concerned. We urge UNMIK to
pursue its efforts to maintain security and stability,
facilitate Kosovo's participation in regional and
international forums, and assist in responding to the
social needs of the different groups, particularly in the
north, in coordination and cooperation with local and
international parties.

On the basis of the Mission's constructive role,
we urge all parties to extend to UNMIK the support it
needs to implement its mandate. We also urge them not
to publish inaccurate information on the Mission's
activities, which only obstructs its work and
jeopardizes the safety of its staff. We also welcome the
continuing coordination between UNMIK and the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
pursuant to the principle of neutrality set forth in
resolution 1244 (1999).

We welcome the relatively calm security situation,
but persistent efforts must be made to combat
organized crime, which, according to the Secretary-
General's report (S/2011/43), continues to be a source
of concern in different parts of Kosovo.

The situation in the north of the country is also
still fragile. Harassment and security incidents
continue to foster a climate of tension and mistrust
among various groups. In those circumstances, it is
important for security forces to provide the maximum
level of security for all citizens of all regions. All
parties must refrain from provocative acts that could
disturb the peaceful coexistence.

Security, trust and respect for diversity are the
basic elements needed in addressing the issue of
refugees. Ensuring those conditions would create a
positive climate that would in turn pave the way for
dignified and safe returns. While returns increased in
2010, the rate is still low.

On a different issue, we would like to express our
regret about the irregularities in the recent
parliamentary elections, which affected the confidence
in the democratic process in Kosovo, despite the partial
redress of those irregularities by the re-vote in a
number of polling stations. The increased percentage of
Kosovo Serbs residing south of the Ibar river who
participated in those elections represented an important
positive development.

At this stage, it is important to focus on forming a
Government that reflects the aspirations of the
population and can improve its standard of living. We
also hope that the momentum of General Assembly
resolution 64/298, adopted on 9 September 2010, will
serve to facilitate a truly frank and constructive
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina as soon as
possible. It must be accompanied by efforts to achieve
reconciliation and to establish confidence among the
parties in Kosovo, allowing them to feel the benefits of
such a proposed dialogue.

Meanwhile, we would like to pay tribute to the
current cooperation of the Serbian Government and the
Kosovo authorities with the Reconstruction
Implementation Commission to protect Serbian
Orthodox sites. In that regard, we agree with the
Secretary-General regarding the significant and
effective role that the religious authorities can play in
reducing tension and in building bridges among groups
in a way that would protect such sites and strengthen
reconciliation.

The Committee on Legal Affairs and Human
Rights of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe adopted a resolution on the report of Special
Rapporteur Dick Marty on the inhuman treatment of
people and illicit trafficking in human organs in
Kosovo. We hope that appropriate legal means can be
found to establish the truth, devoid of politicization, in
a way that meets the expectations of Kosovars and
achieves justice for the families of those victims.

Looking beyond such incidents, we affirm the
importance of fighting corruption and of transparency
and accountability as the main pillars in building stable
institutions and lasting peace.

