Mr. Germanas (Lithuania): Lithuania aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the
European Union.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
hosting today's debate on children and armed conflict.
I also thank all briefers for their extensive statements.
Ambassador Lucas deserves particular recognition for
her brilliant leadership. I also note with appreciation
the work of the Special Representative and her team.

The 1996 study by Graca Machel entitled "Impact
of armed conflict on children" (A/51/306) gave strong
impetus to the strengthening of the United Nations
system for the protection of children in armed conflict.
The United Nations has made significant progress
over the past decade and a half in protecting children.
However, in nearly all recent conflicts, we are facing
the horrific impact of conflicts on children.

Let me refer to just a few examples. The conflict
in the Central African Republic has resulted in than
2 million children lacking basic services and hundreds
of thousands with no access to education. In Syria,
over 10,000 children have been killed and many more
injured since March 2011. Nearly 3,000 schools have
been destroyed, and 1,000 used as detention and torture
centres. An estimated 2.26 million children were not
attending school or attending irregularly. In the latest
incident in Nigeria, 59 children were shot and burned,
in the fourth school assault in less than a year.

The Security Council has undertaken many
measures to end such grave violations against children.
But as we see, they have not been enough. This shows
that we must take more active action against these
crimes. Our agenda should be further developed and
our instruments sharpened. In this regard, I welcome
the new language of the resolution responding to the
changing dynamics on the ground.

I would like to touch on three specific issues:
attacks on schools, the implementation of action plans,
and combating impunity.

Firstly, the growing use of schools for military
purposes and increase in attacks on schools have
not only severely disrupted children's right to access
to education but are a violation of international
humanitarian law. Schools must enjoy immunity from
war. Impunity for violence against children at schools,
as well as the lack of access to education due to fear of
attacks, must be addressed by the Council. Monitoring,
assessment and reporting are crucial in this regard.
Some progress has been made, but we need to do more
to strengthen monitoring and reporting partnerships
to improve data collection and verification. Dialogue
between local community leaders, armed groups and
Government forces and officials is also very important,
as is strengthening legislation, in this regard.

We welcome the development of guidelines for
protecting schools and universities from military
use during armed conflict. These could guide States
to improve their domestic legislation and military
doctrines. Some countries have already introduced
legislation and relevant practices restricting and
prohibiting the military use of schools. The Philippines
restricted the use of schools by their armed forces. Most
recently, South Sudan prohibited its armed forces from
using schools.

Secondly, I would like to underline the significance
of action plans as a key tool for ending the recruitment
and use of children. Signing a plan is only the
beginning. Implementation will require political will
as well as resources. The deployment of United Nations
child protection advisers and assistance for national
capacity-building are very important. On the other
hand, we also encourage the Special Representative to
continue her engagement with non-State armed groups
to conclude action plans. Attacks on schools must be
included in action plans.

Yesterday, the Office of Special Representative,
in cooperation with UNICEF, launched the "Children,
not soldiers" campaign. It is essential that the initiative
find its practical application in respective national
action plans. Regional and subregional organizations
have a role to play in that regard. The agreement signed
between the United Nations and the African Union will
help to strengthen the protection of conflict-affected
children.

Thirdly, accountability for the perpetrators of
violations against children should be strengthened.
Ending violations does not necessarily mean the end
of impunity. The criminalization of child recruitment
under national laws, with the capacity to prosecute
those responsible, would send a signal that crimes
against children will not be tolerated. Where national
authorities are unwilling or unable to bring perpetrators
to justice, international justice mechanisms, including
the International Criminal Court, should play a role.

Targeted measures against persistent perpetrators
of grave violations against children remain an important
tool at the Council's disposal. Violence against children
should be included in targeted sanctions designation
criteria. The need to consider targeted measures against
perpetrators in situations where a dedicated sanctions
committee does not exist is also very important.

The late President Nelson Mandela said that we
owe our children, the most vulnerable citizens in our
society, a life free of violence and fear. We have to act
for all those children, and we must follow those wise
words.

