The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Equatorial Guinea.

I would like to begin by joining others in
welcoming Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). We thank her for her clear and informative
briefing and wish her success in her new responsibility.
We have no doubt that her political and diplomatic
experience will be useful to the Security Council and
UNAMI in making positive progress in the process.
She can count on the full support of the delegation of
Equatorial Guinea.

My delegation congratulates the Iraqi people who,
despite the disagreements following the local and
parliamentary elections last May, were able to peacefully
elect their new President, His Excellency Mr. Barham
Salih, in October, who in turn appointed his new Prime
Minister, His Excellency Mr. Adil Abd Al-Mahdi, who
presented an ambitious political programme that enjoys
much popular support, meets the basic needs of the
country and facilitates transparency and the reforms
that the country so badly needs. We believe that those
events of 2018 represent an important step towards
democracy, political stability and the promotion of a
sustainable, secure environment for Iraq. In that regard,
it is important to highlight the importance of the work
of UNAMI, which has always been available to support
local authorities in various aspects of the Iraqi State
reconstruction process.

However, we are concerned about the difficulties
being experienced in the process of forming the new
Government. We had believed that the easy acceptance
of the appointment of the Prime Minister by the main
political blocs would facilitate the composition of
the rest of the executive branch, submitted to the
Council of Representatives. In that regard, and in
order to avoid impacting the political and economic
reconstruction process that is already under way in the
country, it is urgent and necessary for the parties to
try to bring their positions closer together in order to
facilitate the formation of the Government, the work
of which is essential to promoting and advancing the
development process.

We welcome last November's tour by the new Iraqi
President to the countries of the region. We hope that
Iraq's rapprochement with neighbouring countries will
focus on establishing good cooperation in strategic
areas, such as the fight against terrorism, which would
facilitate information-sharing among Governments.
That would help the Iraqi security services, which
remain on alert given that there are still remnants of
radical extremists of the Islamic State, who continue
to pose an asymmetrical threat in the north and
centre of the country. In the light of that situation, it
is appropriate that, on the basis of the principles of
good-neighbourliness and respect for sovereignty, the
Governments of Iraq and Turkey urgently address the
security situation in the northern part of the country,
which evidently also poses a danger to Turkey.

We welcome the statement issued by the Iraqi
Ministry of Finance in January, in which he indicates
that the central Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government have agreed to unify customs duties at all
border crossing points in the country and eliminate
customs checkpoints between the Kurdistan region
and the rest of Iraq. Similarly, we welcome Kirkuk's
agreement on the resumption of oil exports, as well
as the important meetings held in November by the
authorities of both parties. All that demonstrates the
good will of the political leaders, who are working to
unify and integrate all parts of the country.

Finally, we encourage the efforts of the Iraqi
Government, which in November handed over to the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait a number of
assets appropriated during the invasion of Kuwait,
including books, an archive of Kuwait television video
tapes, a sword and a valuable painting. We look forward
to the full cooperation of the Government of Iraq in
meeting that important requirement.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.

