Ms. Morrison Gonzalez (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): | would like to thank the briefers for their important observations and recommendations. Rimana Youssouf Assane Mayaki's testimony attests to the importance of protecting schools from attacks and her courage impels us to act. We are grateful to the Niger for hosting this timely debate, in particular since we just commemorated the International Day to Protect Education from Attack yesterday. We also thank the Niger for its efforts with regard to presidential statement S/PRST/2020/8, which was adopted today. In conflict-affected countries, armed forces and armed groups continue to violate international law and attack schools and use them for military purposes. This impacts the future of entire generations of children and dashes any hope of returning to normal life. The most recent report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2020/525) states that there were 494 verified attacks on schools in 2019, primarily in the Syrian Arab Republic, Palestine, Afghanistan and Somalia. It also indicates that the Sahel region has sometimes experienced the spillover effect of armed groups' activities affecting other countries, including cross-border attacks on schools. The impact of these attacks, along with the coronavirus disease pandemic, is devastating for students, but also for teachers and communities in general. As a result, there has been a dramatic decline in school attendance, leaving untold numbers of children without education, facing psychological trauma and serious injury and, all too often, costing them their lives. Without access to education, an entire generation living in conflict will grow up without the skills to support their countries' economies and political and social development, thus exacerbating the cycle in which children remain trapped. We condemn all attacks on schools and their use for military purposes. We call on all parties to conflict to put an immediate end to that practice. The Safe Schools Declaration has been a positive channel for increased commitments to protecting children in armed conflict and their right to education. For example, the Governments of Burkina Faso, Mali - and your country, Mr. President, the Niger - and others in the region have endorsed the Declaration, joining 105 other States around the world, including the Dominican Republic. I take this opportunity to congratulate Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on having also endorsed the Declaration yesterday. However, increased international attention to the Sahel region and the security situation there is vital. We encourage those Member States that have not done so to support the Safe Schools Declaration in order make that agenda universal and foster increased action in that regard. Attacks on education must be systematically investigated and the perpetrators brought to justice. In that respect, support for and cooperation with international criminal-accountability mechanisms such as the International Criminal Court are key. Another important measure is the training of national defence and security forces in international humanitarian and human rights law. Education must continue during armed conflict and be a channel for the promotion of peace, and provide physical and psychosocial support to students. To that end, States must cooperate with schools and university communities, civil society, community members and other relevant stakeholders to develop early-warning systems, risk-reduction strategies and comprehensive safety and security plans. In that connection, while responding to the coronavirus disease pandemic, States must ensure that the reopening of schools is in line with the Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict. Female students and teachers living in conflict- affected countries are often targeted during attacks, experiencing terrible acts of violence within schools but also on the way to school. These include rape, sexual slavery and abduction. This puts at risk the critical education needed to address gender inequalities and discrimination. Without access by girls to education, women's participation in decision-makingand leadership in politics and in conflict prevention are greatly affected. Today's debate further highlights the urgent need to ensure that all United Nations peacekeeping missions have a monitoring and reporting mechanism and can appoint senior child-protection and child-rights experts in peace missions. Finally, as Malala would say, "Let us pick up our books and our pens; they are our most powerful weapons. One child, one teacher, one book and one pen can change the world". Children's right to education must be guaranteed and remain a priority during conflict so as to ensure a safe and peaceful future.
