The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Argentina, Armenia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Burundi, Canada, Cuba, Germany, India, Iraq, Italy,
Malaysia, the Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan, Rwanda,
Slovenia, Ukraine and Zimbabwe in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Ramirez
(Argentina), Mr. Abelian (Armenia), Mr. Sacirbey
(Bosnia and Herzegovina), Mr. Amorim (Brazil),
Mr. Nsanze (Burundi), Mr. Karsgaard (Canada),
Mr. Nunez-Mosquera (Cuba), Mr. Henze (Germany),
Mr. Shah (India), Mr. Hamdoon (Iraq), Mr. Terzi
di Sant'Agata (Italy), Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia),
Mr. Biegman (Netherlands), Mr. Biorn Lian (Norway),
Mr. Kamal (Pakistan), Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda),
Mr. Tu'rk (Slovenia), Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine) and
Mr. Sengwe (Zimbabwe) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 19 May 1997 from
Mr. Soren Jessen-Petersen, Director of the Liaison Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
which reads as follows:

"I would like to request, on behalf of the United

Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, that I be

allowed to address the Security Council in connection

with the item on its agenda, without the right to vote,
in accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure".

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Soren Jessen-
Petersen.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 19 May 1997 from Mr. Stephen
Lewis, Deputy Executive Director of United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF), which reads as follows:

"On behalf of UNICEF, and under rule 39 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I am
writing to request that I be allowed to address the
Security Council's open meeting to consider the item
'Protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees
and others in conflict situations' on Wednesday, 21
May 1997".

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Stephen Lewis.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 20 May 1997 from the Deputy
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea to the
United Nations, which has been issued as document
S/l997/386, and reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that the Security
Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Peter Kung,
head of the delegation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations,
in connection with the consideration of the item
entitled 'Protection for humanitarian assistance to

refugees and others in conflict situations.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Peter Kiing.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in the
Council's prior consultations, if I hear no objection, I
shall take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Yasushi Akashi, Under-Secretary-

 

General for Humanitarian Affairs, and Emergency Relief
Coordinator.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting
in accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

The first speaker is Mr. Yasushi Akashi, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, to whom the Council has extended an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.


