Mr. O'Brien (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen for his briefing, with which I completely align.

The people of Yemen are being subjected to
deprivation, disease and death as the world watches.
That is not an unforeseen or coincidental result of
forces beyond our control. It is a direct consequence
of actions of the parties and supporters of the conflict.
It is also sadly a result of inaction, due to inability or
indifference, by the international community.

As I have previously briefed the Council in recent
months, urgent action is required in order to end the
suffering. Yet, based on facts and, as ever, in complete
candour, I return to the Council to report that the
situation on the ground has continued to spiral towards
total social, economic and institutional collapse.
Yemen now has the ignominy of being the world's
largest food security crisis, with more than 17 million
people who are food insecure, 6.8 million of whom are
one step away from famine. Crisis is not coming. It is
not looming. It is here today, on our watch. Ordinary
people are paying the price.

Worse still, the threat of famine is driven and
exacerbated by conflict. Yemen is not facing a drought.
If there were no conflict in Yemen, there would be
no descent into famine, misery, disease and death. A
famine would certainly be avoidable and averted. We
all know that there will be no military solution. And
for as long as it takes until a political solution is found,
we will continue as humanitarians to do everything
in our power in order to avert the famine in Yemen,
despite the challenges to our operations by all sides and
their supporters.

While the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism has facilitated the transfer of
over 7.6 million metric tons of goods through Yemen's
Red Sea ports, of which 3.8 million metric tons were
food, people's ability to buy food is diminishing. We
are working hard to enhance the Mechanism and get
it funded. In particular, governorates in which active
fighting and airstrikes continue, such as Taiz, Hajjah,
Sa'ada, A1-Jawf and Marib, remain affected by high
and rising prices of commodities. The prices of red
beans and wheat flour were 59 per cent and 29 per cent
higher in April than they were pre-crisis. The economy
is collapsing, employment has all but disappeared, food
and fuel prices have skyrocketed and severe disruptions
to fishing and agricultural production continue.
The bottom line is that what food there is is largely
unaffordable to the vast majority of the population,
especially the most vulnerable, such as the 2 million
people who remain internally displaced.

It is not just the food security situation. The
institutional capacity of Yemen to respond to the basic
needs of the population is crumbling, exacerbated by
the failure of the Central Bank, following its move
from Sanna'a to Aden, to operate in the interests of the
people it is intended to serve. All parties to the conflict
in Yemen have proven their continued inability to put
the genuine needs of the Yemeni people first. The
health-care system is a shell of what it once was, with
half of all health facilities now closed. People are dying
because even basic medical treatment, which we would
take for granted, is no longer available. By the time I
finish my statement to the Council today, another child
in Yemen will have died from a preventable disease.

Over 1 million civil servants have not been paid for
months, which has affected more than 8 million people
and pushed more and more families towards poverty
and starvation. Families are increasingly marrying
off their young daughters in order to have someone
else care for them. They often use the dowry to pay
for basic necessities. While humanitarians have been
working to assist the poorest of the poor, it is now
also professionals, such as university professors, who
are asking for food assistance. As the crisis continues,
pressure on already scarce humanitarian resources will
increase and survival for Yemenis will become harder.
It will be difficult for Yemen to recover.

The strain being placed upon the all-too-fragile
Yemeni system became all too evident in the past month,
with the extensive, desperate resurgence of cholera. The
debilitated health system took longer to detect cholera
warning signs because the health workers who would
normally have been maintaining disease surveillance
systems were not paid. Water and sanitation systems
were not functioning, owing to lack of fuel and basic
maintenance, leaving more than 8 million people
without access to safe drinking water and sanitation.

The combination of the rainy season and the
uncollected rubbish that has piled up in the streets
of large cities has created the perfect conditions for
the rapid spread of communicable and water-borne
diseases. In the past month alone, twice as many people
are suspected of being cholera cases compared to
those in the last six months combined, and one third
of them are children. It is important to bear in mind
that malnutrition and cholera are interconnected,
because weakened and hungry people are more likely
to contract cholera and less able to survive it. Estimates
are projecting 150,000 cases over the next six months,
in addition to the roughly 60,000 current suspected
cases since April, with 500 associated deaths.

As well as being depressingly predictable, the scale
of the latest outbreak is a direct consequence of the
conflict. Had the parties to the conflict cared, it would
have been avoidable. Nonetheless, I should praise the
extraordinary speed and courage of the United Nations
and its humanitarian partners, including international
and national aid workers from non-governmental
organizations, who are doing all they can under
the strong leadership of Humanitarian Coordinator
Jamie McGoldrick.

The United Nations and its partners are working
tirelessly to help authorities on all sides meet the
challenge posed by this cholera outbreak, from Aden
to Sa'ada and from Hudaydah to Taiz. We have
worked urgently to scale up assistance, quadrupling
the number of diarrhoea treatment centres in the past
month and establishing 136 oral-rehydration corners.
Synchronized water, sanitation and health efforts,
including a nationwide awareness campaign, are in
place with a view to ensuring a comprehensive and
holistic response. Some 1.6 million people have already
been supported through those interventions and we
will not cease our efforts until the scourge of cholera
is contained. I salute the local health and sanitation
workers, who are trying to support all and taking no
sides regardless of the warring parties' contemptible
attempts to get them to do so. Together with the United
Nations and other partners, they are providing round-
the-clock assistance, and I would also like to thank
those who have provided financial support, including
from the region, to make that happen.

The humanitarian response to the cholera outbreak
is one part ofa much larger effort. In all, humanitarians
have reached 5.8 million people this year with food
assistance, including at least 3 million people every
month. As the needs mount, we will need more
resources, but our ability to respond is dependent on
sustained and predictable funding. As the Council is
aware, on 25 April the Secretary-General, together
with the Foreign Ministers of Sweden and Switzerland,
co-hosted a high-level pledging conference for Yemen
to respond to the increasingly acute needs in the
country. The conference generated $1.1 billion in very
generous pledges.

We are grateful to all the donors who have made
good on their pledges in full and encourage others
to do the same. As of last night, 56 per cent, about
$612 million of the pledges, had been paid both within
and outside the humanitarian-response plan. That
means that the overall humanitarian strategy and plan is
only 24 per cent funded, with $489 million received of
the $2.1 billion required. I strongly urge that we ensure
that funding is provided in support of the humanitarian
strategy and plan, since it is the most effective, neutral
and impartial way to reach those most in need. With
escalating needs, we will need more resources.

Let me now turn to the issue of access. Hudaydah
port is a lifeline for Yemen, being the primary point
of entry for commercial and humanitarian imports into
the country, which has historically been between 80
and 90 per cent dependent on imported food staples.
Hudaydah is also the only port in Yemen that can handle
fuel, bulk and containerized cargo at scale. Yet vessels
have only intermittent access to it, owing to diversions
and clearance delays imposed by the coalition, which,
coupled with the risk of attacks on the port, has sapped
traders' confidence. Where it has normally taken a week
to get into the Red Sea ports, it now often takes five
times as long. Given the rising costs, major shipping
companies are now simply avoiding the ports, thereby
depriving the Yemeni people of desperately needed
food and fuel.

I appeal to Member States to ensure that every effort
is made to keep Hudaydah port open and operating. An
attack on it is not in the interests of any party, as it will
directly and irrevocably drive the Yemeni population
further into starvation and famine. In that regard, we
continue to support the efforts of the Special Envoy
to develop a sustainable solution for the protection of
the port as critical civilian infrastructure. In addition,
bringing in the United Nations mobile cranes that have
been stuck for the last four months in Dubai would be an
investment in Hudaydah port's civilian character, and
would help to get food and fuel to those most in need.

Aside from Hudaydah, the parties must commit to
ensuring that all other ports and land routes are open
for both humanitarian and commercial imports, as
humanitarian action alone cannot meet the needs of
a population of 27 million people. Access across the
country, including in Taiz governorate, must be safe,
consistent and unimpeded, and commercial goods must
be allowed to reach Yemen's ports without artificial
delays and corrupt exactions. It is also imperative
that commercial flights to Sana'a resume in order to
enable civilians to seek medical treatment and families
to reunite.

Time is running out. The Yemeni people face a triple
threat of armed conflict, famine and deadly disease
that has already killed, injured, displaced or otherwise
affected millions, and it will spare no one ifit continues
unchecked. The cruel irony, as I said at the beginning,
is that these threats are man-made and could easily
have been prevented. The international community, in
concert with those parties to the conflict, now has an
urgent duty to address those threats and bring Yemen
and its people on all sides of the fighting lines back
from the brink of complete disaster.

As humanitarians, we will continue to do our
job, but the Yemeni people also need the international
community to do its job. A sustainable political
agreement is the only long-term solution, and if it is
to be achieved, there must be a reduction in violence,
an end to violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law, and unimpeded access to those in
need. The parties to the conflict and the international
community, especially the Security Council, cannot
allow the deadly combination of violence, inaction
and indifference to condemn the Yemeni people to a
bleak obituary.

I call on the international community to
immediately undertake the following actions to avoid
irreversible consequences that will have a generational
impact on Yemen and the wider region. The first is to
ensure the protection of the Yemeni people. For as long
as military actions continue, all parties must comply
with international humanitarian and human rights law,
and all States must exert their influence to ensure that
the parties do so. The second is to ensure that all ports
and land routes remain open for both humanitarian
and commercial imports, including working to avoid
attacks on Hudaydah and to reopen Sana'a airport.
We need the mobile cranes at the port. The third is to
preserve essential Yemeni institutions and ensure that
civil servants are paid. This is no longerjust a question
of politics or economics; it is about basic humanity,
human dignity and, indeed, survival.

Cholera is spreading at an unprecedented rate and
famine is knocking at the door of millions tonight. The
parties to this conflict and their allies, as well other
countries in the region and across the globe, must
set aside politics and self-interest and respond at the
most humane level, facilitating access and mobilizing
resources to treat the cholera outbreak and ensure that
food gets to those in need. In that spirit, I urge the
parties, with the support of the international community,
to redouble their efforts to reach a sustainable political
settlement, ensuring that the people's protection,
dignity and well-being are at the heart of any agreement.
Working together, we can end one of the world's great
humanitarian tragedies and put Yemen back on a path
to survival and a future. The time is now.

