Mr. Sidikou: I would like to thank the members of
the Security Council for the opportunity to brief them
today on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

I would first like to take this opportunity to express
my deepest condolences and sympathy to the families,
as well as to the Government of the United Republic
of Tanzania, for the deaths of the two Tanzanian
peacekeepers killed in an attack on 9 October by the
Allied Democratic Forces on the Mamundioma base of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo (MONUSCO).
I condemn it and all attacks on MONUSCO personnel,
who serve the cause of peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

As the Council is aware, in recent months the
challenges related to the implementation of the
Comprehensive and Inclusive Political Agreement of
31 December 2016 have unfortunately persisted. The
broad consensus achieved among key political actors
with the Agreement's signing has not been maintained
consistently throughout the year, specifically as that
relates to the transitional oversight mechanism - the
Conseil national de suivi de l'accord - and to the
implementation of confidence-building measures for
sealing the Agreement and the electoral timelines.
Recently, discussions have centred on the notion that
elections will most probably not be held before the end
of 2017, unlike what was foreseen in the Agreement.
That has generated new political debate around the
varying interpretations of the Agreement, particularly
with regard to the implementation of the transitional
arrangement in the future. Regrettably that has led
in turn to the re-emergence of a climate of political
uncertainty and tension.

It was in the light of those developments that on the
sidelines of the opening of the General Assembly at its
seventy-second session, the United Nations convened a
side event on the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The meeting welcomed the authorities'
commitment to respecting the Constitution and
stressed the need for further confidence-building
measures to establish conditions conducive to ensuring
the successful conclusion of the electoral process. The
participants once again reaffirmed the centrality of the
Agreement of 31 December 2016 and the importance
of ensuring its full implementation in order to pave the
way for the timely holding of free, fair, peaceful and
credible elections. The discussions during the event
acknowledged the progress made by the Independent
National Electoral Commission with the voter

registration process and stressed the need for publishing
an electoral calendar as soon as possible and providing
a budget for the elections. The Congolese stakeholders
were also urged to step up their efforts to prepare for
the timely holding of free, fair, peaceful and credible
presidential and legislative elections in accordance
with the Agreement and, at the same time, to take
additional confidence-building measures to establish
an environment conducive to a successful conclusion of
the electoral process.

In that regard, I would like to turn to two specific
points -progress with regard to the holding ofelections,
and the establishment of conditions conducive to that.
With regard to the first point, although the publication
of an electoral calendar and a budget remain key
milestones in the political process and will be essential
to lowering political tensions and uncertainty as to a way
forward, it is important to note that progress has been
made with voter registration. As of mid-September,
the Electoral Commission had registered more than
41 million voters. Women represented 48 per cent of
registered voters, a slightly lower figure than in 2006,
2011 and 2016. In early September, voter-registration
training began in the Kasai and Kasai Central provinces,
the last remaining provinces in the country to undergo
that process.

However, there is still uncertainty about the
registration of members of the diaspora, the mode of
voting and the timeline for enacting critical legislation.
Regrettably, the financial resources required to ensure
sustained progress towards the holding of elections
are not yet forthcoming. The Commission is still
underfunded, and the multi-partner basket support
fund for the Project of Assistance to the Electoral Cycle
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, managed
by the United Nations Development Programme, has
reached only 6 per cent of the estimated $123 million
required. Nor has MONUSCO been provided with any
additional resources to support the updating of the
voter registry or the broader electoral process. That is
in large part due to the uncertainties about the electoral
calendar and the political process going forward. The
establishment of conditions conducive to the holding
of elections depends largely on the implementation of
confidence-building measures.

I have consistently reminded all stakeholders of
their responsibility to ensure respect for rights and
freedoms during this period of heightened political
uncertainty. That will require full implementation of
all the confidence-building measures stipulated in the
Agreement, ensuring the opening of the political space
and full respect for human rights, including respect
for everyone's political rights and freedoms, including
freedom of opinion and expression and the right to
peaceful assembly. The United Nations is concerned
about the fact that journalists, political opponents
and civil society activists continue to be subject to
intimidation, harassment and violence, mostly in
connection with their activities and the expression of
their opinions concerning the political process. I have
repeatedly called for such actions to stop and for the
rights and freedoms enshrined in the Constitution ofthe
Democratic Republic of the Congo to be fully respected
so as to establish conditions conducive to the holding of
credible and peaceful elections.

(spoke in French)

In these politically uncertain circumstances, the
security situation in several regions of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has deteriorated further, with
an increase in targeted attacks on the national security
forces by Mayi-Mayi groups. In North Kivu, repeated
Mayi-Mayi attacks on Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo (FARDC) positions have been
taking place in an environment marked by tensions
between the Hutu and Nande communities. The so-
called Allied Democratic Forces have also attempted
to seize several FARDC positions. In South Kivu,
Mayi-Mayi groups have been carrying out attacks
on several strategic FARDC installations since the
end of June. Less than two weeks ago, Mayi-Mayi
Yakutumba mounted an attack on Uvira, the second-
largest city in South Kivu province, and was only
repulsed thanks to a rapid and robust response from
MONUSCO and exemplary coordination with the
FARDC. The complexity of the current situation in
South Kivu was tragically illustrated on 15 September
when, in clashes with Burundian asylum seekers,
Congolese security forces resorted to excessive force,
resulting in 37 Burundians killed and 117 wounded.
One FARDC soldier was also killed, and six FARDC
soldiers and one national police officer were wounded.
That tragedy should never have happened. We should
add that, following that incident, two members of the
FARDC were arrested, and MONUSCO initiated an
investigation into the Blue Helmets' response during
those events.

Besides the situation in North and South Kivu, in
Tanganyika province the clashes between the Twa and
Luba militias have again increased, against the backdrop
of a resurgence in Mayi-Mayi Kata-Katanga activities
and emerging divisions among several Twa militias.
The security situation in the western part of the country
remains volatile, following major clashes between the
Bundu Dia Mayala political-religious sect and security
forces in Kinshasa and Kongo Central. Violent incidents
continue in the Kasai region, involving clashes between
Kamuina Nsapu militia and security forces as well as
inter-ethnic conflicts. I firmly condemn the attacks by
the Kamuina Nsapu, the recruitment of children and the
targeting of schools, churches and other protected sites,
as well as the incidents of disproportionate use of force
and deliberate targeting of civilians attributed to the
Congolese armed forces. The violence must stop and its
perpetrators must be held accountable.

The impact of the deteriorating security situation
on civilian life is clearly visible. Between June and
August, MONUSCO identified 1,329 cases ofviolations
or abuses of human rights. Armed groups carried
out 533 attacks, while State actors accounted for 769
violations, of which 27 per cent were attributed to the
armed forces and 24 per cent to national police. On top
of that, the worsening humanitarian situation is clear
evidence of the impact of the conflict on the civilian
population. We estimate that about 8.5 million people,
including 5.5 million children, are currently in need
of humanitarian assistance. The number of internally
displaced persons has reached 3.8 million, and more
than 621,000 Congolese have sought refuge in various
areas of the subregion, such as Angola, Zambia and so
forth. In the Kasai region alone, some 2.8 million people
are facing critical levels of food insecurity, and more
than 1.5 million children continue to face the risk of
violence, displacement and loss of access to education
and medical services.

Despite the significant challenges that the evolving
situation presents, MONUSCO has continued to adjust
its deployment and presence to better adapt its footprint
to the priorities set out in resolution 2348 (2017), with a
view to maximizing its effectiveness in the face ofbudget
cuts. It has modified its sector boundaries to enable the
force to redeploy its troops in the eastern provinces
and to intervene with more flexibility throughout the
country. The Mission has also improved the mobility of
the Intervention Brigade and strengthened its presence
in the Kasai region, largely through redeployments of
civilian, military and police personnel.

In order to respect the ceiling on military personnel
numbers authorized under resolution 2348 (2017) and
to meet the new budget requirements, the Mission
will soon complete the repatriation of 1,687 military
units. MONUSCO is also in the process of introducing
and testing a new strategy of protection by projection,
specifically aimed at areas affected by the closure of
MONUSCO bases and designed to provide the mission
with greater flexibility in fulfilling its mandate to
protect civilians.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize
MONUSCO's commitment to supporting, through
its good offices, the principles of the Agreement of
31 December 2016, which represent the only viable way
to create the necessary conditions for holding credible
and peaceful elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Publishing a realistic electoral calendar,
establishing a budget for the elections, implementing
measures to ease tensions and ensuring respect for
fundamental rights and freedoms are the main conditions
that must be now be met in order to advance the political
process. In that regard, while United Nations support is
essential, it is not enough. Regional actors, including
the African Union, the Southern African Development
Community and the Economic Community of Central
African States, have a key role to play in helping all the
stakeholders in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to meet the challenges they are facing and in advancing
the political process for the holding of elections. In
that context, the recent visit of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission represents a significant
reinforcement of the international community's
collective efforts to help the Democratic Republic of
the Congo make progress towards holding elections.
Only through joint efforts, in solidarity and synergy,
can the obstacles facing the Democratic Republic ofthe
Congo be overcome.

