Ms. DeShong (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): Saint Vincent and the Grenadines thanks His Excellency Prime Minister Edi Rama for his briefing. We congratulate him on assuming the chairmanship of the dynamic and proactive Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and we wish him a very successful tenure. The work of the OSCE is undoubtedly commendable. As the world's largest regional security arrangement, it serves as a platform for preventive diplomacy and multilateral cooperation across the peace, security and development nexus. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes that multidimensional approach to preventing conflict and ensuring lasting peace. Indeed, existing threats to international peace and security require comprehensive political strategies that address the root causes of conflict. The OSCE's mandate exemplifies the very nexus approach that is so crucial for mitigating existing and emerging transnational risks. As a small island developing State on the front lines of the fight against climate change, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines considers it its solemn duty to raise the issue of climate-driven insecurity. Complex challenges such as climate change, with its attendant hazards, require multifaceted solutions. We welcome the multi-agency Environment and Security Initiative, within which the OSCE and other partners work to promote transboundary cooperation for environmental management and climate change adaptation. Women's involvement is critical to political, peace and security processes. Their full and equal participation in all forms of political life is instrumental to well-functioning societies. In observance of the 20-year milestone since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), our delegation welcomes the efforts to further implement the women, peace and security agenda in the OSCE region under Albania's stewardship.On the crisis in the Ukraine, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reiterates that principles should guide all efforts towards a lasting settlement of the dispute. We welcome the recent efforts made with regard to confidence-building measures, including prisoner exchanges and new areas of disengagement. We emphasize that only through constructive dialogue and the consistent adherence to the principles of international law can a lasting solution to this crisis be crafted and implemented. We hope that in 2020 all parties can work towards the full implementation of the Minsk agreements under the auspices of the Normandy format and the Trilateral Contact Group. Regarding other border conflicts, including the situations in Nagorno Karabakh and Transnistria, we reiterate that the guiding principles of the Charter of the United Nations with regard to territorial integrity and self-determination for displaced populations remain sacrosanct. We welcome the OSCE's mediation efforts for the comprehensive settlement of those disputes. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is a small island developing State, as I said earlier, with an open economy and no standing army to insulate us against many of today's complex security challenges. We owe our continued peaceful existence to the rules-based multilateral system, where all regional and subregional organizations and their member States work together to advance our common interests of peace and prosperity for all. We recognize that the OSCE, as a key partner to the United Nations, has an important place in our global governance architecture. We extend our fullest support to the OSCE as it continues to promote peace, security and development.
