Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank Her Excellency the
Secretary of Foreign Affairs of Mexico for having
honoured us with her participation in the meeting this
morning. I should also like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We are confident that you will
demonstrate outstanding and wise leadership as you
guide the work of the Council.
I also take this opportunity to convey my
gratitude to the delegation of Lebanon for its
outstanding presidency of the Council last month.

I should also like to thank you, Sir, for having
organized this open debate on children and armed
conflict, which, quite clearly, is an issue of great
importance to all of us. I pay tribute to the role played
by Mexico in this area as Chair of the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict. Our thanks go also to
the Secretary-General, and we thank his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and
the Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF for their
introductory statements and for all their efforts in this
field.

I cannot fail to pay tribute to Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
for her outstanding role on the protection of children in
armed conflict, including through her work which
benefits Yemen.

Based on our deep-rooted conviction that children
are our future, the Republic of Yemen was among the
first States to accede to the international Convention on
the Rights of the Child, in May 1991. It has also
acceded to that Convention's two Optional Protocols.
In addition to submitting periodic reports on the
implementation of these instruments, Yemen has
ratified a number of international conventions in this
field, including the Convention concerning Minimum
Age for Admission to Employment and the Convention
concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for
the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour.
Furthermore, the Republic of Yemen has passed
legislation on children, including Law 45 of 2002, on
the rights of the child, and Law 24 of 1992, on
assistance to minors. We have also incorporated
provisions on the protection of the rights of the child
elsewhere in our legislation.

In addition to this legislative framework, the
Republic of Yemen has set up institutional mechanisms
to ensure that the legislation is implemented in
practice, including the High Council for Motherhood
and Children, the Ministry of Human Rights, which
also attaches great importance to the rights of the child,
and departments and offices responsible for children's
issues within the framework of other ministries and
institutions. Children's issues have had an extremely
10-40838
important place in all national development strategies,
programmes and plans adopted since the 1990s.

My delegation has familiarized itself with the
ninth report of the Secretary-General on this topic
(S/2010/181), which we have before us, and we should
like to share with the Council the following
clarifications. First, we should like to reaffirm the
complete commitment of Yemen to protecting children
and promoting their rights. Secondly, during its violent
clashes and military confrontations with rebels in
Sa'dah province, the Government of Yemen paid due
attention to the safety and security of all citizens and in
its military actions acted prudently so as to ensure that
there were no victims among the civilian population,
especially children. We did so by ensuring the security
of various public institutions, especially schools and
hospitals.

Thirdly, on 21 May, the political leadership of our
country decided to release all detainees who had been
arrested within the framework of the insurgency
launched by rebels in Sa'dah. Fourthly, Yemen has
discharged its responsibilities to its citizens affected by
the war, despite the very limited resources available to
it. Our country cooperates with humanitarian agencies
providing assistance to internally displaced persons
and people affected by these events by ensuring and
facilitating humanitarian access to refugee camps to
enable these agencies to see the situation in the camps.
The most recent visit to these camps was that of the
Secretary-General's Representative for the Human
Rights of Internally Displaced Persons.

Fifthly, the Government of Yemen is currently
striving to strengthen peace and security, launch
reconstruction efforts and ensure the return of
displaced persons by guaranteeing decent living
conditions to all citizens, including children. The
Government of Yemen is determined to include
children's issue in future development programmes and
in the reconstruction plans for Sa'dah province. In this
respect, we call on the international community to
support the efforts of the Government of Yemen in this
field.

Sixthly and finally, my country reaffirms the
primary responsibility of the State to protect children
and promote their rights. We also reaffirm the
importance of ensuring the relevance and accuracy of
the information and data collected, as well as the
10-40838
importance of consulting with the State concerned
when reports are being prepared.

In conclusion, we must note that despite the
efforts and achievements made in protecting the rights
of children in armed conflict, a great deal remains to be
done to put an end to their suffering. Here I should like
to refer in particular to continued violations against
Arab children in the occupied Palestinian territories.
The international community is urged to meet its
responsibilities by putting an end to the ongoing
occupation and thus to enable Palestinian children to
live in peace.

