Mr. Kolby (Norway): Mr. President, I would first
like to thank you for this initiative of having an open
meeting on the situation in West Africa. I think it is
very important that countries that are not members of
the Security Council should also have an opportunity to
listen in on this debate and to speak. I would also like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Mr. Ibrahima Fall
for his comprehensive presentation.

During the last year, the conflicts in West Africa
have been on the agenda of the Council on several
occasions. We have discussed issues relating to Liberia
and Sierra Leone, the humanitarian situation in Guinea
and the situation in Guinea-Bissau. It is clear to us that
these conflicts are intertwined in both causes and
effects.

A lasting solution and a durable peace in West
Africa can, in our view, be found only by the peoples
and countries of West Africa themselves. The United
Nations, the humanitarian agencies and the donor
community could do more to facilitate negotiations and
support peace-building. But they cannot create peace if
the parties to the conflict do not want peace or if they
do not take stronger responsibility for implementing
existing agreements and resolutions of the Security
Council.

The road from conflict to development must
therefore be charted by the countries of the region. If
there is no strong ownership of peace and development
in the region and good governance and democratic rule
continue to be the exception rather than the rule, the
international community will remain constrained in its
support. Short-term humanitarian assistance to help the
innocent victims of war will continue, but the
confidence which is necessary for investing in long-
term reconstruction and development will continue to
be lacking.

Stronger and more accountable political
leadership is necessary to lift West Africa from the
morass of conflict. We welcome the leadership of
President Konare of Mali in his initiative on the small
arms moratorium, in his leadership in the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and in
bringing the situation in West Africa as a whole before
the Security Council.

Lately, there have been some positive
developments. We are pleased to note that the political
dialogue between the Mano River countries is
continuing. The proposed summit meeting between the
three heads of State can be an important step forward.
We welcome the establishment of the Secretary-
General's regional Office for West Africa, in Senegal.
We encourage regional actors such as ECOWAS, the
Organization of African Unity and the Mano River
Union to engage in constructive cooperation with the
newly established office.

The progress already achieved in West Africa
needs to be strengthened. It is important that West
Africa receive continued international attention and
resources.

Norway is contributing to the work for peace in
West Africa, among others, through the Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development in West Africa, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme in
Sierra Leone and the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL). Norway has also supported the
work for the ECOWAS moratorium on small arms in
West Africa and is considering extending our "Training
for Peace" programme to include West Africa.

In Sierra Leone, Norway congratulates the United
Nations and UNAMSIL on their continued
contributions to a peaceful solution. DDR is key here
to securing lasting peace. The recent improvements,
particularly demobilization of former combatants and
UNAMSIL deployment to previously rebel-held
territory, are encouraging signs. The DDR programme
is, however, severely underfinanced. If demobilized
combatants are not offered economic opportunities,
they may turn to activities that can undermine the
peace process. For the long-term stability ofthe region,
it is crucial that income-generating activities be
created. Ex-combatants should be offered an
opportunity to participate in the revitalization of the
country's economy. Norway has contributed $1.5
million to the DDR fund. We encourage other members
to increase their financial contributions.

Long, drawn-out civil wars in West Africa have
created one of the world's most serious forced
displacement situations. Humanitarian actors in
general, and United Nations agencies in particular, are
doing an important job in West Africa to alleviate the
situation. But again, insufficient funding is a major
problem. We hope and believe that the imminent
establishment of the regional Office for West Africa,
together with existing regional structures, will
contribute to addressing this grave problem.

With the current situation improving in Sierra
Leone, donors should encourage this development by
contributing to the newly launched consolidated
appeals for 2002. Norway has recently provided an
additional $2.2 million to West Africa, primarily
channelled through the United Nations system.

The security situation in the region gives cause
for concern. We appeal to the Governments in the
region, together with regional cooperative structures, to
create a better climate for security and stability.

