Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): I am pleased to take the
floor on behalf of members of the Group of Friends of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, namely,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, the
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, the United Kingdom,
Uruguay and my own country, Switzerland. The Group
of Friends thanks the French presidency of the Security
Council for organizing today's open debate and for
keeping protection of civilians high on the agenda. We
also thank today's briefers for their statements.

It is right that the protection of civilians be
discussed by the Security Council on a regular
basis, to reaffirm the necessity for full respect and
implementation of the norms and principles related to
the protection of civilians as enshrined in international
human rights law, human rights and refugee law and
in international criminal law. Parties to armed conflict
must be reminded time and again that even wars have
rules, and that those rules apply to all.

We continue to call on the Security Council to
systematically uphold core protection-of-civilians
standards. The latest report (S/2016/447) of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians clearly
indicates that the situation is worsening in a number
of areas. Indiscriminate attacks on civilians are
widespread in many contemporary conflicts. Schools
and medical personnel and facilities are regularly
and increasingly targeted. Access restrictions on
humanitarian workers impede the delivery of assistance.
A growing number of parties to armed conflict openly
disregard long-established rules of international
humanitarian law, especially with regard to the conduct
of hostilities or of persons no longer participating in
hostilities. In that context, the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2286 (2016) by the Council, on health
care in armed conflict and the protection of medical
personnel and facilities - an adoption with a large
number of sponsors - sends an important signal.
Despite the numerous violations observed in recent
years, international law is clear: the wounded and the
sick, medical personnel and humanitarian personnel
exclusively engaged in medical duties, their means of
transport and equipment, as well as hospitals and other
medical facilities, must be respected and protected.
At the World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul,
States, civil society and humanitarian leaders
consistently asserted that international humanitarian
law, human rights law and refugee law are more
relevant than ever. Global leaders announced
significant commitments to enhance compliance with
international humanitarian law and human rights law
through a spectrum of concrete measures.

Turning to peacekeeping operations, we want to
stress that protecting the civilian population and persons
who are no longer taking part in hostilities is not just
another task of the United Nations; it is seen by many as
the essence of the United Nations. The implementation
of the recommendations emanating from the peace
operations review presents a key opportunity; the review
highlights the tools we need to enable United Nations
peacekeeping missions to leverage all their components
to effectively protect civilians. Such a mission-wide
task requires a solid foundation in the form of clear and
pragmatic mandates that reflect what is feasible on the
ground. A whole-of-mission approach to the protection
of civilians is essential. Mission leadership can play an
essential role, and the civilian and police components
of missions can contribute to protecting civilians just
as much as the military components, depending on
the situation.

Political engagement and support for political
settlements should be seen as an integral part of this
effort. The best way to protect civilians is by preventing
armed conflict in the first instance and, if this fails,
by ending armed conflicts through a negotiated and
inclusive settlement. We also believe that establishing
accountability is essential to making progress on
protection issues and in this regard welcome the fact that
missions such as the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic are tasked with
supporting the fight against impunity and the work of
the International Criminal Court.

We further believe that tailored mission planning
is crucial for the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations. In this context, we see great potential
for a phased mandating process that ensures a sound
alignment between the needs on the ground and
available resources. We also need a systematic review
of mandates after an initial period, in close consultation
with troop- and police-contributing countries.

We see benefits in mandates that give clear
guidelines on the distribution of tasks. In this context,
we welcome the establishment of senior protection-of-
civilians advisers and comprehensive protection-of-
civilians strategies in all missions with such a mandate.
Such approaches pave the way for close cooperation
with all actors involved and for the further development
of best practices and approaches that are tailor-made
to specific contexts. Enhanced conflict analysis is
also necessary for mission planning, and we welcome
the decision of the Secretary-General to revise
existing conflict-analysis methodologies and to set
up a centralized analysis and planning capacity in the
Secretary-General's Office. Furthermore, protection of
civilians must be an integral part of the pre-deployment
training for both uniformed and civilian personnel.

A coherent approach across the United Nations
system is fundamental for efficient cooperation between
the United Nations and local actors, non-governmental
organizations and regional and other international
organizations. Let us also not forget that there are
pressing protection challenges in several conflicts,

including situations on the Council's agenda, where
there are currently no peacekeeping operations, and that
these also have to be addressed. A gender perspective
is a key component of effective protection. Field-based
United Nations missions must reach out to women and
girls not only to ensure that their specific needs are
taken into account but also to realize their full potential
and engage them as protectors.

The Group of Friends also takes note of the Kigali
Principles on the protection of civilians currently
endorsed by 30 countries aiming at reinforcing the
protection of civilians by troop- and police-contributing
countries in the framework of peacekeeping operations.

Finally, missions can succeed only ifboth uniformed
and civilian personnel act in the spirit ofthe mandate as
well as of the overarching goals of the United Nations.
Repeated incidents of sexual exploitation and abuse
by United Nations representatives in peacekeeping
missions have painfully reminded us how devastating
the actions of a few individuals can be for an entire
organization and in particular for the lives of those
whom they should be protecting.

