Ms. Meitzad (Israel): Once again, some of the
speakers in the Chamber today have demonstrated
that they will not let the facts confuse them when they
decide to falsely attack Israel, rather than to establish
a sincere, meaningful conversation about the situation.
The remarks in the Council today can be interpreted
only as a clear lack of knowledge or an explicit choice
to perpetuate the biased approach against Israel in
this house.

In our statement this morning we stated that the
some might try to balance the criticism of Palestinian
terrorism by condemning Israeli construction, and
that some might even criticize the construction while
ignoring Palestinian terrorism. Unfortunately, that
prediction has came true too many times. Israel strongly
rejects any attempts to draw moral equivalents between
construction and terrorism. It is not only morally false,
but it has also provided justification for terrorism.

The Iranian representative sat here and blamed
Israel for all that is wrong in the Middle East, when in
fact the true destabilizing force in the region is Iran. Not
only is Iran the world's leading sponsor of terrorism, it
also makes no secret about its intentions to seek the
destruction of another Member State. I do not need to
remind the representatives sitting in the Chamber today
that this is the same Iran that launched a ballistic missile
with the words "Israel should be wiped offthe face ofthe
Earth" written on its side. Just a week ago, Iran held its
yearly demonstration of hate for Israel. Among crowds
of people burning the Israeli and American flags and
chanting "Death to Israel", the Iranian Revolutionary
Guards' second in command threatened that its proxy,
Hizbullah, had more than 100,000 rockets in Lebanon,
ready to be launched at Israel.

Hassan Nasrallah, the head of internationally
recognized terrorist group Hizbullah, does not miss any
opportunity to thank its main benefactor, Iran. Nasrallah
admits that Hizbullah's funds and rockets come from
the same source, that is, the generous Ayatollah of
Tehran. To the Lebanese delegation, I would like to say:
those living in glass houses should not throw stones.
And those with terrorist organizations as part of their
Governments should not criticize the most progressive
and liberal democracy in the Middle East.

The representative of Kuwait, speaking on behalf
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC),
the very same organization that just a week ago tried
to make the case that attacks against Israel were not
terrorism, today had the audacity to compare Israel to
Da'esh. Are there no limits to what the OIC is willing
to say?

Lastly, to my Palestinian colleagues in the
Chamber, I would like to say that the only way to
address the outstanding problem between the two sides
is byjoining us for direct negotiations. That is the only
way to turn the vision of the two States for two peoples
into a reality. Israel wants and prays for peace, but we
cannot make any progress unless we put an end to terror
and incitement and finally agree to direct, face-to-face
negotiations. Peace will not come by evading tough
decisions and compromises.

The meeting rose at 3.55 pm.
