Mr. Takasu (Japan): Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate on the
situation in Afghanistan. I join previous speakers in
thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Koenigs, for his comprehensive and
informative briefing.

Since the last debate on this topic in the Security
Council, in March this year (see S/PV.5641), we have
been encouraged by certain progress made in
Afghanistan. In the area of economic development,
positive economic figures have been reported and the
finalization of the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy is under way. Regional initiatives, including
the convening of the peace jirga in August, have
contributed to the process of establishing peace and
security in the region.

Those positive signs of progress notwithstanding,
the challenges facing Afghanistan are enormous, and
problems related to security, narcotics and corruption
have yet to be overcome. Sustained and coordinated
international efforts to assist the country are essential. I
take this opportunity to reaffirm Japan's unwavering
commitment to supporting Afghanistan in its efforts to
stabilize and reconstruct the nation.

I would also like to underscore the central role
that the United Nations has been playing in
coordinating international efforts to address these and
other challenges. Japan commends the work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and its staff, who are operating under very
difficult conditions. In particular, I would like to
express our deep appreciation to Mr. Koenigs for his
service and his dedication to the fulfilment of the
indispensable role of the United Nations.

The security situation in Afghanistan remains a
source of deep concern. In particular, we are seriously
concerned about the increasing number of abduction
cases and suicide attacks. Among the various efforts to
improve the security situation, security sector reform
has a key role to play. We support the efforts of
President Karzai and his Government in that area and
look forward to further initiatives and achievements in
the future. As regards the disbandment of illegal and
armed groups (DIAG) process, in which Japan is acting
as lead country, I was encouraged by a recent report
from the embassy in Kabul that over the past year
momentum has been regained and progress achieved in
the areas of both policy and operations. At the same
time, I must emphasize that, in order for further
progress to be made, it is essential to carry out the
recommendations put forth at the conference held in
Tokyo in June this year, including improving the
coordination between DIAG and other areas of
security-sector reform, such as police reform.

In addressing the threat posed by terrorists in
Afghanistan, sustained international efforts are needed
to supplement the efforts of the Afghan Government
itself. Security Council resolution 1776 (2007) stresses
the necessity of such international efforts, including
those of the International Security Assistance Force
and the Operation Enduring Freedom coalition. We
welcome the position taken by the Council. Japan is
determined to continue its supply operations to vessels
conducting maritime interdiction operations. Shortly,
the Government of Japan intends to submit to the Diet
for its approval a bill providing the legal basis for
continuing its maritime supply operations in the Indian
Ocean.

Japan shares the concern expressed in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2007/555) over the
linkage between the increasingly critical narcotics
issue and reconstruction and nation-building. Counter-
narcotics actions must be strengthened, together with
capacity-building, in the months to come. As part of its
integrated approach to addressing issues such as
poverty, security and narcotics, Japan has promoted
comprehensive rural development, with efforts to
develop agriculture and rural communities at its core.

Japan has a strong interest in human resources
development and has provided technical cooperation

for the training of teachers and the reconstruction of
more than 300 schools. We intend to further expand our
assistance to support the national education strategic
plan in areas such as literacy education and the
building of schools. To date, we have implemented
assistance amounting to $1.24 billion and we will
implement the remaining $210 million of the amount
pledged at the London Conference, with particular
focus on improvement of the security situation and
advancing economic development.

The Secretary-General reports that UNAMA will
focus on consolidating its presence, while expanding
its international staff. In light of the current security
conditions, we support this direction as a reasonable
one. Japan takes note of the suggestion recently made
by some Member States of appointing a new United
Nations special envoy. We look forward to a more
detailed, concrete proposal to that effect. At the same
time, we reaffirm that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has played a central role in the
coordination of the international efforts for
Afghanistan.

Japan will chair the G8 in 2008, succeeding
Germany. The issues of Afghanistan will be one of the
major topics to be discussed at G8 meetings. In
keeping with our steadfast commitment to Afghanistan,
Japan will also host a meeting of the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board in Japan next year.
Japan will continue its close cooperation with the
United Nations aimed at achieving a stable and
prosperous Afghanistan.

