Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for keeping us updated on the
political situation in Ukraine. We also thank Mr. John
Ging and Mr. Ivan Simonovic' for their briefings on the
humanitarian situation in the country.

I would like to begin by deploring the death of four
demonstrators as the result of a remotely detonated
device, on 22 February in Kharkiv. We hope that
terrorism will not spread. Ukraine is a country that has
already suffered greatly; it needs to rebuild a peaceful
society in which its citizens will not have to fear for their
lives or well-being. In that connection, we were pleased
to hear that, since the signing of the Minsk agreements,
there has been a decrease in tensions in Ukraine and
progress has been achieved - for example, on prisoner
exchanges between the parties.

Nevertheless, it is difficult to begin to speak of a
political solution when we know that, since the ceasefire
entered into force on 15 February, 60 Ukrainian
soldiers and an unknown number of separatists and
civilians have died. Indeed, confrontations persist in
some regions of the country. We once again urge the
parties to fully implement the ceasefire.

According to the package of measures adopted on
12 February, the deadline for the withdrawal of heavy
weaponry will expire tomorrow, 7 March. That process
was developed with limited access by the Special
Monitoring Mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Chile believes
that the process must be transparent and that the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine must be given
an inventory of the weapons in the country and full
access to information on the withdrawal so that it can
play its full role in monitoring the ceasefire and the
arms stockpiles.

Despite those difficulties, it will be able to manage
this phase without major setbacks, in accordance with
the programme established in the package of measures,
which should not interfere with the establishment of
working groups and the finding of a political solution
to the conflict. We are also concerned that access was
not given to a United Nations rescue team following
a methane explosion in a Donetsk mine. We stress
the fact that access to humanitarian and emergency
support must be unrestricted throughout the territory of
Ukraine, and the authorities must ensure the protection
of the entire Ukrainian population.

It is necessary to put a clear end to the confrontation
so that the international community and the Government
of Ukraine can concentrate their efforts and resources
on dealing with the humanitarian and economic crisis.
Ukraine will need all the help it can get in addressing the
humanitarian crisis, which has left more than 1 million
people displaced. The Government must find lasting
solutions for the provision of housing, employment
and social services and the integration of those people
who, because of the conflict, will not be able to return
to their places of origin. In that vein, we are pleased
that the international community is supporting the
Government's reform programme, and we hope that
it will continue to support the implementation of the
necessary changes.

