Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing
on the Secretary-General's third report (S/2016/830) on
the evolution of the threat posed by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, or Da'esh, to international peace
and security, and on the range of activities to combat it
undertaken by the United Nations in support to Member
States.

The report notes that Da'esh has continued to suffer
military defeats in Iraq and Syria and to lose territory
and the financial capacity to govern. While that would
seem to be encouraging, there are many reasons for
us to feel seriously concerned, especially in view of
the diversification of the threat posed by Da'esh. Its
ability to adapt to new circumstances, which allows
it to expand its action geographically and change its
modus operandi, means that we are constantly facing
new challenges and diminishes our ability to react and
respond.

The dangerous personal relationships among
terrorists; the growing number of foreign terrorist
fighters who are returning to Europe and the Maghreb as
a result of the military pressure currently being exerted
in Iraq and Syria; the use of so-called broken travel,
encryption and the dark net; the planning of multiple
and simultaneous attacks; the actions perpetrated by
individuals or small groups; the use of the Internet
and cyberspace; the use of encrypted messaging
systems and closed forums; the building of an ever-
increasing transnational network of sympathizers and
fighters; and the proliferation of online propaganda
are all manifestations of Da'esh's rapid evolution and
adaptation to new conditions. Particularly repellent is
the use of sexual violence against Yazidi women and
girls in Iraq and Syria, as well as other minorities
trapped in the conflict, which we firmly condemn.

The report focuses on South-East Asia, Yemen and
East Africa and considers the revitalization of foreign
terrorist networks in South-East Asia, the Da'esh
leadership's interest in Yemen and the emergence of
Da'esh cells in Somalia. Since we are far from winning
the battle against terrorism and its despicable partisans,
we must ask ourselves where we are failing and what

we can do, both in this forum and nationally, to combat
them more effectively and forcefully.
First, and as the Secretary-General's report clearly
indicates, the primary responsibility falls to States. We
welcome the measures adopted by some countries, as
reflected in the Secretary-General's report. We also
note the remaining shortfalls, including the difficulty
encountered by some countries in adopting measures to
implement resolution 2178 (2014) or Security Council
resolutions on preventing terrorism and its financing.

We are aware that the goodwill and resolve of
States alone are often not sufficient for the national
implementation of comprehensive counter-terrorism
strategies. For many, it is also and above all necessary
that they receive technical and financial assistance. We
are also aware that at other times, what is lacking is not
resources but rather the political will. We stress the need
for a unified voice in affirming that the fight against
terrorism does not allow for ambiguity or doublespeak.

Members of the international community also
have a shared responsibility to act jointly and in
solidarity in order to more effectively and efficiently
combat terrorism. It is in the interests of all for the
United Nations to be able to play the role of primary
coordinator among States and subregional, regional and
international organizations. That perception should be
shared by all members of the international community.
To that end, we should also consider strategies to build
confidence among various States and regions, at all
times highlighting that the ultimate objective is the
common good - the good of all.

I cannot conclude without noting that as we develop
counter-terrorism strategies, we must always bear
in mind the obligations of States, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, including international human rights law and
international humanitarian law. We should also not lose
sight of the fact that by promoting the rule of law and
fundamental liberties, and by encouraging inclusive,
diverse, multicultural societies, we will enable
new and future generations to practice and choose
tolerance, which is probably the most important tool for
neutralizing any manner of extremism.

