The Secretary-General: I thank you, Sir, for
giving me the honour of briefing the Council from
Ramallah. I deeply apologize for being late, which was
due to my continuing engagement in Israel. I have only
just arrived. As you know, I am now well into my third
day of an ongoing mission throughout the region. I want
to thank the Security Council for its strong support for
my efforts.

Ramallah is my fifth stop on a journey that has
so far included Qatar, Kuwait, Egypt and Israel. I will
continue on to Jordan, Saudi Arabia and other countries
of the region, if necessary. I have had intensive and
fruitful discussions with the leadership in all countries.
I also had a very meaningful meeting with Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas in Qatar and with United
States Secretary of State John Kerry, as well as the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States,
Mr. Nabil El-Arabi, in Cairo late last night. I have also
had the opportunity to meet the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Norway, who was visiting the region, and to
have a telephone conversation with President Hollande
of France. We exchanged our views and discussed the
current situation in the region. I am very grateful to
the many countries that have been engaging in the
diplomatic efforts to bring an end to this crisis.

I am sure that members of the Council will
understand that at this highly sensitive moment, I cannot
be expected to publicly reveal the details. Suffice it to
say that it is my hope and belief that these talks will
lead to results and an end to the fighting in the very
near future. Of course, there are many obstacles and
complexities. This is a mission of solidarity and peace.
But just as I landed in the region, I was greeted with
the news of the terrible fighting in Shejaiya, reflecting
the enormous human toll of the fighting and the scale
of the challenges before us. I have carried a three-part
message at every turn ofmy Visit: first, stop the fighting;
secondly, start the dialogue; and thirdly, tackle the root
causes.

A ceasefire is essential, but without addressing
the deeper issues we will never solve the problem; we
will merely delay it for yet another time. The cycle will
continue, except the bitterness and hatred will become
that much more entrenched each time it comes around.
Quite simply, if a people are left with despair and
occupation, the problem Will not disappear; it will only
grow.

The most promising prospect of a ceasefire comes
in the form of the initiative put forward by Egypt on the
basis ofthe November 2012 understanding on a ceasefire.
This effort has garnered the support of President Abbas
and the Arab League. Unfortunately, Hamas has yet to
respond positively. I encourage all those with influence
to urge constructive action. This is the most meaningful
path to peace. I have also discussed Israel's legitimate
security concerns with Prime Minister Netanyahu and
Defense Minister Ya'alon, and I am going to continue
my meetings with President Peres and other ministers.

I once again strongly condemn the indiscriminate
rocket fire launched by Hamas and Islamic Jihad from
Gaza into Israel. I am also alarmed by Israel's heavy
response and the corresponding high civilian death toll.
Since the Council was briefed on Sunday, the violence
has reached even more alarming levels. Yet again, too
many civilians, including many children, are paying
the price for this latest escalation. I once again urge all
parties to rally behind a collective international effort
to end the fighting. There is no time to lose.

Immediately following this briefing, I will get the
latest update from our United Nations team in Gaza.
I want to stress how deeply proud I am of our many
United Nations colleagues, with the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) in the lead, courageously assisting
the people of Gaza in such difficult circumstances.
They are providing crucial relief and shelter to civilians
in imminent danger. The escalation of violence is now
acutely affecting UNRWA's regular operations. Some
23 UNRWA installations are closed as a result of the
conflict. A total of 77 UNRWA installations have
been damaged since 1 June as a result of the conflict.
The premises have been used to store weapons. This
is unacceptable. Today, about 110,000 people - more
than 5 per cent of the population of Gaza - are seeking
shelter with UNRWA.

In the past, our premises in southern Lebanon
and Gaza have been hit with serious loss of life. I call
on Israel to exercise particular care to avoid another
unfortunate incident. I urge all present to respond to
UNWRA's emergency flash appeal for $115 million to
address the most pressing humanitarian needs of the
people of Gaza. We must do all we can to alleviate
their suffering. I thank the many countries that have
already generous humanitarian assistance to the flash
appeal for UNRWA, including $47 million announced
by United States Secretary of State John Kerry. I also
thank United Nations staff, including my Special
Coordinator on the ground, Mr. Robert Serry, for their
relentless efforts to negotiate much-needed spaces to
respond to humanitarian needs.

The international community, including the
Council, as recently as Sunday evening has issued
numerous calls for an end to violence and for the
protection of civilians. We as the international
community have to assume responsibility for what is
the result of a collective failure to advance a political
solution for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We
cannot return to the status quo ante - a concern that
Palestinians and Israelis both share.

Core elements of resolution 1860 (2009) remain
unimplemented. They include an end to weapons
smuggling, the full opening of the crossings and
bringing Gaza back under one legitimate Palestinian
Government that accepts and adheres to the
commitments of the Palestine Liberation Organization.

Sustainable peace and security will be achieved
only through a negotiated political settlement. Only
durable progress, including on socioeconomic and
governance issues, can permanently stabilize Gaza.

It is imperative to address the issue of governance.
Tens of thousands of employees hired after 2007 and
working in Gaza are not being paid, while more than
60,000 employees continue to receive salaries from
Ramallah without performing essential Government
functions in Gaza.

The United Nations remains prepared to help
coordinate and consult with all concerned parties.

This is the third time as Secretary-General that I
have had to come on an emergency mission to the region
to help end a crisis. That means that the children of
Gaza are now living through the third major assault in
the past five years of their young lives. The horror and
upheaval is beyond imagination. The cycle of suffering
must end. The parties must seize the opportunity not
only to renew a ceasefire, but also to support a durable
political, security, institutional and socioeconomic
progress that stabilizes Gaza. The parties must also
heed the Council's call to return to negotiations in order
to find an end to this conflict through a viable two-
State solution.

As I have repeatedly emphasized on my mission,
Israelis, but also Palestinians, need to feel a sense of
security. Palestinians, but also Israelis, need to see a
horizon of hope. Both sides need to be reassured that
international humanitarian law counts and that there
will be justice for all. Let us do our part for all the
peoples of this region.

Lastly, I hope the Council will understand that
I have a series of important meetings in Ramallah.
Therefore, I will be able to remain at this meeting until
6.50 pm. here. I will be very happy to listen as much as
I can. I count on your continued support and leadership,
Sir.

