Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): The Indonesian delegation
would like to express its appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his thorough and informative report concerning
the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, submitted pursuant to
resolution 1036 (1996). Our appreciation is also extended
to the Secretary-General's Special Envoy, Ambassador
Edouard Brunner, and his Deputy and Head of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG), Mr.
Liviu Bota, as well as to all the personnel of UNOMIG
who have carried out their tasks under difficult conditions.

My delegation is dismayed to note from the report
that political negotiations between the parties have not
progressed; the core issue - namely, the definition of a
political status for Abkhazia - remains unresolved, thus
bringing the political process to a standstill. The
uncompromising stance of the Abkhaz side has indeed
rendered negotiations more difficult. To break the current
impasse, there is a clear need for both parties to intensify
their efforts, under the auspices of the United Nations and
with the assistance of the Russian Federation as
facilitator, to achieve an early and comprehensive political
settlement of the conflict. Indonesia would like to
reaffirm its full support for the efforts of the Secretary-
General and his Special Envoy aimed at achieving a
comprehensive political settlement of the conflict based
upon respect for Georgia's sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.

Compounding our concern regarding the lack of
progress on the political front are the continuing troubles
on the ground, including the precarious situation in which
internally displaced persons find themselves and the
persistent mine threat. The humanitarian situation arising
from this conflict remains a source of considerable
concern for our delegation. In this regard, my delegation
would like to underline the urgent need for all refugees
and displaced persons to return to their homes in secure
conditions, in accordance with international law and as set
out in the Quadripartite Agreement. We would also like
to emphasize the indiscriminate sufferings which have
been inflicted upon the civilian population, peace-keepers
and international community observers by the laying of
mines in the Gali region. This situation must be
immediately redressed.

It is therefore a source of satisfaction to my
delegation to note the important contribution of UNOMIG
and the peace-keeping force of the Commonwealth of
Independent States to the alleviation of these serious
situations. UNOMIG continues to carry out its mandate in
parts of the security and restricted-weapons zones and in
the Kodori valley in an exemplary manner. However, the
Mission is unable to operate effectively in other areas,
such as the Gali sector, since they have become unstable.
The dangers posed to the Mission and the CIS peace-
keeping force, as well as to the population of the area,
from the persistent mine threat to which we alluded
earlier, as well as the lawlessness, including acts of

 

murder, armed robbery, looting, extortion and intimidation,
are unacceptable. Our delegation, therefore, would like to
underline that it is essential for UNOMIG and the CIS
peace-keeping force personnel, as well as the local
population, to be granted safety, security and freedom of
movement. The fact that even the Abkhaz militia has little
control over this region and that the local population is
resorting to unofficial "self-defence groups" only
underlines, once again, the need to break the stalemate in
the negotiations.

Our delegation has noted that UNOMIG is involved in
protracted negotiations for the exchange of hostages and
that some of these exchanges have been brought to fruition.
Also, we are encouraged that the two sides, with the
assistance of UNOMIG and the CIS peace-keeping force,
are cooperating to solve common problems, such as the
fight against criminality, addressing security issues and
humanitarian needs, and establishing confidence-building
measures.

My delegation cannot fail to commend the cooperation
and coordination between UNOMIG and the CIS peace-
keeping force in the implementation of their respective
mandates that has enabled them to contribute to
stabilization in the zone of conflict. The cooperation
between UNOMIG and the CIS peace-keeping force has
permitted a number of successes in the rapprochement of
the parties to the conflict.

In line with our views expressed today, the Indonesian
delegation would like fully to support the draft resolution
before us. It is our hope that the parties will soon enter
constructive and substantial negotiations to bring about a
lasting and comprehensive peace.

