Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I congratulate New
Zealand on its presidency of the Security Council and
I thank you, Minister for Foreign Affairs McCully,
for presiding over this important debate, which is a
reflection of his country's responsible, principled
position vis-a-vis this issue and its commitment to
uphold the Security Council's mandate to contribute to
international peace and security.

We also reiterate our deep appreciation to the
delegation of Malaysia for its skilled leadership of
the Council in June, including the critical debate on
children and armed conflict (see S/PV.7463), and also
express our appreciation for Malaysia's efforts as Chair
of the Security Council Working Group on that topic.
I also thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his
briefing and his initial efforts in his important post.
We reaffirm our support for his mandate, as well as
our readiness to continue cooperation towards the
fulfilment of our common objectives, foremost among
them being to secure a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace.

Regrettably, we are no closer to that peace today than
we were when we met in the Chamber a year ago (see S/PV.7222), when my delegation appealed desperately
for the Council's intervention to halt Israel's slaughter
of innocent Palestinian children, women and men and
the wanton destruction of homes, schools, hospitals
and vital civilian infrastructure, which terrorized
and traumatized the entire civilian population in the
Gaza Strip and left hundreds of thousands of lives and
entire communities shattered and in ruins. On this day,
23 July, a year ago, we informed the Council that the
death toll from Israel's aggression had already reached
660 Palestinians and was rising. We alerted the Council
to the shocking fact that, even at that stage, two weeks
into the Israeli offensive, one third of the casualties
were children, more than half of them under 12 years
old, which exposed the brutality of the occupying force
and the false Israeli claims about respect for civilian
lives and international humanitarian law.

Those facts were later corroborated by the
Independent Commission of Inquiry appointed by the
Human Rights Council and by the Secretary-General's
report on children and armed conflict (S/2015/409),
which confirmed that by the end of Israel's assault
on Gaza the occupying forces had killed at least 551
children, ranging from week-old babies to 17-year-
olds, and killed 299 women among the more than 2,251
Palestinians killed, the majority civilians. The reports
also confirmed that over 11,000 Palestinians were
injured, including 3,540 women and 3,436 children,
with injuries so severe owing to the lethal weaponry and
wide-impact explosives used by Israel that an estimated
10 per cent of the injured civilians will suffer life-long
disabilities. The Independent Commission of Inquiry
also found that Israel persisted with its onslaught even
after early knowledge of the high casualty figures,
indicating a deliberate decision on the part of the Israeli
Government and military officials to inflict such harm,
a fact also confirmed by the testimonies of numerous
Israeli soldiers instructed to kill without mercy anyone
they encountered in Gaza - man, woman or child.

Despite those facts, our pleas to the Council were
to no avail. One year since the horrific devastation
mercilessly and deliberately inflicted on Gaza by
Israel, the occupying Power, not a single Israeli official
or soldier has been held accountable for those crimes,
committed so wantonly before the eyes of the world,
the vast human and physical wounds remain unhealed,
and hopes are rapidly fading for any relief from that
appalling injustice.
Families remain traumatized by that indescribable
loss, including 1,500 children orphaned by the killing
of their mothers and fathers, and more than 110,000
people remain homeless, forcibly displaced by Israel's
massive destruction of homes, and dependent on aid
for their survival. As Israel's blockade continues in
collective punishment of Gaza's 1.8 million Palestinians
and continues to obstruct reconstruction and recovery,
humanitarian conditions are worsening beyond
measure, as unemployment and food insecurity are
rising to unprecedented levels and become ever more
difficult to alleviate as donor support becomes harder
to secure. At this time, I must draw attention to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which provides
assistance to at least 70 per cent of Gaza's population,
the majority of whom are Palestine refugees. The
Agency now faces the most severe funding crisis since
it began operations, 65 years ago, threatening not only
its vital services in Palestine but also in Syria, Lebanon
and Jordan at a precarious time in the region. We
appeal for international support for UNRWA's essential
humanitarian work and stabilizing presence as a matter
of urgency, and we appeal to the United Nations to act
immediately to address the crisis.

While Gaza is being suffocated and dehumanized,
the rest of occupied Palestine continues to be ravaged
by Israel's vicious settlement campaign, settler terror
and repression, the confiscation of Palestinian land, the
demolition of Palestinian homes and the construction of
Israeli settlements, the wall and related infrastructure
persist, in grave breach of international law, in violation
of Security Council resolutions, and in flagrant
disrespect of the authoritative International Court of
Justice advisory opinion on the Legal consequences of
the construction ofa wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory (see A/ES-10/273), handed down 11 years
ago. The dire situation now faced by Palestinians in
Khirbet Susiya in the southern hills of Al-Khalil, who
are being threatened with the destruction of their entire
community and forced displacement, as extremist
settlers and illegal settlements further encroach on
their land and rights, as well as the plans for the forced
transfer of thousands of Palestinian Bedouins from
areas in and around occupied East Jerusalem, are just
two examples of that rabid Israeli colonization.

The Israeli occupying forces also continue to cause
civilian casualties through military raids and attacks
on protesters. The killing of 17-year-old Mohammed
Al-Kasbah, who was shot by Israeli soldiers in early
July at the Qalandiya checkpoint, brought unbearable
tragedy to yet another Palestinian family, this time to
a family that had already lost two of their other young
sons, Samer, age 15, and Yasser, age 11, to the brutality
of the occupation. Moreover, not a single day passes
where Palestinian civilians are not intimidated, arrested
and detained, including children, adding to the nearly
6,000 illegally imprisoned by Israel under inhumane
conditions and subjected to constant abuse and torture.
The plight of our prisoners and detainees has again
been highlighted by the 55-day hunger strike of Khader
Adnan, who was recently released from detention,
only to be detained immediately after his release in a
vulgar display of Israel's total control of every aspect
of Palestinian life.

Israel launched its war in the summer of 2014 and,
bearing in mind all the illegal actions perpetrated
thereafter, it had intentionally aimed to sabotage the
prospects for peace, by intensifying its collective
punishment of the Palestinian people and stripping
them of any hope for an end to the cruel occupation
and for the realization of their inalienable rights and
national aspirations.

That is why 4 despite the global calls for a just
solution based on two States within the pre-1967
borders, despite the historic compromise made by
the Palestinian leadership more than a quarter of a
century ago, despite over two decades of negotiations
and despite the passage of more than 48 years since
the adoption of resolution 242 (1967) - the dangerous
political impasse continues and peace remains elusive.
That is the direct outcome of Israel's illegal, combative
behaviour, by which it continues to deny the Palestinian
people their rights and to entrench its occupation in
violation of international law and all norms of morality
and decency. It is also a direct outcome of the Israeli
Government's rejection of peace and its bad faith
and obstruction of all attempts to revive negotiations
based on clear and credible parameters rooted in
Security Council resolutions. In reality, it has not only
undermined the efforts to salvage the two-State solution
but is actively destroying it.

As a result, the humanitarian and security situation
continues on a downward spiral and tensions continue
to rise, threatening total destabilization, which we have
repeatedly drawn the Council's attention to, in vain.
As the region experiences unprecedented turmoil and
extremism, imperiling entire States and endangering
international peace and security, we reiterate that
continuing destabilization poses grave risks that must
be averted. Human lives must be saved and the potential
of peace be restored.

While some believe that regional crises necessitate
turning away from Palestine to focus on other matters,
many also believe that solving the conflict now is
imperative for the future of the Middle East and
beyond. The latter rightly believes that ajust, peaceful
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict - the core
of the Arab-Israeli conflict - would open doors for a
new era in the region - one of stability, cooperation
and collective action for our common goals and also
our common problems. The promise of the Arab Peace
Initiative, one of the most important peace initiatives
the region has ever witnessed, is at the centre of that
belief. Regrettably, that Initiative has never been
reciprocated by Israel, which has continued to distort
and reject it.

Yet the State of Palestine remains committed to
the pursuit of peace, committed to international law,
as reflected in our decision to accede to the core
humanitarian and human rights law instruments, as well
as to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court, and committed to the purposes and principles of
the United Nations, whose resolutions we uphold and
for which we seek respect.

We insist that ajust peace is the only remedy for the
conflict and the violence, deprivation and instability
it engenders. We firmly reject claims that "now is not
the right time" for a solution. The time is actually long
overdue.

In 2015, as we witness the distress and instability
in Palestine and the region as a whole, we do not
have the luxury to continue delaying peace. The
Palestinian people can no longer delay realization of
their fundamental human rights, which they have been
so wrongly denied, nor accept rationales asking them
to endure further violations, suffering and indignities,
while the occupying Power is placated and appeased,
not even held accountable for its most egregious crimes.

Palestine seeks peace and coexistence with Israel,
but that must be based on freedom and justice. That
requires a complete end to the foreign occupation and
the colonial, racist policies that have fueled it for nearly
half a century. International law and human rights, not
military might and violence, must be the core of that
peace. Interim solutions or other palliatives to ease
or manage the situation will not suffice. The plight
of the Palestinian people - from occupied Palestine
to our refugee camps in the region and especially in
Syria, where that catastrophic conflict has brought
death, destruction, starvation and displacement to
Palestinian refugees along with the Syrian people who
are suffering so gravely - is an existential crisis that
urgently demands a just solution.

We therefore reiterate our call on the Security
Council to uphold its Charter duties and to act now
to adopt a resolution aimed at breaking the political
impasse and ushering in the achievement of lasting
peace and security. In that regard, we continue to
welcome and support the French initiative and call on
Council members to move forward now on reaffirming
the parameters for peace, based on the internationally
recognized terms of reference enshrined in the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles and
the Arab Peace Initiative, as well as on a clear time frame
for an end to the Israeli occupation, with international
monitoring and support for the implementation of a
peace agreement.

The foundations for peace must be firmly set
before this opportunity is lost to us and the two-State
solution is relegated to the archives of history. Israel
must be compelled to cease all of its illegal policies and
measures, whether the blockade or aggression against
Gaza, or the colonization and de facto annexation of the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, or the collective
punishment of the Palestinian people, all must be halted
and compliance with the law must be demanded.

Also, Israel must be held responsible for its crimes.

We recall here the Independent Commission of Inquiry's
findings on actions triggering criminal liability by
Israeli occupying forces, commanders and Government
leaders and the imperative of accountability. Peace and
accountability are not mutually exclusive; both can and
must be pursued, for impunity will always obstruct
peace and peace cannot exist without justice.
The Security Council should heed the global calls
to fulfil its responsibilities, which were echoed in the
appeals made to Council members during the 20 July
Arria Formula meeting on the Gaza crisis, which was
co-chaired by Malaysia and Jordan and was the first
Arria Formula meeting on Palestine since 1997. That
meeting highlighted voices from the ground and calls
for redress of the unsustainable situation in Gaza,
underscoring that this crisis and underlying issues must
be addressed immediately to avert another explosion
and must be addressed as an integral part of the overall
efforts to resolve the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. We
note that we recognize the necessity for Palestinian
unity and assure the Council of our ongoing efforts
to achieve reconciliation and empower the national
consensus Government to fulfil its duties.

Significantly, the Arria Formula meeting also
reaffirmed the universal view that a continued failure
to achieve a just solution and the continued denial of
Palestinian rights, including of Palestine's rightful
place among the community of nations, have severely
undermined international law and the international
system itself, including the credibility of the Security
Council. We therefore appeal again to the Council
and the international community to uphold the rule of
law and find the political will to achieve peace and to
make it a living reality that will finally bring relief to
our long-suffering people, the region and the global
community.

Despite so many failures and setbacks, the
Palestinian people still look to the Security Council
to act with conscience to contribute to the attainment
of peace and the realization of their rights, including
to independence in their State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, on the basis ofthe 1967 borders,
stressing that the Palestinian demand for freedom is
non-negotiable and is a prerequisite for lasting peace
and security.

