Mr. Christian (Ghana): Allow me to thank the
High Representative, Mr. Javier Solana, Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno and Under-Secretary-
General Gambari for their briefings. We wish to
commend the European Union for the security
provided during the elections period.

The elections in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the swearing into office of President Joseph
Kabila reflect the people's desire for peace, stability
and development. Similarly, the consolidation of peace
for socio-economic development in the country
requires enormous efforts to strengthen its democratic
institutions. That is all the more so because poorly
functioning institutions entrench corruption, chronic
economic mismanagement and repression of
opposition, and ill-disciplined and uncontrolled
security forces had almost led to the country's collapse.

We welcome the nomination of Mr. Antoine
Gizenga, leader of the Unified Lumumbist Party, as
Prime Minister. We hope that the Prime Minister will
engage in consultations will all political parties, civil
society and other stakeholders to enable him to form a
Government of national unity. Similarly, we welcome
the election of Mr. Vital Kamerhe as President of the
National Assembly, and we look forward to the successful
election of state governors, vice-governors and senators.

However, we wish to express concern about the
precarious security situation in the eastern part of the
country, where the national army force in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - the FARDC -
and the rebel fighters of the National Integrationist
Front - the FNI - are engaged in conflict,
particularly in the Ituri district. These armed conflicts
have led to an increase in the number of internally
displaced persons, forced labour and summary
executions. The lack of security has also resulted in
frequent violations of human rights and the rule of law.
The widespread culture of impunity that allows the
repetition of crimes by well-known persons who should
be protecting the population is of great concern to us. It
is, however, encouraging to note that the Government
of Rwanda is mediating talks between the Congolese
Government and General Laurent Nkunda's rebel group.
We urge both parties to rise above personal and sectional
interests and allow peace and stability to return to the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

While commending the United Nations, the
European Union, the international community and
Congo's development partners for their various
contributions to peace and stability in that country, we
also express our appreciation to the member countries
of the Great Lakes region for having signed a Pact
which, hopefully, will pave the way for security,
stability and development in the region. The provisions
of the Pact, which include a security action plan to
disarm rebel groups in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and along the border areas in
the Sudan, Kenya and Uganda, should help to bring
peace and stability to the region.

The implementation of the Pact will, however,
require financial support and coherent assistance from
the international community. It is also of utmost
importance that there be follow-up on the national
implementation of the legal protocols adopted in the
Pact. The protocols on governance, humanitarian and
social issues address the cruel violence against women
and children, the property rights of returning persons,
the protection of internally displaced persons and
economic programmes. There is also a non-aggression
and mutual defence protocol, under which those countries
will not tolerate the presence of insurgents on their
territories. Those protocols are of the utmost importance
and vital to peace and stability in the region.

Finally, we reiterate the crucial role of the
security and judicial sectors in post-conflict
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and we urge the
Government and its development partners to intensify
efforts in the area of judicial and security sector reforms.
That will undoubtedly require the support of the major
donor partners. We therefore urge the international
community not to abandon the Democratic Republic of
the Congo prematurely but instead to build a
partnership with the newly elected authorities,
consolidate peace and promote economic recovery.

