Mr. Ferrarin (Italy): In its presidential statement of
the 27 February last, the Security Council strongly deplored
the shooting down by the Cuban Air Force of two civil
aircraft, which had taken place three days earlier, resulting
in the death of four persons.

On the same occasion, the Council requested the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) to
investigate the incident and to report its findings to the
Council. The ICAO report has confirmed the basic facts:
two unarmed civil aircraft in flight were destroyed, while

"Means other than interception were available to
Cuba, such as radio communication, but had not been
utilized". (S/1996/509, annex, appendix B, para. 3.18)

The position of the Italian Government is fully
reflected in the statement issued by the Foreign Ministers
of the European Union on 26 February:

"Irrespective of the circumstances of the incident,

there can be no excuse for not respecting international

law and human rights norms". (S/1996/l45, annex)
The Italian Government deeply regrets the loss of lives
caused by this tragic event.

My delegation fully subscribes, therefore, to the
reaffirmation of the principle that States must refrain from
the use of weapons against civil aircraft in flight, which
is also contained in the resolution adopted by the ICAO
and forwarded to the Security Council with the report.
Such use is indeed a violation of the rules of customary
international law, irrespective of whether or not the
aircraft is within the territorial airspace of that State and
irrespective, as well, of whether or not that State has
ratified the Protocol introducing article 3 bis of the
Convention on International Civil Aviation.

On the other hand, we also believe that the ICAO
Council was correct in underlining the principle that each
contracting State shall take appropriate measures to
prohibit the deliberate use of any civil aircraft for any
purpose inconsistent with the aims of the Convention. The
draft resolution before the Council contains an important
reference to this principle.

Indeed, the text of the draft resolution, largely based
on the resolution adopted by the ICAO Council, contains
specific references to all principles governing international
civil aviation relevant to the issue under consideration,
while noting in its crucial paragraph that the unlawful
shooting down by the Cuban Air Force of the civil
aircraft violated the most basic of these principles.
For these reasons, Italy will vote in favour of the
draft resolution before the Council.

