Mr. Jacob (Israel): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency for this month, and to congratulate your
predecessor, the representative of Mauritius, for his
most able leadership.

The people and Government of Israel are
committed to negotiating a peaceful settlement to the
conflict in the Middle East. This is a commitment that
is unshakeable and rooted in our fundamental belief in
the right of all the peoples in the region to live in
freedom, peace and security. Even after more than a
year of violence, we remain committed to the agreed
terms of reference of the peace process, which require
the sides to engage in direct face-to-face negotiations
on the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973). Furthermore, we have accepted the
Mitchell plan and the Tenet recommendations in their
entirety as a road map out of the morass of conflict and
towards negotiations and a future of peace.

Israel demonstrated its commitment to peace in
the negotiations at Camp David in July 2000 and in the
unprecedented compromises and extraordinary risks we
were willing to take for the sake of peace. Such
compromises could have been accomplished only
within the framework of direct face-to-face

S/P\'.4478

 

negotiations. History has repeatedly shown that peace
cannot be imposed and that there can be no substitute
for direct talks between the parties.

Israel's far-reaching peace proposals were
rewarded with a deliberate campaign of violence and
terrorism. For 17 months, Israel has faced an
orchestrated campaign, incited and supported by the
highest levels of the Palestinian leadership. Israeli
civilians have been subjected to every manner of
terrorist atrocity: suicide bombers in crowded
restaurants and cafes, abductions and murders of our
citizens, ambushes and sniper attacks on the roads, and
missile attacks against our territory. Even as the
international community has firmly and repeatedly
called for a cessation of hostilities, the Palestinian
leadership has equivocated and taken half measures in
public, while continuing to plot violence in secret.

And now a new threat is emerging. Last week,
Turkish forces detained three individuals linked to Al-
Qaeda who had travelled from Afghanistan, through
Iran, to Turkey, and who intended - had they not been
arrested - to continue on to Lebanon and into Israel to
carry out a terrorist attack in an Israeli city.

The Palestinian leadership purports, before the
world, to condemn terrorism, while legitimizing and
supporting it at home. To Western audiences,
Palestinian representatives have been known to speak
in the language of peace, but to their own people they
speak in the language of hatred and holy war. Murder
and martyrdom are glorified in Palestinian Authority
schools and textbooks; members of Hamas, Islamic
Jihad and other terrorist groups are embraced as
national heroes. In December, when Chairman Arafat
was finally pressured sufficiently to call for a ceasefire,
he immediately undermined that call by making a
speech in which he called for a million martyrs to
sacrifice themselves on behalf of the Palestinian cause.
Here in the United Nations, the Palestinians often
declare their fidelity to the international campaign
against terror, but just as often they undermine that
claim by distinguishing between certain attacks and
others. Does the Palestinian side truly want us to
believe that attacking innocent Israeli children can be
considered a legitimate act of resistance?

The international community must make
absolutely clear that there is no justification
whatsoever for acts of terrorism. The current
international campaign against terrorism is predicated
on this principle: no distinctions are made between so-
called "good" terror and "bad" terror, or between the
terrorists and the regimes that harbour and support
them. The same must apply in this case, as well.

When Chairman Arafat made his historic
commitment, enshrined in his letter of 9 September
1993 to the late Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, he
showed no confusion as to what was considered
terrorism. He renounced terrorism fully and without
distinction, and committed himself to resolving all
outstanding issues on the basis of the agreed terms of
reference, through direct negotiations with Israel.
Furthermore, the Palestinians claim to have accepted
the Mitchell report, which defines terrorism without
distinction and calls for a complete cessation of
violence. How can that position possibly be consistent
with the Palestinian leadership's brazen support for
terrorism?

We must be clear: there is no cause so just, no
grievance so severe, no objective so noble, that it can
justify the deliberate killing of civilians.

Where do we go from here? It is our view that the
only path forward requires an immediate, complete and
unconditional cessation of violence as a crucial first
step in restarting the process and rebuilding trust
between the parties. Reaching a settlement of the
conflict cannot be done in an atmosphere of hatred and
violence, and negotiations cannot be conducted under
the threat of terror. That makes neither moral, nor
political, nor diplomatic sense. Israel cannot be
expected to sit down and negotiate with the very same
individuals who are supporting and engaging in terror.
Nor can the Palestinians purport to negotiate peace
while they prepare for a future conflict.

Such duplicity, in the midst of an unrelenting
terrorist campaign, sends a message to Israelis that the
Palestinians have still failed to come to terms with the
very right of the State of Israel to exist. It serves to
confirm the suspicion that, in the eyes of many
Palestinians, the peace process is simply war by
another name. If the Palestinian leadership truly
wanted to live peacefully side by side with Israel, it
would not be fuelling hatred and condoning the murder
of Israeli men, women and children on a daily basis.
The Palestinian leadership has failed to demonstrate,
either to the Israeli people or to the international
community, or, perhaps more importantly, to the

S/PV.4478

 

Palestinian people themselves, that its goal is peaceful
coexistence.

The only constructive action to be taken here is
for the international community to exert pressure on
the Palestinian leadership to abandon its campaign of
terror and embrace a peaceful solution to the conflict.
If the Council were to do anything other, it would send
the message that violence is acceptable. This is a
prescription for more violence and more terror and for
the worsening of the current state of affairs.

The international community must resist the
tendency to approach the conflict in the Middle East by
attempting to find some middle ground between
terrorists and their victims, to forge a compromise
between those who initiate violence and those who
must defend against it. There is no moral equivalence
between the two. For 17 months the Palestinians have
been intent on proving that Violence works; Israel is
intent on proving that it does not.

The Security Council must not be neutral here,
nor should it encourage Palestinian violence by
offering an ever-expanding package of rewards and
incentives in exchange for a ceasefire. Violence must
be ended unconditionally. After nearly a year and half
of bloodshed, inspired and supported by the Palestinian
leadership, offering any incentive in exchange for
ending the terror is sure to result only in more terror.

The real tragedy of the Middle East conflict is
that barely a year and a half ago, the peace process had
brought us so close to achieving a final settlement.
Israel remains willing to re-energize that process. We
repeat: we are committed to the sequence of steps
outlined in the Mitchell report, the first of them being a
complete cessation of violence. We are further
committed to a return to the agreed terms of reference
of the peace process, and we are resolved that Violence
will not be rewarded and will not be permitted to
influence the outcome of issues that are to be
negotiated between the parties.

I urge the Council to support the position that
violence is unacceptable and to refrain from endorsing
any action that would detract from our immediate and
crucial objective of ending the violence so that we may
return in earnest to the agreed negotiating process. It is
only through such a process that both Israelis and
Palestinians can hope to realize their legitimate right to
live in peace and security.

