Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The delegation
of Senegal welcomes the convening of this important
meeting on the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon.
I would like to thank our briefers - Under-Secretary-
General Voronkov, Head of the Office of Counter-
Terrorism; Ms. Michele Coninsx, Executive Director
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED); and Ambassador Umarov,
Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan and Chair of
the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities - for their high-quality presentations.

We note with genuine concern that three years
after the Council adopted resolution 2178 (2014), on
24 September2014, not onlyhas the threatto international
peace and security posed by the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters not diminished, but that the opposite
is true: it has become more dangerous. Foreign terrorist
fighters, who number 40,000, according to estimates,
and come from more than 120 countries, represent a
serious threat to transit and destination countries as
well as to their countries of origin, as their return can
undermine peace, security and stability.
As early as 2013, the Council, in paragraph 5 of its
resolution 2129 (2013), directed the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate to identify emerging
issues, trends and developments in that respect. The
work carried out by CTED is outstanding and should
be commended, as the information contained in its
three reports has enabled us to better understand
the phenomenon. The implementation of the
recommendations formulated thereon must be followed
up regularly.

Terrorist groups are increasingly using the
Internet and social networks to incite to violence and
disseminate their strategy and bloodthirsty ideology,
which is based on an often incorrect interpretation
or instrumentalization of religion, as well as on the
improper use of religious terminology. Containing the
current flow of foreign terrorist fighters therefore must
be done through the strict joint implementation of the
relevant provisions contained in resolutions 1373 (2001),
1624 (2005), 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014) and 2253 (2015).

It is clear that in a globalized world no country
can alone counter this fresh threat to world peace
in the long term. We therefore need to devise an
appropriate, effective and comprehensive strategy that
is based on a holistic approach in order to eliminate
it. Such an approach must include measures aimed
at addressing both the structural and cyclical causes
of the phenomenon, such as marginalization and
discrimination, poor governance, lack ofsocioeconomic
prospects and latent conflicts.

We must also deconstruct the terrorist discourse
and develop initiatives and programmes that promote
tolerance, dialogue and understanding among
civilizations, cultures, peoples and religions. We must
also provide young people with reasons to stay with
their families and their countries rather than leave for
adventures of uncertain outcome that frequently come
to a tragic end. Senegal, while pursuing its strategy on
preventing violent extremism and terrorism, emphasizes
education, information and communication by focusing
on raising the awareness of the people and on dialogue
with opinion leaders, in particular religious leaders,
whose role is key in countering the extremist narrative.

Preventing or, at the very least, reducing the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters requires intensified
regional and international cooperation, in particular
in the areas of information-sharing, border control,
passenger registration measures and other boarding
security controls. All of these measures are in keeping
with its road map, the Global Aviation Security Plan.
That is why, as it implements the relevant provisions of
resolution 2178 (2014), Senegal, with a view to increased
effectiveness, in June 2014 put together a general
delegation on national information so as to centralize
all of the intelligence services, which had been based in
various ministries. Furthermore, Senegal is now one of
the most advanced countries on the African continent
in terms of advance passenger information with the
adoption of aeronautical regulation 9/2016.

Turning to the INTERPOL database, in particular
its I-24/7 network, it is important to provide assistance
to Member States, in particular those in West Africa
and the Sahel, in strengthening their capacity in this
area. However, we wish to ensure that our fight against
foreign terrorist fighters does not impede the free flow
ofgoods and services, as this is essential for the political
and economic integration of countries, in particular the
Economic Community of West African States in our
West African subregion.

The third CTED report on terrorism (S/2015/975)
states in its paragraph 5 that monitoring the return
of foreign terrorist fighters to their country of origin
or a third country remains one of the most urgent
challenges facing us. As noted in paragraph 8 of the
report, any policy in this respect must categorize
returning combatants and take account of the role
they played in the respective terrorist organization as
well as their reasons for leaving and returning. Their
effective rehabilitation and reintegration into society
will depend on how well we understand their motives.
The involvement and cooperation of their families are
also very helpful in this respect.

Iwish to say by way ofconclusion that the Senegalese
delegation invites the new Office of Counter-Terrorism
to further strengthen the coordination of United Nations
work in this area, in particular the assistance extended
to Member States in the framework of the plan to build
the capacity of the United Nations to counter flows of
foreign terrorist fighters, which was established by the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.

