Ms. Mohamed: My name is Marwa Mohamed.
I am a Libyan human rights defender who has been
working on peace and justice in Libya for over 10 years.
Today I speak in my capacity as Head of Advocacy and
Outreach at Lawyers for Justice in Libya. We are a
Libyan organization registered in the United Kingdom
that is working on, and in, Libya to promote human
rights, the rule of law and access to justice.

The 2011 uprising brought Libyans, for the first
time, a profound sense of belonging and ownership
over our collective future. Civil society flourished and
began to take many shapes and forms. But this growing
movement was disrupted by increased intimidation
and violence. The assassination of women's rights
advocate Salwa Bugaighis in 2014, who was shot dead
in her home, was a turning point. From that moment on,
civil society began to withdraw from the public space,
political leadership and activism. The recent abduction
and disappearance of parliamentarian Siham Sergewa
is a stark illustration of how complete impunity for
attacks and intimidation of activists - women in
particular - has only emboldened perpetrators.

Those of us who choose to fight for peace and
justice in Libya continue to face repression. I address
the Security Council today as a member of Libya's civil
society who is committed to rebuilding the future of
our country, one that is based on the rule of law and
respect for human rights. That is possible only if we
work together. My statement today will focus on
three main areas of concern, namely, the gendered
impact of the conflict, the widespread use of enforced
disappearances and torture, and the targeting of
civilians and civilian objects.

What happened to Salwa and Siham illustrates a
broader pattern of the risks that human rights defenders,
in general, and women, in particular, face for their
activism in Libya. Since 2014, women human rights
defenders have been routinely subjected to gender-
based violence and threats, including physical assault,
abductions, sexual violence, as well as gender-related
slurs and smear campaigns designed to undermine us
and undercut the legitimacy of our work. Such attacks
have also increased on social media. The threat of
reprisals and retaliation for participating in politics or
carrying out human rights work, combined with a lack
of accountability for such acts or specific steps by the
United Nations-backed Government to address these
risks, has effectively forced women out of public life.

The proliferation of weapons despite the United
Nations arms embargo, the breakdown of State
institutions, and the general state of lawlessness has had
a disproportional impact on Libyan women's security
and freedom of movement. Women living in conflict-
affected areas are vulnerable to sexual harassment,
rape and abduction. According to 1,300 first-hand
interviews conducted by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
the majority of migrant and refugee women and girls
have been systematically gang-raped by traffickers or
have witnessed others taken away to be abused along
their journey. Migrant and refugee women, who are
held in detention centres run entirely by male guards,
are also strip-searched and exposed to sexual violence,
including rape. Nevertheless, sexual and gender-based
violence, on the whole, remains underreported.
The State's inability to control the activities of
armed groups and militias has left women vulnerable,
with no accountability for the attacks against them.
In the absence of a central State authority, women
have had to take their safety into their own hands by
adhering to specific dress codes, travelling only with
a male guardian or restricting their movements to the
daytime. That has resulted in profound limitations on
their freedom of movement and their ability to engage
fully in public life.

Given the gendered impact of the conflict on
Libyan women, it is especially critical that they be
meaningfully included in all political talks to bring
sustainable peace to Libya. The token representation
of women or their inclusion at stages when they can
have no influence over the outcome undermines the
effectiveness of any peace process.

Although poorly documented due to fear of
reprisals, enforced disappearances have become a
widespread pattern across Libya since 2011. The only
official numbers from the Ministry of the Interior are
from 2017, and they indicate that 257 people disappeared
in March and April in Tripoli alone. The figure is likely
higher across Libya and over the nine years since the
conflict started. Militias routinely abduct individuals
from their homes, streets, checkpoints and places of
work, holding them in unofficial places of detention
with no access to lawyers, their families or judicial
oversight - usually subjecting them to torture and
other ill-treatment. UNSMIL has reported that some
of the disappeared have been held for up to two years.
Others have never been seen again.

This was most recently illustrated by the enforced
disappearance of parliamentarian and women's rights
activist Siham Sergewa, who had expressed political
views critical of the offensive of the Libyan National
Army (LNA) on Tripoli and had called for the formation
of a civilian State. Siham was abducted by armed
militias from her home in Benghazi on 17 July. Her
fate remains unknown. Siham's case is one of many.
Enforced disappearances are used in Libya to deter any
kind of dissent and send a message that there are those
above the law who can operate with total impunity.
Without accountability, the cycle will continue.

Since the LNA's offensive on Tripoli began,
indiscriminate targeting of civilians and civilian
objects have been documented by Lawyers for Justice
in Libya, activists on the ground and other international
organizations. They include attacks on Mitiga airport
and medical personnel and facilities, in violation of
international humanitarian law, which may amount to
war crimes.

According to the World Health Organization, 106
civilians have been killed, 294 injured and more than
10,000 people displaced across Libya since April.
Furthermore, according to UNSMIL, as of 15 August,
there had been over 37 attacks on health workers and
facilities - with 19 hospitals attacked and 11 medical
personnel killed, in clear violation of international
humanitarian law. Migrant detention centres have also
not been spared. An aerial attack on the official migrant
and refugee detention centre in Tajura in July left 46
dead and at least 130 wounded.

As Secretary-General Guterres himself warns in
his latest report (S/20l9/682) on the situation, Libya is
likely to erupt into a full civil war unless immediate
action is taken. It is a test of the Council's credibility
to act now.

We therefore call on the Security Council to
demand an immediate ceasefire to end the current
conflict and ensure that all civilians are protected from
attacks, including sexual and gender-based violence,
and to stop the transfer of weapons that are being used
to perpetuate the violence. All Member States must
uphold and enforce the United Nations embargo on all
weapons transfers and sales to Libya. The absence of a
clear message from the Security Council has led to an
intensified stockpiling of weapons on both sides at an
alarming rate.

We furthermore call on the Council to demand
accountability from all parties to the conflict and
call on the International Criminal Court to initiate
investigations into possible war crimes and crimes
against humanity.

We call on the Council to protect women human
rights defenders. Libyan authorities must ensure
an enabling environment for all women, including
women human rights defenders, peacebuilders and
political leaders. The Council must demand that Libyan
authorities, UNSMIL and all parties to the conflict
ensure the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women in all phases of the peace and reconciliation
process. UNSMIL's active and public support for
substantive engagement by women in conflict and
post-conflict dialogue would send a clear message that
women's participation and contributions are not only
vital, but necessary.
In conclusion, while warring parties are fighting
for power, it is the Libyan people, the civilians on
the ground, who are paying the ultimate price, many
with their lives. It is their voices that should guide the
Council's actions in bringing an end to this conflict and
restoring peace to Libya.

