Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I wish to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I assure you of our
full support and cooperation. In the same breath, I
would like to salute Ambassador Mayr-Harting for the
very able manner in which he and his country presided
over the Council last month.

We welcome The Honourable Justice Byron,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, and The Honourable Justice Robinson,
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, and thank them for the briefings. We also
thank Prosecutor Brammertz and Prosecutor J allow for
their briefings. Uganda appreciates the tremendous

work carried out so far by the Tribunals. We attach
great importance to the delivery of justice and the fight
against impunity for persons who bear the greatest
responsibility for heinous crimes and violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law.

In resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004), the
Security Council set a deadline and called upon the
Tribunals to take all measures possible to complete all
trial activities. It stressed the importance of fully
implementing the completion strategies. It is now
obvious that these targets cannot be met due to
intervening circumstances outside the control of the
Tribunals. The arrest of Karadzic, in the case of the
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, as well as, more
recently, the arrest of Nizeyimana in Uganda, shows
that dispensing justice cannot be adequately guided by
deadlines. Since the Tribunals have no police forces of
their own but depend upon the cooperation of States,
we call upon States to cooperate with the Prosecutors
and help in the arrest and transfer of the remaining
fugitives.

Even when the Tribunals' mandates are over,
there are residual issues that will remain until the last
sentence is served. Certain functions of the Tribunals
will not necessarily terminate upon the conclusion of
the trials and appeals. The fugitives, if and when they
are apprehended, the convicts serving sentences, and
the witnesses and victims that may still be under
protection will still need oversight by the mechanisms.
There is no substitute for programmes such as those
that provide protection for victims and witnesses. We
note, for instance, the challenges of residual issues
which are also of concern to other interim judicial
tribunals. Perhaps the only sure way of avoiding
interim measures is to consider embracing permanent
institutions such as the International Criminal Court.

Uganda fully supports an expeditious
improvement in the conditions of service for the ad
litemjudges.

We welcome the measures taken to preserve and
manage the archives. My delegation is aware that the
archives are the property of the United Nations, but we
are also cognizant of the need to keep them in their
respective regions, along with the residual mechanisms
for ease of access by the primary stakeholders: the
victims of these heinous crimes.

We welcome the formation of a genocide
awareness-raising network being conducted in Rwanda
by the Tribunal and call upon those who are able to
contribute to this effort to do so. The training of
Rwandan jurists, including training in international
criminal law, is welcome, as it ensures that there will
be adequate preparation for the courts in Rwanda to
handle the cases that are not handled by the Tribunal.
The reported high demand for future training
strengthens the case for keeping the archives and
residual mechanisms in the region. Uganda therefore
recommends the establishment of two mechanisms, one
in the African region and the other in The Hague.

Witness intimidation leads to delay in the trial
process and should be curbed by appropriate measures
to ensure that the ultimate credibility of the process is
not put in doubt. We therefore support the allocation of
the necessary resources towards that end. The
formation of three Appeals Chamber benches to deal
expeditiously with the anticipated appeals is also
welcome. The holding of two separate sittings per day
by the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
ensures maximum utilization of the limited number of
courtrooms. We welcome the downsizing exercise
because it is in tandem with the reduced workload.

We are concerned about the high turnover of
highly qualified and essential staff as the Tribunals
near the end of their mandates. That can only
exacerbate an already difficult situation. We commend
the creation of the roster system, which ensures that
qualified replacements are within reach.

My delegation welcomes the outreach and
capacity-building programmes and other legacy matters
that form part of the Tribunals' completion strategy.
That ensures that there will not be a vacuum upon
termination of the mandate. To that extent, the
Tribunals are exemplary models of international
criminal justice.
