Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Sir, and your delegation for convening this necessary
and timely debate.

My delegation shares the deep concerns voiced
both by Council members and by the Arab League in
its ministerial meeting in Cairo on 8 September
regarding the illegal settlement activities undertaken by
Israel in the occupied Palestinian territories, especially
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. It is profoundly
worrisome that Israel has nearly doubled its settlement
construction in the occupied West Bank since 2007.

We associate ourselves with the position of the
Non-Aligned Movement in the declaration on Palestine
issued at its fifteenth ministerial conference in July
2008, which points to the illegality of Israel's
construction and expansion of settlements, particularly
in and around occupied East Jerusalem. We also concur
with Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in his remark that
Israel's continued settlement activities run counter to
the Fourth Geneva Convention and to the very
commitment it has made in accordance with the road
map and the Annapolis process.

We hold that Israel's continuation and expansion
of illegal settlements in the Palestinian occupied
territories not only pose a serious obstacle to the
effective conduct of Israeli-Palestinian peace talks,
resumed after a year-long delay, but also grossly
violate the land-for-peace principle, one of the
cornerstones of the Middle East peace process. We
urge Israel to cease such illegal practices, including
measures to change the status, character and
demographic composition of East Jerusalem, and to
fully respect and implement resolutions 446 (1979),
452 (1979) and 465 (1980), as well as other relevant
resolutions adopted by the Security Council on the
issue of Israeli settlements.

Israel's settlement activities will only deepen the
enmity and confrontation between Israel and the
Palestinian people, thus failing to ensure Israel's long-
term security interests. We join the Non-Aligned
Movement, the Arab League and the Quartet in urging
Israel to put an immediate end to such settlement
activities.
As noted by Mr. Robert Serry, the United Nations
Special Coordinator, at the Council's last consultations,
the Middle East peace process is now at the crossroads.
We call upon Israel and Palestine to work together and
take reciprocal steps to resolve the issue of settlement
in accordance with the road map, the Annapolis
process and relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly. Viet Nam will
continue to support the efforts of the international
community, the regional stakeholders and the Quartet
to facilitate the search for a satisfactory solution to the
issue under discussion today.

