Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation expresses its
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening this open
briefing to consider the report of the Security Council
mission to Kosovo. It is regrettable that the Council has not
been able to accommodate the requests of interested
Members of the Organization to participate in the
discussion of this important report. Their contributions
would certainly enrich the deliberations of the Council. This
open briefing on the mission's report, which in any case
is already known to the larger membership of the
Organization, should be more than a mere formality.

My delegation would also like to express its
appreciation to Ambassador Chowdhury of Bangladesh,
the leader of the mission, for his lucid introduction of the
mission's report. As a member of that mission, I can attest
to what has been said by others, and I wish to take this
opportunity to pay a warm tribute to Ambassador
Chowdhury for his outstanding leadership in the course of
the mission.

Ambassador Chowdhury has already highlighted the
salient parts of the report, and I do not intend to go over
the same ground, other than to underscore a number of
points of particular importance to my delegation. With the
advantage of having visited Kosovo, my delegation now
has a greater appreciation of the fact that the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) is a difficult and complex United Nations
mission and that the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 ( 1999) faces many enormous challenges,
which will have to be overcome. These challenges are
being addressed in serious fashion by Mr. Bernard
Kouchner, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, whose tireless efforts for and total commitment
to the full implementation of resolution 1244 (1999)
deserve the highest praise. It should be noted, however,
that the situation on the ground is far from ideal, which
requires great political and managerial skills as well as
pragmatism, which Mr. Kouchner has brought to bear in
administering Kosovo on behalf of the international
community as Head of UNMIK.

There has been a tremendous improvement in the
security situation, thanks to the efforts of the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) and UNMIK police. However, the peace
and security situation is still fragile and can be put in
jeopardy by the slightest inter-ethnic incident, which can
occur at any given moment - and indeed, did occur
while the mission was still there on the ground. Hence the
importance of the continuing stabilizing presence of
KFOR and the law enforcement role of UNMIK police.
Equally important is the role of the judiciary in
dispensing justice in a fair and impartial manner to all of
Kosovo's ethnic groups. My delegation commends the
steps taken by Mr. Kouchner to strengthen the law and
order situation, particularly the training of a multi-ethnic
Kosovo Police Service and the strengthening of the
judiciary through the recruitment of international judges
and prosecutors who work alongside their Kosovar

 
counterparts. A stable and peaceful Kosovo will depend, to
a large extent, on the effectiveness and credibility of such
law and order institutions. This is an area that the
international community, with the capability to do so,
should continue to support, and support generously.

Clearly, one of the most difficult challenges
confronting UNMIK is the issue of inter-ethnic relations
and the urgent need for forge inter-communal harmony
based on reconciliation among the several ethnic groups in
Kosovo, particularly between the majority Albanian and the
minority Serb populations. Given the long history of
suppression and repression of the Albanian Kosovars in the
past - culminating in their forced eviction from their
homeland, which is still fresh in memory - it would be
unrealistic to expect a quick process of reconciliation. A
considerable period of time will be required for genuine
reconciliation to take effect, but the process must begin
now by instituting confidence-building measures aimed at
bringing about a degree of trust, tolerance and
accommodation between the ethnic groups. In this context,
the general apology issued by the Serb community of
Orahovac and the positive response of the Kosovo Albanian
community were steps in the right direction. We warmly
welcome and encourage those positive developments. We
earnestly hope that this trend will continue with the active
encouragement of Mr. Kouchner and influential members
of the international community.

Clearly, no genuine and lasting reconciliation will be
possible unless and until the different communities in
Kosovo can address and resolve their long-standing
grievances against one another and begin to live together as
a people, on the basis of the concept of unity in diversity.
An important step in that process will be to address the
issue of detained and missing persons, which affects both
communities, but particularly the Kosovar Albanians, more
than a thousand of whom are known to be in prisons in
Serbia or are unaccounted for.

In this regard, my delegation strongly and
wholeheartedly supports the proposal for the appointment
of a special envoy for detainees and missing persons. The
appointment of such an envoy has the strong support of all
the different ethnic communities in Kosovo, who clearly
wish to resolve the matter for the sake of those in their
community who have lost loved ones and for the sake of
inter-ethnic reconciliation. The early appointment of such
a high-level envoy, in the same manner in which one was
appointed with respect of the missing Kuwaiti and third-
country nationals, would contribute positively to the final
healing of the wounds of the past among the people of
Kosovo. The appointment of such an envoy is the earnest
and express desire of all of the people of Kosovo and
should therefore be responded to positively and
expeditiously by the Secretary-General, with the full
support of the Council. For such an envoy to succeed in
his work it is imperative for all parties concerned to
extend their fullest cooperation to him. The authorities of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia have a particular
responsibility in this regard. Non-cooperation by the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on this issue will only
reveal the cynical exploitation of the issue by the
Belgrade Government, and its true intentions.

The future of Kosovo will depend on the
management of the current difficult situation by both the
international community and the people of Kosovo
themselves. The commitment of the international presence
there must be matched by the equal commitment to peace
and inter-ethnic harmony by the people of Kosovo
themselves. In this regard, my delegation looks forward
to the sustained support of the international community
for UNMIK and KFOR. We also look forward to the
successful conduct of the planned upcoming municipal
elections in Kosovo, which will lay a viable foundation
for the future. Such a future, of course, cannot fail to take
into account many important, complex and sensitive
factors, not the least of which is the pertinent issue of the
aspiration of the majority Albanian community in Kosovo,
as recognized by the Rambouillet Accords, as well as the
legitimate rights of the other ethnic minorities in Kosovo.
The international community must come to grips with
these issues if it is to ensure the long-term solution of the
Kosovo question.

UNMIK and KFOR have done much in so short a
time. There are, of course, flaws and imperfections in the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) that cannot be
avoided given the complexity of its mandate. But those
are being addressed by the leadership of UNMIK. What
is important is for the Council and the international
community to look at the larger picture of what UNMIK
is doing, rather than at specific instances of weakness and
imperfection in implementation. Important as those are,
we should look at them in the broader perspective.

