Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Ambassador of
Colombia, in his role as Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), for
his briefing, as well as to express our appreciation
for his efforts in steering the Committee. I would also
like to thank the Panel of Experts created pursuant to
resolution 1929 (2010) for the quality of the expertise it
provides to the Committee. We encourage it to continue
its participation, under the direction of the Committee,
in the various conferences and meetings relevant to
the Committee's mandate, including its dialogue with
Member States, particularly through visits to countries
organized at their request. In that regard, we are pleased
to recall the Panel's visit to Morocco, which allowed
its members to review with Moroccan authorities the
measures taken to implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

The Committee has considered the final report
of the Panel of Experts (S/2012/395). I would like to
reiterate my congratulations to the Panel on the quality
of the report and its efforts to take into account the
Committee's comments following its consideration of
the previous report. We hope that the Committee will
continue to consider the final report in a constructive
spirit that will enable it to reach a speedy consensus.
We also welcome the unanimous renewal of the Panel's
mandate and remain convinced that the Committee
will continue to be able to rely on its professionalism
and impartiality. We are also confident that it will be
able to benefit from full cooperation on the part of
Member States. In that spirit, my delegation supports
the Chairman's intention to organize, with the support
of the experts, an open briefing for all Member States.
The most recent report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), published on 25 May,
demonstrates that the outstanding issues around the
Iranian nuclear programme have not yet been resolved.
The report also gives an update on the dialogue between
the IAEA and Iran, indicating some progress in the
definition of "a structured approach to the clarification
of all outstanding issues". We hope that the Agency will
receive all the cooperation it requires for that purpose.

We welcome the resumption of talks between Iran
and the five permanent members of the Security Council
and Germany aimed at making progress towards a
diplomatic solution to this issue. We remain convinced
that dialogue and the diplomatic route are the only
way to arrive at a solution to the problem. The success
of such a dialogue demands a clear, sustained and
good-faith commitment, with no hint of any action that
might complicate the situation.

We also believe that settling this issue can be
achieved through strict respect for the Council's
resolutions and by fully satisfying the demands of the
International Atomic Energy Agency in the framework
of Iran's complying with its international obligations.
We are convinced of the impartiality and integrity of
the IAEA, the only institution competent in this area,
which should therefore benefit from all the necessary
cooperation, including on all requested information and
access.

We take this opportunity to reiterate that the
non-proliferation regime must not be weakened, and that
every State must scrupulously respect its obligations
in that regard. The goal of nuclear disarmament will
continue to be severely tested if commitments made are
not respected. We would also like to emphasize that this
regime is founded on a fundamental balance between the
rights and obligations of States, which no State should
neglect.

