Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Madam President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of May. We thank you, Madam, for convening
this open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. We are particularly invested in this topic, as it
directly impacts Yemen, which has suffered the scourge
of war due to Houthi militias. I also wish to thank all
of our friends at the United Nations who have warmly
congratulated us on the twenty-eighth national holiday
that is being celebrated today in Yemen.

Yemen underwent one of the richest experiences
of the peaceful transition of power within the context
of the Arab Spring. The culmination of that transition
was to hold presidential elections, under the auspices
of the United Nations and the Security Council, and
the National Dialogue Conference that tackled all the
difficulties experienced by the country. The movement
for change in Yemen, launched within the framework
of the initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council and
its Implementation Mechanism, has become a model
for peaceful transition process in Yemen which aims to
build a new Yemen - a Yemen that all Yemenis want
to become a free and democratic country, putting an
end to dictatorship and exclusion. Indeed, dialogue
and civilized trends have prevailed with the adoption
of our new Constitution, which was the result of the
conclusion of the national dialogue.

However, the Houthi militias, supported by Iran,
took advantage of the fragile situation and occupied the
capital in september 2014, putting a bloody end to the
peaceful political transition in the country. The elected
President led the country during the peaceful transition,
making concession after concession to protect the
country, community-based peace and civil peace from
the scourge of armed violence. However, the Houthi
rebels have destroyed the country; they have attacked
cities and villages, killing unarmed civilians in cold
blood and destroying the infrastructure to further Iran's
expansionist agenda in the region. In fact, the launch
of missiles provided by Iran targeted not only Yemen,
but also Saudi Arabia, randomly targeting Yemeni and
Saudi Arabians civilians as well as civilian structures.
The main duty of the national army and the
Government is to protect the people and infrastructure
of our country. For the past three years we have
spared no effort to accept all United Nations peace
proposals - especially those submitted to Kuwait in
August 2016 - in order to seek lasting peace based on
three points of reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative and Implementation Mechanism
agreement; the conclusions of the national dialogue; and
Security Council resolutions on the matter, particularly
resolution 2216 (2015).

Those efforts are being made to put an end to
the Houthi rebellion and ensure the withdrawal of all
weapons and missiles, in order to achieve stability and
security for Yemen and the region, as well as to put
an end - once and for all - to the Iran-sponsored
terrorist networks.

Our capital has been taken hostage. It is within
approximately 20 kilometres' range of the national
army. We have full capacity within the army to target
any spot therein. However, in order to safeguard the
lives of citizens who are in the capital, the army has not
launched any attack on it.

In contrast, however, the city of Taez is being held
hostage under the blockade of the militias who have
targeted this most populated Yemeni city, the civilians
and infrastruccture on a daily basis. There have been
thousands of victims: victims whose fate is the very
subject of this open debate, victims of the worst forms
of crimes perpetrated by the militias for more than
three years. The Houthi militias have committed the
worst violations of human rights in Yemen, which have
even affected children in indiscriminate shootings.
Children have been indoctrinated and recruited as
soldiers. Women have also been subject to violations.
They are either imprisoned or targeted in peaceful
protests organized by the mothers of missing persons.

The Yemeni Government calls upon the international
community to undertake all the necessary measures
to protect Yemeni civilians, including by providing
logistical support to protect and rehabilitate children
indoctrinated and recruited by the militias; liberate
those who have been arrested and find those who have
been subject to enforced disappearance, or have been
detained. We highly appreciate the cooperation and
support we receive from Member States to protect
civilians. We also look forward for that support to
overcome the current stalemate. That can be done by
encouraging international organizations that protect
civilians in conflict through the provision of medical
and psychological support to victims.

The Iranian representative spoke of the deplorable
humanitarian situation in Yemen, while Iran is in fact
the State responsible for that situation. Iran provides
the militias with missiles and landmines. Iran is
responsible for the murder of Yemen's children. My
Government relies on the Council and the international
community to strengthen the protection of civilians in
times of armed conflict. Pressure must be placed on the
Houthi rebels, supported by Iran, to surrender arms and
listen to the voice of reason and dialogue to put an end
to the fighting that has caused hundreds ofthousands of
deaths in my country.

It is necessary to put pressure on the militias to
prevent them from targeting civilians, especially women
and children. We must stop them from using women
and children as human shields and preventing their
access to schools, hospitals and civilian institutions,
using them as barracks and missile launch bases and for
other military purposes. That endangers all civilians
and constitutes a flagrant violation of all the relevant
norms as well as international law and international
humanitarian law, which makes it an offence to target
civilians in armed conflict.

In conclusion, we declare that the conclusions ofthe
national dialogue and relevant international decisions
are a sure solution to protect the lives of civilians
and build a united and democratic Yemen. We, the
Government, are convinced that the peace so strongly
desired by the Yemeni people, one that safeguards
their civil and constitutional rights, is envisioned by
those conclusions. That will spare us further cycles of
conflicts and wars and will also enable us to meet the
aspirations of the Yemeni people.

