Mr. Takasu (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
express my appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your
initiative in holding this debate. I also wish to thank
Ambassador Kumalo for his briefing last week on the
Security Council mission to Timor-Leste (see S/PV.5791). Today's debate provides an important
opportunity for Member States to express their
continued support for peace, stability and development
in Timor-Leste, as the Council will consider the
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) in February next year.

As a member of the core group, Japan has
consistently been a strong supporter of nation-building
in Timor-Leste since the country's independence. My
delegation is therefore encouraged by the report by the
Council mission that the process of democratization is
making good progress. This year, Timor-Leste
successfully conducted presidential and parliamentary
elections, which constituted a significant milestone for
the country in the process of establishing democracy
and consolidating peace. We are impressed by the
enthusiasm and commitment to democracy among the
people, which was witnessed by the international
electoral observers, including those from Japan. The
visit by the Council mission was timely and
contributed significantly to enhancing the work of
UNMIT, whose efforts have been welcomed and
recognized by the country's people.

There are areas in which more needs to be done.
For instance, as the Security Council mission pointed
out, there still seem to be political differences among
the leadership following the elections. We have full
confidence in the wisdom of the people of Timor-Leste
and their determination to achieve the political stability
and cooperation required for the country's
reconstruction. In that context, I would like to stress
that the political differences among the parties now can
and should be expressed through their representation in
the Parliament. I also would like to commend Mr. Atul
Khare, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Timor-Leste, for his efforts through the high-level
coordination mechanism provided for in resolution
1704 (2006) to facilitate efficient communication both
within the Government and between the Government
and UNMIT.

Japan also shares the view of the mission that
there is still much work to be done in capacity-
building, including security sector reform and justice
sector reform. The successful holding of the elections
is a good indication that the situation is essentially
stable and calm. At the same time, we must bear in
mind that it is still volatile, as the level of residual
trauma and fear among the people remains high.

Rebuilding the professional National Police Force
of Timor-Leste (PNTL) is indispensable for the
maintenance of security. The police officers sent by
Japan to UNMIT are doing their part to contribute by,
among other things, assisting in the compilation of a
basic textbook for new PNTL recruits and acting
officers. We are pleased with the efforts by UNMIT to
screen and mentor the PNTL, and we are encouraged to
see that the PNTL is now seeking greater responsibility
in the maintenance of the country's security. However,
evaluating the extent of the PNTL's credibility with the
people and the community will be key to deciding on
the transfer of greater responsibility to the PNTL. In
our View, the possibility of transferring responsibility
should be assessed by an expert mission, as the
Security Council mission suggested.

I would also like to reaffirm Japan's continued
commitment to supporting all efforts aimed at
peacebuilding and development in Timor-Leste beyond

the peacekeeping stage. Timor-Leste has great potential
as a result of the large amount of funds generated by
oil revenues. The effective and well-planned use of
those funds will contribute to the country's prosperity.
In that context, the training and capacity-building of
Timorese personnel to manage the funds are critically
important.

Peacebuilding is a long, complex and
multidimensional process. Since Japan assumed the
chairmanship of the Peacebuilding Commission, we
have been actively engaged in promoting assistance for
recovery and reconstruction efforts by countries
emerging from conflict. I am therefore particularly
pleased to observe the progress in the consolidation of
peace in Timor-Leste and will continue to follow
closely the progress of the peacebuilding efforts.

The situation in Timor-Leste is moving towards
stabilization. This time, we must not fail to consolidate
peace. UNMIT should continue to play an important
role to that end. My delegation also understands that
the Government of Timor-Leste would like the United
Nations to consider creating an overlap period in which
peacekeeping operations and the activities of the
Peacebuilding Commission would work in tandem, so
that a smooth transition to the consolidation of peace
can be ensured. Japan sincerely hopes that the parties
concerned will consult in good faith and reach
agreement on how best to benefit from the various
forms of support for peacebuilding being carried out in
parallel with United Nations peacekeeping efforts.

