Mrs. Gallardo Hernandez (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of my delegation, Mr. President,
may I begin by wishing you every success during your
Presidency.

My delegation welcomes this initiative to
convene an open debate on the subject of children and
armed conflict. We are dealing with, no doubt, an
extremely sensitive matter, not only for its implications
in terms of peace and security, respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms, particularly those of
children, but also given the associated consequences in
terms of peacebuilding, reconciliation and national
reconstruction during the post-conflict period.

El Salvador recognizes, as a matter of principle,
the importance of encouraging measures at the
national, regional and international levels intended to
put an end to the recruitment and use of children in
armed conflict, which is in violation of applicable
international law, in addition to other grave violations
committed against children affected by armed conflict.

When viewed from this angle, our delegation
echoes the importance of stepping up national efforts
intended to establish an appropriate legal framework,
which will contribute to more clearly and precisely
defining those grave violations. Those include murder
and maiming of children, rape and other acts of sexual
violence, kidnapping, denial of access to humanitarian
assistance intended for children and attacks against
schools, nurseries and hospitals, which are frequently
perpetrated by the parties in an armed conflict.

As has been broadly reported by relevant United
Nations bodies, in an armed conflict children are the
target of different forms of sexual and gender violence,
including rape, which is prohibited by international
humanitarian law as a flagrant violation of their human
rights. Clearly, rape is a method of war, which is
deliberately employed to humiliate girl children and
their families, thereby forcing them to become
displaced and causing humanitarian crises.

It should be noted that this negative situation
generates a culture of violence and negative values,
which may very well be reproduced by other children
in different forms, making it difficult for them
subsequently to achieve reconciliation with society.
Our delegation exhorts the international community to
contribute to the establishment of an enabling
environment that will bring an end to impunity of those
who commit crimes against children, particularly those
who promote the recruitment and use of children in
armed conflicts.

It should also be stated that post-conflict and
peacebuilding processes require the international
community to work with countries emerging from
conflict in their endeavours to implement measures
intended to achieve national reconciliation. These
include measures to benefit of children who are the
victims of violence.

In the view of my delegation, the Peacebuilding
Commission might be more closely involved in
supporting the mechanisms that exist within the
Security Council to deal with these matters, in
particular within the context of peacebuilding
strategies. In addition, strengthening communication
and coordination between bodies within the United
Nations system and with post-conflict countries could
in turn contribute to bolstering efforts to achieve the
reintegration of children in society. In our view, the
satisfactory reintegration of children in post-conflict
societies is an important element in implementing
peacebuilding strategies, and thus should be taken into
account in the early planning stage and throughout the
implementation of peacebuilding operations.

El Salvador welcomes the dialogue of
cooperation between the United Nations system and
countries emerging from a situation of armed conflict.
Clearly, in a peacebuilding process many of the issues
that arose during the armed conflict may continue to
have an adverse effect on children, marking them and
making it difficult for them to learn a culture of peace
in the future.

Therefore, post-conflict countries' societies
should have an opportunity to reassess relevant actions
once they have achieved greater levels of political
maturity and democratic governance as a result of the
implementation of peace agreements and through open
and transparent dialogue with the international
community.

In this regard, attention should be drawn to the
importance of continuing to promote a broad-based
approach, which incorporates all aspects of political
issues, security and human rights, together with
fundamental freedoms in post-conflict countries.
Consideration should also be given to the need to
promote a gradual process in promoting justice,
reparation and rehabilitation of victims of conflict.

Lastly, allow me to reiterate the political will of
the Government of El Salvador to continue to promote
measures intended to strengthen the rule of law and
democratic good governance and to step up efforts at
the institutional level to guarantee the promotion and
the effective protection of the human rights of all of the
people of El Salvador, especially the children.

