Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Spain
decided to co-sponsor this resolution because we
believe it essential to act urgently in order to fill a legal
vacuum. The context of the resolution is no other than
the global struggle against terrorism, and therefore
Spain views this exercise as part of that initiated by
resolution 1373 (2001). The possibility that non-State
actors, in particular terrorists, might gain access to
weapons of mass destruction represents a real, grave
and imminent threat to international peace and security.
For that reason, my country has always felt that it was
within the Council's competence to take action. Since
the Council is legislating for the entire international
community, we welcome the fact that this resolution
was adopted by consensus.

I will discuss Spain's stance in four brief points.

With respect to non-proliferation, my country
believes that the objective of this resolution is clear
and limited. It does not seek to modify international
obligations in the area of disarmament and non-
proliferation, as expressly stated in paragraph 5. It
seems to us that the term "non-proliferation", with the
safeguard that that paragraph represents, is the most
appropriate one to refer to the phenomenon we seek to
combat, since it clearly encompasses both the State and
non-State perspectives.

With regard to disarmament, the various treaties
referred to in the resolution are concerned with
disarmament, not non-proliferation; the two concepts
are closely related. Clearly, disarmament can
contribute to preventing non-State actors from
acquiring these weapons. But this resolution will not
cause States that possess such weapons to accelerate
the fulfilment of their obligations or those outside the
treaties to accede to them. That does not mean that we
do not agree on the substance of the resolution, but that
it seemed to us appropriate to avoid numerous
references to disarmament in its text, since they were
not appropriate in the context of this resolution and
could have diluted its aims.

With regard to Chapter VII, we believe that the
resolution is not intrusive because it enables States to
translate the obligations conferred by it into domestic
law as they wish. My country believes that this
resolution has been adopted under Chapter VII for two
reasons: to make it legally binding in an unequivocal
way and to send a strong political message. I stress that
Spain considers this exercise as part of the global
struggle against terrorism and as a continuation of the
efforts initiated by resolution 1373 (2001), which was
adopted under Chapter VII. It would have been
difficult to understand, then, not applying that Chapter
on this occasion.

With regard to the follow-up mechanism, we
supported the creation of a committee entrusted with
monitoring the implementation of the resolution, and
we welcome the fact that it was given sufficient time to
fulfil its functions. Two years seems to be a
satisfactory length of time. The committee will have to
determine its terms of reference, but we hope that its
operation will be similar to that of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. It should thus be governed by
principles of cooperation, equal treatment and
transparency, and technical assistance to States should
be one of its key components. Similarly, we believe
that it should have a team of experts to assist it in its
work.

