Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): As this is the first
time that I am taking the floor under the Russian
presidency, let me congratulate you, Sir. You have our
full support. I thank our Polish colleagues for their
stewardship during the month of August. I would also
like to thank our briefers: the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Fedotov and our colleague
from Afghanistan.

Like other speakers, I would like to particularly
highlight four issues: peace, the presidential elections,
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) itself and the issue of women, peace
and security.

Together with other speakers this morning, I want to
express the United Kingdom's strong condemnation of
the Taliban for its recent attacks. Taliban representatives
at the intra-Afghan peace conference held in Doha in
July committed to reducing civilian casualties to zero,
but the Taliban's actions are not matching the group's
words. Indeed, on the eve of a historic meeting with
United States representatives, the Taliban chose to
carry out yet further attacks in Kabul. The Afghan
Ambassador enumerated those, but the list before me
identifies at least five attacks since the month ofAugust.
Those are not the actions ofa group that is searching for
peace. At a minimum, the leaders ofthe Taliban need to
condemn violence when it occurs and undertake to do
everything in their power to stop the rest of its groups
from carrying out violence. It also needs to get a united
view that peace is in its interests as much as it is in the
interest of the people of Afghanistan.

As I am talking about the Taliban, I will take
the opportunity now to reiterate what the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General said about
inviting the Taliban to retract the threats against
the election. We note that President Ghani remains
committed to direct peace talks, and we share other
speakers' wish that the intra-Afghan negotiations
can proceed apace. President Ghani has appointed a
lS-strong member negotiating team, and he said only
this Monday, "We are ready for peace talks, but if the
Taliban think they can scare us, look at these warriors".

But peace without ceasefire is impossible. If there
is to be lasting peace in Afghanistan, the Taliban must
enter into meaningful negotiations with an inclusive
and representative Afghan negotiating team.
My second point concerns the elections. We are
encouraged by what the Special Representative said
that the elections remain scheduled for 28 September. I
know from experience in Kabul that there are often many
stories around elections and many fears that they will
be cancelled. Therefore, what Special Representative
Yamamoto was able to say about the elections and the
arrangements has been very important. The elections
represent an important opportunity for the Afghan
people to make decisions about their future at a critical
time. Our Ambassador in Kabul met in recent weeks with
Ms. Hawa Alam Nuristani, Chair of the Independent
Election Commission, and with Zohra Bayan Shinwari,
Chair of the Electoral Complaints Commission. I think
it is important that the Council offer its full support to
the Afghan authorities to help ensure that the elections
are credible, transparent, participatory and as free as
possible from violence, and that we encourage all the
leaders to engage faithfully in the democratic process
and to take a stand against electoral fraud.

Turning to my third point, about UNAMA, we very
much welcome the work UNAMA has done, especially
in coordinating international support for the elections.
We hope that it will be able to continue that work at
the same pace until election day and beyond. Other
speakers have referred to UNAMA's mandate, which is
due for renewal by 17 September. We hope all Security
Council members will be able to support a text that
gives UNAMA the clear and strong mandate it needs to
support Afghanistan at this critical time.

Turning to the issue of women, which the
Ambassador of Afghanistan set out so eloquently, in
all cases, the United Kingdom remains committed to
a peaceful and democratic future for Afghanistan. We
will continue to work with partners and the Afghan
authorities to ensure that Afghanistan has the support
it needs. It is particularly important that Afghanistan
maintain the gains it has made on human rights over
recent years. Women play an essential role in Afghan
society, a fact that was underscored by the Deputy
Secretary-General's visit in July. The United Kingdom
will continue to support the full implementation of
Afghanistan's national action plan on women and peace
and security.

I want to end by stressing the vital importance of
women's participation in the elections, but also in an
inclusive peace process.

