Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. You are well known for your great diplomatic
experience and commitment to peace in your continent,
and specifically in the Caribbean region and Haiti. We
are convinced that, under the outstanding leadership of
Ambassador Cesar Mayoral, the Argentine team will
discharge its responsibilities to the fullest. Indeed, it
has already begun to do so, to the satisfaction of all.

I should also like to congratulate all of the new
Council members and to pay tribute to the very
positive and fruitful work of the Algerian presidency
during the month of December.

I welcome your initiative, Mr. President, to
convene this public debate on the situation in Haiti.
This is an issue to which the Kingdom of Morocco
attaches the greatest importance, given our long-
standing relations of cooperation with that friendly
country, to whose security and stability we are firmly
committed, and our desire - which you share, Sir -
for the harmonious development of the Caribbean
region.

Before dealing with the situation in Haiti, I
should like to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, and his Special Representative and Head of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), Mr. Juan Gabriel Valdes - a good
friend who was the representative of his country, Chile,
here at the United Nations - for their tireless efforts
and their dedication to the restoration of peace and
security and to strengthening the political process in
Haiti.

We should also like to commend the efforts of the
Multinational Interim Force in Haiti, which was made
up of contingents from Canada, France and the United
States and which carried out its responsibilities with
great professionalism.

Haiti has given French-speaking countries, and
the entire world, many eminent artists and poets. It is a
country with great cultural vitality. But it is also a
country that has, unfortunately, been the victim of
confrontations and cycles of violence that have torn it
apart, depriving it of the means to provide for the basic
needs of its people and to address the challenges of
sustainable development - a situation has been made
worse by natural disasters.

In April, our Organization launched an appeal to
Member countries to support the political transition by
contributing to the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), which was established
pursuant to resolution 1529 (2004). The Kingdom of
Morocco had no hesitation in responding positively to
that appeal. Indeed, in July we decided that, working in
close cooperation with the Kingdom of Spain, a
neighbouring country that is also committed to the
stability and security of the Caribbean region, we
would participate in MINUSTAH by providing an
operational military contingent.

For Morocco, this is a matter of working to
ensure the success of the United Nations Mission with
a view to meeting all conditions for the normal
resumption of the constitutional process in Haiti and
the full functioning of the governmental authorities,
within the framework of the rule of law.

We sincerely hope that security conditions will
quickly be restored so that the Transitional
Government can hold elections this year. The
Moroccan contingent has been operational since
November, and it is fully carrying out its
responsibilities within MINUSTAH. Similarly,
Moroccan and Spanish troops have been cooperating
very successfully since taking over from the Chilean
battalion at Fort Liberte and Terre Rouge in the north-
east of Haiti. They now control the main crossing
points on the border with the Dominican Republic and
are working to stem smuggling and arms trafficking.

We are pleased that the many contributions to
MINUSTAH have enabled it almost to reach full
strength, as authorized by the Security Council, and to
deploy throughout the country, thus ensuring that it has
a permanent presence. Here, we would like to pay
tribute to the effective and well-respected command
that is being exercised by Brazil with great
competence. The latest report of the Secretary-General
on MINUSTAH, dated 18 November 2004, outlines the
key tracks for moving forward in our thinking and in
the efforts undertaken so that the Organization can lead
the transitional process under way in Haiti to a
successful conclusion.

We earnestly hope that the Transitional
Government - with MINUSTAH's help, of course -
will pursue without delay its disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes, which
should lead to the creation of the national commission
on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
recommended by the Secretary-General. The
disarmament of armed groups is, in our View, the sine
qua non for restoring stability on the island and for the
success of the transitional process. Disarming militias
will not only help to establish an appropriate
environment for the forthcoming elections, but will
also undoubtedly help promote the restoration of the
rule of law on the island.

If re-establishing security is a necessary condition
for the transitional process and for peace-building, we
remain convinced that that process, if it is to have
lasting success, must be accompanied by an in-depth
political reform in which all actors commit to dialogue
and cooperation aimed at organizing transparent and
fair elections. It goes without saying that
accomplishing those objectives is also largely a
function of the degree and level of international
assistance in the military, humanitarian, economic and
political areas.

We welcome the fact that the financial
institutions and donor countries responded to the
Security Council appeal, in accordance with resolution
1576 (2004), which permitted significant disbursement
of the funds pledged at the international donor
conference on Haiti held in Washington on 19 and
20 July 2004. We hope that that financial support will
continue, because the normalization of the situation in
Haiti will largely depend on it. There is a link between
purely military action and economic action aimed at
meeting the people's basic needs.

As this new year begins, we express the hope that
the Transitional Government and all the parties
concerned will move towards peace, with
MINUSTAH's help, within the framework of the
mandate set by the Security Council. We are convinced
that political harmony, once restored, will lead all
Haitians to mobilize for the development and
prosperity of their country.

