Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to offer you,
Sir, my sincere congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. We are
very grateful for the role Australia is playing as the
penholder on Afghanistan under your leadership and
for its capable work in the Security Council. I thank my
good friend Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Kubis for his very comprehensive briefing,
and more broadly for his leadership of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. Let me
also express a warm welcome to our new colleagues,
the Ambassadors of the United States of America and
the People's Republic of China, to today's debate.

We are now at the beginning of the sixty-eighth
session of the General Assembly, which has turned this
city into the epicentre of world dialogue. Today's debate
is convened ahead of a number of events with a broader
focus on Afghanistan: the International Contact Group,
the senior officials meeting of the Istanbul Process, a
number of ministerial meetings, and the opportunity
for the Afghan delegation to meet with our friends and
partners at a high level. Meanwhile in Afghanistan, the
campaigns for the third presidential elections are about
to begin. At the same time, we are envisioning the end
of the mandate of the International Security Assistance
Force * a mission that started 12 years ago and then
became the backbone of international stabilization
efforts in Afghanistan - by the end of 2014.

On 18 June, the final phase of security transition,
the fifth tranche, began in Afghanistan. Over the past
several months, the Afghan National Security Forces
have been at the forefront of difficult combat. They
have largely proved themselves capable of defending the
country and providing security. The transition will take
us into a new decade - the decade of transformation
characterized by strengthening sovereignty and the
normalization of the situation. It is a leap in the right
direction, and a proud new chapter in our history.

But while this is a new chapter, it is also remarkably

familiar. Throughout our long history, our country
has consistently risen up from the ashes, defiant after
tragedies, and has re-emerged from war, conflict and
destruction. Today, backed by the collective efforts of
the international community, we take responsibility
for our security and our defence, as we have done time
and again, and we meet that challenge with confidence,
courage, and responsibility.

At the beginning of his second term, President
Karzai outlined a new vision for Afghanistan's future.
He called for full Afghan responsibility for security,
a move towards a self-reliant economy and a political
solution to end the war. Since 2010, Afghanistan and
its partners have solidified those commitments through
constructive conferences in London, Lisbon, Istanbul,
Bonn, Chicago and Tokyo.

In Lisbon and then in Chicago, the international
community committed itself to long-term support after
2014 to train, advise and support the Afghan National
Security Forces. Our international partners pledged
financial support and equipment necessary for our
armed forces to function independently, a goal furthered
through strategic partnerships signed with a number of
countries including the United States. We signed the
Enduring Partnership Agreement with NATO, which
will be realized through its post-2014 role, namely,
Operation Resolute Support. We are also in the final
phases of negotiating the Bilateral Security, Defence
and Cooperation Agreement with the United States.
Other countries outside NATO have also committed
to provide long-term support to Afghan forces. Those
agreements are not aimed at fighting wars, but rather
at ensuring the security of our country, protecting
its people and safeguarding the democratic order we
created so painstakingly over the past 12 years.

In addition to progress on security, the
transformation decade aims to move Afghanistan's
economy from aid-dependency to self-sufficiency.
In Tokyo, international donors pledged $16 billion to
support Afghanistan's economic transition through
2017 by adopting the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework. The Framework links aid directly to
Afghan commitments in sectors such as human rights
and governance, and commits donors to strengthen
aid efficiency and sustainability while channelling
their commitments through Afghanistan's core budget.
The senior officials' meeting of the Tokyo Conference
looked critically into those obligations in July in Kabul.

Our neighbours are vital to Afghanistan's future
prosperity and peace. Yet, as President Karzai explained
at the Shanghai Summit last week, our vision is not
simply to better Afghanistan's future, but also to enable

us to be a constructive, friendly and dependable partner
to our neighbours and to countries in the region. To
that end, we are now part of many regional cooperative
frameworks. We are at the centre of the Istanbul Process
initiative. We hope that this process will become an
important forum for all countries in the region to build
more trust, counter shared threats to stability and peace
and focus on steps needed for the prosperity of all
countries in the region. We are very happy to see that
our brotherly country the People's Republic of China is
going to lead the ministerial conference next year.

We are preparing for our third-ever presidential
elections, an accomplishment that demonstrates
the increased maturity of Afghanistan's emerging
democracy. The past decades were characterized by
decisions made with violence, problems solved through
war and power solidified with weapons rather than
votes. Electing a new President is an important symbol
that the bloody struggle for power in our country
belongs to the past.

Our enemies want to derail the process, as
made evident by the assassination of the head of the
Independent Election Commission office in Kunduz
province. But let it be known that no such acts will
prevent a successful electoral process from taking
place.

The coming elections are seen by all as crucial to
the success of the transformation decade, the trust of
Afghans and the continuing support of the international
community. Afghans know that deeply, which is why
Afghans from all walks of life are actively engaged
in the process and debate before the elections. A
robust electoral framework has been established. New
members of the Independent Election Commission
and the Independent Election Complaints Commission
have been appointed. A chairman of the Independent
Election Commission has been elected. A national
security strategy for elections has been arranged. And
two new pieces of legislation have been signed into law.

As Afghanistan looks towards a brighter future,
the enemies of Afghanistan - the enemies of
peace - continue their violent campaign against
civilians, soldiers, civil servants, men, women,
children and foreign forces. If they see brutality as the
measure of their power, they are wrong; it is a measure
of their weakness. It is not brave to kill a police officer,
particularly if she is a woman protecting and serving
her country. It is time for the Taliban to stop the killing,
renounce the violence and heed the call to peace.

The first attempts at peace negotiations were
undermined by the Taliban's determination to take
Afghanistan back to the past. But the Afghan people do
not want to return to the past. They want the violence to
end. That is why, despite the atrocities, Afghanistan's
leadership has not lost faith in a political solution.

Countries in the region, particularly Pakistan, play
an important role in supporting this process. We are
encouraged by the outcome of President Karzai's recent
visit to Islamabad, and reassured by the new Pakistani
Government's guarantees of support for the process.
We look forward to working together towards enhanced
cooperation.

As we approach the transformation decade, we
must secure the gains made in the past 12 years, despite
the difficulties, vulnerabilities and risks. In the years
ahead, we must build upon our achievements and enable
Afghanistan to stand on its own feet, with a strong voice
and as a full partner of the international community. In
this period of change, we will go into the elections in
search of a solution, in a spirit of national unity and
coherence, together with our international partners,
to further our struggle for democracy, prosperity and
peace.

