Mr. Rivas (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Colombia would like to begin by
welcoming Mr. Nebojsa Covie, Deputy Prime Minister
of the Republic of Serbia, and to thank him for the
contribution he is making towards the establishment of
a multi-ethnic Government and society in Kosovo. We
would also like to take this opportunity to thank
Mr. Steiner, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General responsible for the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for the
excellent work he is doing. My Government recognizes
in particular the commitment and dedication he has
demonstrated in recent months to try to ensure the
establishment of a strong provisional Government in
Kosovo.

The successful transfer of functions to the local
executive body has strengthened the public, pluralistic
and multi-ethnic structure. I would also like to
congratulate the Assembly, which adopted the
Government programme on the basis of the agreement
reached on 28 February and the benchmarks introduced
by the Special Representative during his first statement
to the Security Council, last April.

Since the establishment of the ministerial cabinet,
last June, we have repeatedly received positive news
about the activities undertaken by the legislative
branch in connection with its willingness to take the
necessary measures to protect the interests of the
various communities of Kosovo. The democratization
process has clearly pointed to an increase in the
participation of communities in local bodies. For
example, the Assembly decided to increase the number
of committee members in order to ensure that minority
communities have better representation in the decision-
making process. The move towards municipal
elections, which are scheduled for 26 October 2002, is
surely a serious test to the process of political and
social integration of Kosovars. Mr. Steiner has been
right to strengthen the monitoring teams for the
elections and above all to promote the active
participation of all communities in the electoral process
from the very beginning.

Despite the efforts of the Special Representative
to ensure all the necessary conditions to guarantee a
provisional structure for effective self-government, we
must continue to work to establish a transparent
judicial system and to strengthen the rule of law. The
recent detention of some members of the Kosovo
Liberation Army leads us to think that the authorities
are fighting organized crime and impunity through
formal and effective judicial processes.

We are also concerned about the fact that there
continues to be a high level of unemployment,
estimated to be 57 per cent. The implications of this for
the economic revitalization of Kosovo are also a matter
of concern. The Secretary-General's report refers to the
possibility of stagnation in the process of fiscal
expansion, given, among other things, the performance
of the business sector and the scarce to non-existent
foreign investment. The report also refers to the
consequences of the reduction in donations and the
negative impact on Kosovo's overall budget. Although
the activities to promote foreign investment initiated by
the European Union have been a wise step, we
nevertheless think that greater efforts must be made by
the international community to promote economic
growth in Kosovo.

Finally, we consider it urgent to review the return
and reintegration processes for hundreds of Kosovar
refugees and displaced persons. We support the request
made by the Secretary-General in his report, reminding
donors that the Mission must have the necessary
resources to successfully carry out the reintegration
into society of persons displaced by the conflict. The
essential process to ensure an inclusive provisional
Government must be sustainable and founded on
pluralistic and multi-ethnic participation.

