Mr. Okamura (Japan) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Mr. President, I would like to express my sincere
appreciation for your leadership in convening today's
open debate. I would also like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.

Let me begin my statement by underlining the
importance of African ownership in resolving conflicts
in Africa. The African people know themselves better
than anyone else. Political mediation efforts and peace
operations in Africa can best succeed when they are
conducted in ways that are respectful of African cultures
and traditions. Japan therefore highly commends
Africa's ownership in the field of peace and security.
The African Union (AU) has been taking the lead in
these efforts. The roles played by various subregional
communities are also noteworthy.

I witnessed on the ground how crucial African-led
processes are in dealing with crises on the continent.
When I served as Japan's Ambassador to the Republic
of Cote d'lvoire, I closely observed the situation
following the presidential elections in November 2010.
As the Ivorians went through political turmoil, the AU
and the Economic Community of West African States
mediated between the parties concerned. Although that
did not prevent military clashes from occurring in the
ensuing months, active engagement by those African
institutions helped to lay the necessary foundation for
the political stability and reconstruction that have been
brought about in the country since May 2011, under the
leadership of President Alassane Ouattara.

African ownership and international partnership
are the basic principles of the Tokyo International
Conference on African Development (TICAD). These
principles were reaffirmed in the Yokohama Declaration
issued at TICAD V, which Japan hosted in June 2013
together with the AU Commission, the United Nations,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
World Bank.

As Director-General for African Affairs at the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, I was directly in charge
of the organization of TICAD V. I would like to take
this opportunity to reiterate my personal gratitude to
my African counterparts, in particular my Chadian
colleagues, for their valuable cooperation in the
successful holding of the conference. Among them was
Ambassador Mahamat Zene Cherif, then Permanent
Representative of Chad to the AU. It is a great honour
for me to be able to continue to work closely with him
in his new capacity as Permanent Representative of
Chad to the United Nations.

Today's Security Council debate is particularly
relevant and timely in terms of exploring ways to deepen
the United Nations-AU partnership for peace, as the
issue of partnerships is one of the areas on which the
High-level Panel to Review Peacekeeping Operations
will focus. I would like to touch upon two challenges to
be addressed in this regard.

My first point concerns the financing of AU
peace operations. While the primary responsibility to
secure financial resources lies with the African Union,
the United Nations must continue to engage with the
African Union so as to consider how to enhance the
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of the
financing of the AU operations mandated by the
Security Council.

In that context, we note that the Prodi Panel
recommended the establishment of a multi-donor trust
fund as a possible option. We are of the view, however,
that this option needs to be carefully considered to see
if such a fund would be operated under appropriate
oversight, which should include a reliable audit system.

Japan has been making its own financial
contributions through the African Peace Fund, which
now total approximately $12 million. Last March, Japan
donated $3 million to the Fund to support the African-
led International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic, and, later on, the African Union mission for
the Central African Republic and Central Africa.

My second point concerns the issue of the rapid
deployment of peacekeeping operations. Japan
appreciates African ownership in this area. Japan looks
forward to the early operationalization of the African
Stand-by Force (ASF). We hope that the African
Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises, which
the AU unveiled last year, will serve in the interim to
facilitate the rapid deployment of African forces. We
would also like to commend the initiative taken by
the United States to launch the African Peacekeeping
Rapid Response Partnership.

Japan, for its part, will continue to support
African endeavours, in line with the pledges that
Prime Minister Abe made at the summit meeting on
United Nations peacekeeping operations held in New
York on 26 September. For instance, we are currently
working on a new assistance package to provide heavy
engineering equipment and personnel training in Africa.
Furthermore, Japan's assistance to peacekeeping-
operation training centres in Africa contributes to the
capacity-building of African personnel. As many as 13
peacekeeping operation centres have to date received a
total of $36.6 million from Japan since 2008. Japan Self
Defense Forces personnel have also been dispatched
to manage programmes or hold conferences at those
centres.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore once
again the importance of Africa's ownership in the
field of peace and security. We expect Africa to
continue to actively engage in not only resolving its
conflicts but also in preventing them. As a proactive
contributor to peace, Japan stands ready to support
those African efforts. Our contributions are not
limited to capacity-building: we will continue to
provide development assistance to reduce poverty and
promote economic growth. We are confident that our
assistance helps address the root causes of conflicts.
Those are key commitments that Prime Minister Abe
made to African leaders at the fifth Tokyo International
Conference on African Development (TICAD V). The
African Union Commission and the United Nations
are among the co-organizers of the TICAD process.
Japan will continue to work hand in hand with those
two institutions to promote peace and prosperity in
Africa on the basis of TICAD's principles of African
ownership and international partnership.

