Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to the thank the
briefers, Special Representative ofthe Secretary-General
Sidikou and Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun, for
their update on the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Continued monitoring and reporting by
the United Nations on developments on the ground are
crucial at this critical juncture.

Over the past decade, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has made great strides in overcoming its
conflict-ridden past and shown immense determination
in addressing remaining challenges to peace and
security. Consolidating democratic gains and setting the
stage for a peaceful transition of power in accordance
with the Constitution of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we believe, is a key step to securing the lasting
peace and stability desired.

The current long-simmering political impasse over
electoral processes is therefore deeply worrying and
poses an immediate challenge that risks undoing the
positive gains we have recently seen in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Security Council travelled
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo last month
to ShOW solidarity with the Congolese people, with a
view to improving the political and security situation,
including through supporting efforts for credible,
transparent and inclusive elections. In this regard,
we welcome the presidential statement adopted today
(S/PRST/2016/18), and, in our national capacity, we wish
to reiterate some of the key messages contained therein.

First, all parties agree that sincere and inclusive
dialogue is the only path to peacefully resolving
the political impasse. The agreement reached on
18 October in the context of the national dialogue was
an important first step towards resolution. However, it
is clear that more inclusive engagement is needed to
achieve an outcome that all Congolese stakeholders can
rally behind.

Secondly, we urge all political stakeholders
to return to the negotiating table in good faith and
engage in dialogue towards a swift and consensual
way forward. In this regard, we emphasize our support
for the mediation efforts of the Conference e'piscopale
nationale du Congo.
Thirdly, it is imperative that the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and all political
leaders issue strong messages to their supporters that
violence is unacceptable. This warning must be backed
by quick and impartial measures to investigate all
cases of violence and hold perpetrators or instigators
to account.

Fourthly, we call for the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and all political
stakeholders to continue taking confidence-building
measures to mitigate tensions and create an environment
conducive to dialogue. We appeal to all stakeholders to
act responsibly and refrain from rhetoric and actions
that could exacerbate the situation.

While the fate and future of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo rests in Congolese hands alone,
we call on the regional and international communities
to lend their full and proactive support to mitigating

tensions, averting the risk of violence and ensuring that
the Democratic Republic of the Congo remains on the
path of peace and security.

