Ms. Zerrougui: I would first like to take this
opportunity to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs

of Malaysia for organizing this debate on children and
armed conflict. Today's debate builds on the important
discussion we had on 25 March (see S/PV.7414),
presided over by France, dedicated to child victims of
non-State armed groups.

As the Secretary-General has just stated, 2014 was
a devastating year for children living in conflict areas.
A number of conflicts intensified in 2015, imposing
terrible short- and long-term consequences on many
children caught up in the violence.

An estimated 230 million children now live in
countries and areas affected by conflict. More than
5 million refugee children have also been forced to
flee from countries where the monitoring and reporting
mechanism is in place. Appalling impacts on the welfare
of children were felt especially in Afghanistan, Iraq,
South Sudan, the State of Palestine, Syria and Yemen.
The report before the Council (S/2015/409) documents
sharp increases in the numbers of children killed
in 2014, and an equally shocking number of injured.
That should not just shock us, it is a call to action to
all of us. I will use the opportunity today to outline
the challenges as I see them and ways in which we can
address obstacles and assist these children.

First, violent extremist groups and their horrific
crimes captured much of the world's attention in 2014.
We saw children forced to become suicide bombers
and human shields, and we saw the public execution
of many others. Others were required to witness and
actively participate in public acts of brutality. We note
that responses to the threat posed by extreme Violence,
by both militia groups and in some cases Government
forces, have also raised child protection concerns. I am
gratified to see that the Council routinely calls on States
to ensure that measures taken to counter these group
comply with all their obligations under international
law, in particular international human rights law and
refugee and humanitarian law.

As the Secretary-General mentions in his report,
the abduction of children in large numbers was a
growing and prevalent feature of conflict in 2014. The
response to abductions needs to be scaled up to address
this increasing trend, including through early-warning
mechanisms. I echo the Secretary-General's call in
his report to expand the tools available to address
this important issue, including adding abduction as a
trigger violation for listing a party in the annexes of the
Secretary-General's annual report. We must also tailor
integration programmes for those who undergo the
traumatizing experience of abduction and associated
Violence and ensure that international support is there
to fund these programmes.
As discussed extensively at the open debate in
March (see S/PV.7414), engagement with non-State
armed groups is another Vital area of focus to improve
the situation of children in conflict. The majority of
the parties in the annexes to the Secretary-General's
report are non-State armed groups, and I have been
working to engage a wide range of these groups to
secure commitments to stop violations and protect
children. As the Secretary-General's report notes, in
the Central African Republic I supported efforts of
the United Nations mediation team to include child
protection provisions in the Brazzaville ceasefire
agreement, signed in July of last year. This progress
was further consolidated in the context of the Bangui
Forum in May of this year. Following a commitment
signed by 10 armed groups on the margins of the
Forum, more than 300 children have been released
from the anti-Balaka and the ex-Se'leka, and thousands
more are expected to be released in the coming months.
This is another reminder of the significant resources
needed to appropriately receive and reintegrate such a
large number of children.

More recently, at the invitation of the Government
of Colombia, I met in Cuba in May with a delegation
of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia - Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP). They
were open to discussing international standards and
ways in which they could make progress to ensure the
protection of children. In that connection, I welcome
the announcement made earlier this week regarding
the release of children under the age of 15, and I
look forward to seeing further progress to ensure the
separation of all children.

Later in May, I met with the leaders of three armed
groups from Darfur to stress the importance of child
protection. I am pleased to report that following this
meeting, they issued a joint statement on the situation
of children in Darfur, pledging to reinforce efforts to
prevent grave violations against children.

This concerted engagement also requires the
support of Member States to help facilitate contact
with these groups and allow independent access so
that discussions can be held. It is in the interests of all
involved that these groups be brought into a process
that will expedite the end of violations against children
and prevent future ones.
As Council members know, last year we launched
the "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign. I am pleased
to report that we continue to make progress towards
ending and preventing the recruitment and use of
children by national security forces by 2016. We saw
important steps taken in 2014 in Afghanistan, Myanmar,
Somalia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
One can see in the Secretary-General's report that just
one case of recruitment by Government forces in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was documented in
2014, and we have not received any reports so far in
2015. That represents tangible progress as compared to
the situation just a few years ago. I will soon travel to
Myanmar to support the Government and the United
Nations country team in their efforts to intensify and
implement priorities in their joint action plan.

While progress is indeed being made with several
Ccmpaign countries, sadly, the crises in South Sudan
and Yemen have severely hampered our efforts in those
countries. Solid progress had been made, but has now
been largely lost.

From South Sudan, I am receiving testimony that
children - some as young as four months old - are
being targeted in Unity state based on their ethnicity.
Eyewitnesses and survivors said that boys were killed
and civilians thrown into burning houses. In one
instance, young boys who did not manage to escape an
attack on their village were reportedly tied together with
one rope and their throats were slit. Girls are also being
subjected to rape by both individuals and groups. Those
alarming reports were just received, and those acts
have occurred within the last six weeks. Such heinous
crimes fly in the face of the numerous commitments
by all parties in South Sudan to stop violations against
children. As the Council knows, the Council's Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict adopted strong
conclusions on South Sudan in May. Unfortunately,
these actions seem to have little or no impact on
stopping ongoing violations. More must be done, and
I call on the international community, especially the
African Union and Security Council members, to take
concerted action to protect these children, who have
grown up surrounded by violence and insecurity.

Yemen is also in our thoughts daily, as we watch
the violence in the media and receive reports of
children being killed in aerial bombings, and of many
others being recruited. Since late March, as UNICEF
reported a few weeks ago, at least 135 children have
been killed and 260 injured. The fighting has destroyed
schools and hospitals. Cases of recruitment of children
and their use in conflict have also risen dramatically,
with all parties to the conflict on the ground recruiting
children in large numbers.

Another issue that has recently been a focus in the
field, as the Secretary-General mentioned a moment
ago, is the sexual abuse and exploitation of children by
peacekeepers or foreign troops. Sexual abuse committed
by those entrusted with protecting a population is
particularly egregious. It is our collective responsibility
to do our utmost to prevent such behaviour and to
ensure that the perpetrators are held accountable in all
contexts.

The issue of deprivation of liberty is another
concern, with security forces detaining children for
their actual or alleged association with armed groups.
It is equally worrying that children are being treated
primarily as security threats rather than as victims. My
Office has been working with its partners to ensure
that protocols are in place to ensure that detained
children are handed over to child protection actors as
soon as possible, and these efforts have borne fruit. In
2014, agreements for the handover of children to child
protection actors were reached with the Governments
of Chad and Somalia. Child-protection provisions
were also included in the concept of operations of the
Multinational Joint Task Force established to fight Boko
Haram. Despite such progress, however, we continue to
receive disturbing reports of large numbers of children
being detained, particularly in the context of counter-
terrorism operations.

The rise in the number and gravity of recent crises
has tested both our resolve and our ability to respond.
The most important element of our response will be to
redouble our efforts and address new challenges with
new tools. I would remind the Governments concerned
that they continue to bear the primary responsibility for
the protection of the children within their borders and
that they must actively address the violations outlined
in the Secretary-General's report. The fight against
impunity remains one of the key aspects of our efforts
not only to react to, but also to prevent grave violations
against children. Without credible accountability, the
Violations will not stop. I call on all States to comply
with their international legal obligations and to review
their policies and practices to ensure that children are
protected and their rights respected.

Lastly, we must all answer this call to action. The
stakes are high. An entire generation of children is
depending on us to be their voice, to tell their story
and, most of all, to take action. My Office stands ready
to engage with any party to conflict that appears in the
Secretary-General's report.

