Mr. Sejdiu (spoke in Albanian; English interpretation provided by the speaker): I would like
once more to emphasize that we have high regard for
the Secretary-General's initiative to reconfigure the
United Nations presence in Kosovo, that is, the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), taking into
account the common need for a limited engagement,
until the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo is ready to assume responsibilities.

We have said before, and we re-emphasize, that
we are fully committed to coordination and
cooperation in order to successfully conclude the great
story of the international community's investment for
peace and stability in Kosovo. In this regard, I would
like to say that we are committed, and I personally am
committed, as President of the Republic of Kosovo -
not as representative of the Albanians in Kosovo, but
as the representative of the people and institutions of
the Republic of Kosovo - to fully put into practice
and implement the plan put forward by the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy, Mr. Ahtisaari. Our
commitment is to shoulder direct responsibility for the
work of Kosovo's institutions.

On the day that the constitution of the Republic
of Kosovo entered into force, I signed 41 laws, most of
them referring to the main provisions of the Ahtisaari
plan and related as well to safeguarding the interests of
the minority communities.

We take this opportunity to recall that the
Secretary-General spoke positively about the precise
moment of Kosovo's declaration of independence and
the entire period since then. Some representatives of
Member States said that by its declaration of
independence Kosovo was threatened and the United
Nations was threatened. They also predicted that there
would be a large-scale exodus from Kosovo and that
bad things would happen. Just the opposite has
occurred. We have shown our genuine commitment,
taking a serious and mature approach. All developments
in Kosovo should be treated as joint developments,
which will lead to an objective perspective.

Despite this, I would like to emphasize again that,
as is well known, there have been attempts on the part
of Serbia to maintain tension with respect to
developments in Kosovo. For example, two border
crossing points were set on fire on the day of Kosovo's
declaration of independence and subsequent events
included the wounding of police officers from the
United Nations Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
death of a police officer from the Kosovo Force. I
personally visited the scene of these attacks to be with
the victims and to hear their concerns following their
stressful experiences.

I take this opportunity to again urge the Republic
of Serbia to allow the Serbs in Kosovo to live with the
reality, to allow the Serbs in Kosovo to live with the
reality, to allow Kosovo to become independent,
prosperous and deeply committed to the integration
processes within the Euro-Atlantic structures.

We therefore highly regard the special role that
the United Nations, the European Union and NATO
have played in Kosovo during these times, with respect
to the process that we have gone through. We also
express the readiness of the Kosovo institutions to
responsibly continue their work in cooperation with the
international presences in Kosovo, leading to a
conclusion of their operations in Kosovo on the basis
of principles that we have affirmed and will support in
order to move forward.

