Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Sir, for convening this
open briefing on the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Our thanks also go to Under-Secretary-General Miyet for
his briefing on the subject. We are confident that this
meeting will help the Council to find solutions to the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Earlier, Ambassador Holbrooke briefed the Council on
his trip to Africa. We welcome that trip, including his
meetings with the parties to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Physical visits to the areas of
conflict in Africa have enabled us not only to empathize
more keenly with the sufferings and desires of the war-torn
peoples on the ground, but also to collect more first-hand
information and to hear divergent views from the parties
directly involved. Of course, visits are not ends in
themselves, but the means to strengthen our political will
and efficiency in our efforts to solve African conflicts.

The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is one of the most serious problems plaguing Africa. The
Lusaka accords were signed almost six months ago, but the
peace process remains bogged down in difficulties. The
United Nations and the Security Council have been quite
slow in responding to the situation. At our open debate
yesterday, several countries expressed criticism in that
regard. The Council should rethink this problem as soon as
possible. After all, it is never too late to make amends.

China welcomes the news that both the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the rebel
group have accepted the former President of Botswana,
Mr. Masira, as the Facilitator for the national political
dialogues. We support the holding of such national political
dialogues between the parties to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as soon as possible.

However, we wish to emphasize that it is also an
immediate priority for the Council and the United Nations
to send in military observers and peacekeeping troops as
soon as possible, because there can be effective monitoring
and maintenance of the ceasefire only when a United
Nations peacekeeping mission is deployed there. That will
create a relatively stable climate and situation in which
national political dialogue can be conducted smoothly and
other elements of the Lusaka Agreement can be gradually
implemented. Otherwise, nothing is possible.

We are very much in agreement with the views
expressed yesterday by some representatives that the
Council's ability to push through a settlement of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo with
concrete actions would be the litmus test of the
importance the Council attaches to African conflicts. In
this connection, while we look forward to the smooth
implementation of resolution 1279 (1999), and welcome
the Secretariat's preparations for this purpose, we also
expect - and this is more important - that Council
members will be unanimous on taking concrete actions as
soon as possible for the deployment of military observers
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

