Miss Durrant (Jamaica): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the 14 members of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) that are Members of the
United Nations: Antigua and Barbuda, the Bahamas,
Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago and
my own country, Jamaica.

CARICOM. congratulates you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of January, and we thank you for
organizing this open debate and for the interactive
manner in which it has been conducted. We also extend
congratulations to the new members of the Council:
Bulgaria, Cameroon, Guinea, Mexico and the Syrian
Arab Republic. And on behalf of the Jamaican
delegation I wish to express appreciation for the
excellent cooperation we received from all other
members of the Council during our membership.

I wish also to pay particular tribute to our friend
and colleague Ambassador Jorge Navarrete for the
contribution he has already made to the work of the
Security Council on behalf of his country, Mexico. We
are sorry to see him go, and we wish him every success
in his future endeavours.

Let me thank Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock for
his comprehensive report on the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and commend him for his
extremely effective leadership. Jamaica, having
participated in the work of the Committee until the end
of December 2001, fully appreciates the transparency
with which the work of the Committee has been carried
out. We consider continued transparency to be
important to the credibility of the Committee's future
work if it is to achieve the level of cooperation
expected from Member States.

CARICOM. members have joined in the global
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms, and have
pledged full support for the collective measures being
undertaken by the United Nations, which include
taking all necessary steps within our capacities to
implement the measures set out in resolution 1373
(2001) of 28 September 2001. The Security Council in
resolution 1373 (2001) created new legal obligations
for States in combating terrorism. The range of
measures set out in the resolution are quite
comprehensive in nature, to wit: precluding anyone
within our territories or jurisdiction from in any way
aiding and abetting the planning, promoting, financing
or executing of acts of terrorism or otherwise
supporting such acts; preventing and suppressing the
financing of terrorist acts; and refraining from
providing any form of support, and denying safe haven,
to perpetrators of terrorism. We fully subscribe to the
decisive action taken by the Security Council in
prescribing those measures, and we support them as
necessary and prudent if the international community is
to succeed in combating terrorism.

While we have no reservations about what we
need to do, we must also recognize the added burden
placed on States in implementing these provisions. Not
all States have an equal capacity to fully implement the
measures provided for in resolution 1373 (2001). Many
countries face the prospect of not being able to fully
commit scarce resources, human and financial, to that
endeavour. It is therefore incumbent on the
international community, led by those with the capacity
to do so, to provide the necessary financial and
technical assistance to those who need it. By fully
accepting that principle, the objective we seek to attain
will be realized: combating by all means threats to
international peace and security posed by terrorist acts.
It is very encouraging that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee has taken up this issue and is putting in
place a mechanism for providing technical assistance to
Member States. We therefore support the Committee
Chairman's proposal for the establishment of a trust
fund to support that initiative. We also support the role
proposed by the Secretary-General for the Bretton
Woods institutions in the global effort to combat
terrorism, and we welcome the offer made by Member
States to provide technical assistance. We share the
view that the fight against terrorism can succeed only if
all Member States have the capacity to play the role
envisaged for them in resolution 1373 (2001).

CARICOM. wishes to draw attention to the
problems posed by the illegal trafficking in small arms
and light weapons and the linkages to the illicit drug
trade that have become a major source of terrorism
affecting the stability and economic development of
some Member States. Resolution 1373 (2001), in its
paragraph 4, recognized that relationship and
emphasized the need to enhance coordination of efforts
in order to strengthen a global response to this serious
challenge and threat to international security. It is
important for us to enhance coordination of efforts on
the national, subregional and international levels to
strengthen the global response to the serious challenges
posed by links between international terrorism and
transnational organized crime, illicit drugs, money-
laundering and illegal arms trafficking, in particular the
illegal trafficking in small arms and light weapons. We
urge the Counter-Terrorism Committee to engage fully
in assisting Member States in dealing with these
problems through facilitating the exchange of
information, technical assistance and other forms of
support.

We agree that there must be a renewed
commitment to international efforts aimed at
addressing global issues which give rise to terrorism.
We believe very strongly that the international
community must be prepared to address the problems
of poverty, the prevalence of regional conflicts, the
denial of human rights, the denial of access to justice
for all and equal protection under law, and the lack of
sustainable development. While stating unequivocally
that no cause or grievance can justify reprehensible
attacks against innocent victims, we must recognize
that these are conditions which provide fertile breeding
grounds for terrorism and a cover for those who
perpetrate terrorist acts. These issues must be featured
prominently on the agenda of the international
community.

Acts of terrorism threaten the stability and the
social and economic development of all States and
undermine global stability and prosperity. We in the
Caribbean reiterate our commitment to work with the
international community in the fight against terrorism
in accordance with international law and conventions.
We look forward to continuing to work cooperatively
with the Committee in carrying out its responsibilities
in combating international terrorism.

