Mr. Arias Cerdenas (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Personally speaking,
we are saddened to hear an ambassador with
Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad's background reading a
note that really does not explain anything but makes a
mockery of the Security Council, the United Nations,
international law and the domestic legislation of the
United States itself. Indeed, he has responded with
sophistry to a legal and legitimate request by our
country, by our Republic, for the extradition to
Venezuela of Mr. Posada Carriles for trial by our
authorities. Why, then, has the extradition treaty
between the United States and Venezuela, which has
existed since 1922, not been respected? That is what
we want to know. I feel that there are reasons for this,
and I shall be more specific about them.

On 27 April 2007, the United States prosecutor
submitted to the Federal Court in El Paso, Texas, a
motion to exclude all evidence, testimony, questions
and arguments on the relationship between Posada
Carriles and the United States Central Intelligence
Agency: on 13 February 1976, Posada Carriles had
signed a document with his employer, the Central
Intelligence Agency. Thus, this is a case of protecting a
terrorist who acts under cover and under the protection
of a Power. The situation in the twenty-first century -
the enlightened rule of law that has been mentioned
here - is very different from that of the feudal period,
and it obliges the Security Council and its Counter-
Terrorism Committee to review this case. A resounding
voice must be raised within the Council compelling the
Government of the United States of America to respect
the law, not to continue to mock the people and not to
use force as an argument to impose its version of the
truth.

We have spoken about removing individuals from
the terrorist list; we have heard reports about action
against Al-Qaida. But on the territory of the United
States a terrorist is being protected. This is a blatant
contradiction that cannot be tolerated at this stage in
human history. We therefore respectfully call upon the
44

Security Council to take this opportunity to make a
clean breast before the world and not pursue terrorists
only when it suits a powerful nation, but to pursue
terrorists and punish terrorism in all their forms. That
is what we are talking about here, and we continue to
appeal for justice, for the dignity of peoples and for
sending Mr. Posada Carriles to be tried in Venezuela in
conformity with our laws and in compliance with the
extradition request submitted to the United States.

