Mr. Henze (Germany): Germany took an active part
in the discussions that preceded this meeting, under the
able and energetic chairmanship of Argentina and with
very helpful contributions from New Zealand. We fully
subscribe to the Statement made by Ambassador Cerdenas
summarizing the outcome of these talks. Before briefly
commenting on some issues, permit me to take this
opportunity to thank Ambassador Cerdenas and his team,
as well as Ambassador Keating, not only for their
substantial contribution in the area under consideration
today, but also, with regard to Ambassador Cardenas -
though not for the last time - for the very active role

 

Argentina has played in respect of many Council issues
during the last two years.

My country has spoken out on many occasions in
favour of better coordination between the Security Council
and troop-contributing countries, emphasizing in particular
the importance of an improved flow of information in both
directions as a major element for more transparency in the
Council's activities.

Improvements in this field do not serve only the
legitimate interests of troop contributors. In our View, far
more is at stake. An improved mechanism of consultation
is crucial also for the effectiveness of the Security
Council's work. Decisions and mandates cannot be
effectively implemented and peace-keeping operations
cannot be satisfactorily carried out if those who carry out
the mandate in the field lack information or cannot make
their voices heard. Lessons learned- in Somalia, for
instance, not to mention more recent cases - clearly
demonstrate the detrimental and far-reaching effects which
lack of consultation may have not only on a particular
operation, but equally on the image of United Nations
peace-keeping as a whole.

The mechanism outlined in the presidential statement
of 4 November 1994, and implemented afterwards, was
doubtlessly a good beginning to a more structured
approach. It has, however, proved to be insufficient.
Troop contributors need information about ongoing
operations. In this respect, the meetings jointly chaired by
the President of the Council and the Secretariat undeniably
had a positive impact. Everybody in this circle, I think, is
grateful for that. But what troop-contributing countries are
really interested in is having more of a political impact on
decisions taken by the Security Council. The general feeling
is that this goal has not yet been achieved. As a
consequence, the troop contributors' interest in the existing
mechanism has declined somewhat over a period of months.

We should therefore all agree that an improved
mechanism of consultation is needed, particularly when
decisions on the extension, modification or termination of
mandates are at stake.

In this context, we welcome the idea of appointing a
chairman from among the members of the Security Council
for the period of one year in order to give more continuity
to the relationship with the troop contributors. One could
even think about nominating a chairman for each operation
or group of operations, if need be.

I do not intend to repeat the major issues contained
in the statement made by Argentina in their entirety.
Germany supports the suggestions outlined by
Ambassador Ca'rdenas because we hold the View that they
are fair, pragmatic and realistic. No claim has been made
that unduly infringes on the prerogatives of the Security
Council.

Let me therefore conclude by appealing to all parties
concerned to approach the suggestions made with an open
mind and the degree of flexibility that is always needed
on important issues. Today we have come together to
breathe new life into the whole idea of better coordination
between the interests of the Security Council and troop
contributors.

We should, however, not look at the issues as a
matter of one group of Member States making
concessions to another. We should, rather, approach it
from the basis of our shared interest in rendering the
Security Council even more effective in order to further
enhance the United Nations peace-keeping capability.

