Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia) (interpretation from French):
May I first of all congratulate you, Madam President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this
month, and wish you every success in the accomplishment
of your tasks. The mission to Angola that you have just
carried out and its results deserve to be welcomed as an
important contribution to the consolidation of the peace
process.

My congratulations also go to your predecessor, the
Ambassador of the United Kingdom, for the excellent work
that he accomplished last month.

I wish to take this opportunity to welcome the holding,
for the second time this year, of an orientation debate,
which allows the members of the Organization to express
their views on questions of interest to them; it also allows
the Council to take its decisions with full understanding of
all the elements and all the sensitive issues connected with
a given subject.

The difficulties and delays in implementing the Lusaka
Protocol clearly demonstrate that the efforts already made
to achieve the signing of that Protocol should be intensified
in order to avoid Angola's return to the situation of war
from which the population of that country suffered for two
decades.

In this connection, I would like to pay tribute to the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, the
representatives of the three observer countries - the United
States, the Russian Federation and Portugal - as well as
the Organization of African Unity. They are continuing
their sustained work to relaunch implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol, following repeated violations of the cease-
fire and scant progress in the quartering of UNITA troops,
which is an essential stage towards peace.

We believe that implementing the Lusaka Protocol
requires resolute political will on the part of all Angolans
in order to close the book on the past and rebuild the
country on a solid new basis of fraternity and national
solidarity.

To this end, in the present stage of implementing the
Protocol, it is essential that negotiations between the
Angolan Government and UNIT A be resumed, in order to
restore confidence between the two by putting an end to
all military activity and resuming the quartering of
UNITA troops and the return to barracks of government
forces.

In this respect, we regard as encouraging the
agreement reached between the Government and UNITA
to establish a new timetable in order to move the peace
process forward, as well as the resumption of bilateral
negotiations to complete the establishment of joint armed
forces.

The recent conclusion of an agreement to this end
between the two parties is a positive step, which, in spite
of certain difficulties which emerged, deserves to be
encouraged and supported. We are pleased that the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. 111)
became involved in that process, in order to find, as the
Secretary-General said in his report of 31 January 1996,

"a workable, fair and durable solution" (S/J 996/75, para. 13)

to the problems.

The role of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission is essential for the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol, especially as regards the quartering of the
UNITA elements. We hope, Madam President, that Mr.
Savimbi will respect the commitments he made during the
telephone conversation that you have just had with him,
and that the quartering of 16,500 of his troops will indeed
be carried out by 10 February 1996.

Furthermore, we would like to commend the work
being done by the UNAVEM. 111 units for the demining
of Angola and the assistance being given by the United
Nations Mission in this field to the Government. The
continuing commendable efforts by the personnel of the
Mission have won the respect and appreciation of us all.

In this context, we support the proposal by the
Secretary-General to extend the mandate of UNAVEM. III

 
for six months, until 8 August 1996. It goes without saying
that the cooperation of all the parties and the establishment
of a climate of confidence are fundamental to the
continuation of UNAVEM. III's activities.

I cannot fail at this point to pay a well-deserved
tribute to the personnel involved in humanitarian assistance
activities, who, in spite of the difficult conditions in which
they work, continue to carry out their tasks in order to
respond to the many humanitarian needs of the population.
We appeal to UNITA to keep its promise to facilitate the
work of the humanitarian organizations, respect the integrity
of their personnel and to protect their property.

In a different context, we believe that the efforts to
consolidate the peace process in Angola should be
accompanied by increased financial support from the
international community. We are pleased that specialized
agencies of the United Nations have become involved in
studies and in organizing seminars to find ways to improve
the economic situation in that country.

In conclusion, Tunisia, which has unfailingly given
assistance to the fraternal African people of Angola, as well
as political support to facilitate the conclusion and
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, stands ready to
continue to participate in all efforts to make peace in that
country irreversible.

