Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): On behalf of
the Kingdom of the Netherlands, I would like to thank
the Security Council for the opportunity to speak in
today's debate. I would like to begin by offering my
deepest condolences to our Russian colleague on the
occasion of the killing of the Russian Ambassador in
Turkey. He has our deepest sympathy.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union. I would also like to underline the
statement just made by the representative of Italy as
part of our cooperation related to our upcoming split
term in the Security Council.

We commend the Secretary-General for his detailed
and thorough report (S/2016/1049). I would also like
to thank Special Representative Yamamoto and my
good friend Mr. Saikal, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for their interesting briefings.

I will focus today on three issues - the Brussels
Conference on Afghanistan, political developments and
the security and human-rights situations.

The Brussels Conference was a key event ofthe past
couple of months. Ms. Lilianne Ploumen, our Minister
of Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation,
reaffirmed the commitment of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands to Afghanistan. I think the Conference
made it clear that the international community, and the
Netherlands, as part ofit, will not abandon Afghanistan.

We welcome the presentation of the 2017-2018 Self-
Reliance through Mutual Accountability Framework
by President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah
Abdullah. We feel strongly that the Framework sets
clear progress indicators for the Afghan Government.
Those declarations, of course, now have to be translated
into concrete action. We urge the Unity Government
to become more of a genuine Government of unity.
Only a united team can bring about progress. In that
context, we welcome the fact that seven members of
the Electoral Commission and five of the Independent
Electoral Complaint Commission have been announced.
They should pursue electoral reforms and prepare for
elections, as was agreed. We also welcome the fact
that the nomination process was transparent. We also
welcome the agreement reached with Hizb-i Islami
(Gulbuddin) and call for its implementation. We hope
it will be an inspiration for other, similar agreements.

One of the priorities of the Afghan Government that
we support is the advancement of the anti-corruption
agenda. The inauguration of the new Anti-Corruption
Justice Centre in October was a welcome step in that
regard. At the same time, however, we must realize
that corruption remains a big problem. We believe it
is important to ensure that the national anti-corruption
strategy can meet the commitments made in the Self-
Reliance through Mutual Accountability Framework.

Secondly, with regard to the security situation and
regional cooperation, armed clashes between the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces and the Taliban
have intensified. Along with an increasing number
of returning refugees, the humanitarian situation in
Afghanistan is worrying. In order to achieve a truly
stable Afghanistan, we believe it is vital to intensify
the Afghan-led peace process. President Ghani has
stated that the Government is open to peace talks, and
we strongly encourage the Taliban to act accordingly.
The Netherlands stands ready to support an Afghan-
led peace process in whatever form is agreed on. The
countries of the region have a critical and positive role
to play in supporting Afghanistan. A regional approach
is crucial to achieving structural security and stability,
but regional stability is possible only when all partners
are genuinely engaged and work together, which we
strongly encourage.

With respect to human rights, an EU-Afghanistan
human rights dialogue took place in Kabul three weeks
ago. There we discussed women's rights, children's
rights, torture and ill-treatment, access to justice
and the importance of freedom of expression. We are
looking forward to achieving concrete deliverables on
these topics, together, in the coming months, as we have
said. We commend the role of the United Nations, which
has continued its efforts to advance Afghan women's
equal and full participation in building peace and
security. We also commend the fact that at the Brussels
Conference, both the President and the Chief Executive
stated that gender equality was a top priority for their
Government. Moreover, the First Lady, Rhula Ghani,
has of course repeatedly underlined the importance of
the economic participation of women. We welcome this
full-heartedly. Women are the key to a better future and
we must empower them.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
has been a long-time partner of Afghanistan and
contributed significantly in the fields of peace, justice
and development. Dutch military personnel have given
their lives in bringing peace to Afghanistan. We must
remember them. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
remains committed to supporting Afghanistan
throughout the transformation decade - a decade
of ever greater Afghan ownership and leadership.
The Afghan people can count on us standing by their
side, in the full knowledge that the road ahead will be
long. The Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue
to be a partner with Afghanistan for peace, justice
and development.

