Mr. Sen (India): We thank you, Sir, for
scheduling this timely meeting on threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts. We also thank the Chairpersons of the Security
Council Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
for their detailed briefings.

The recent horrific attacks in London and
elsewhere in the world have shown the emergence of
terrorism with a renewed vigour. The seriousness and
consistency of the threat posed by terrorism to civilized
society everywhere, irrespective of political affiliation
or ideology, have been brought home once again. Most
important, for our purposes, they have reinforced the
urgent need for a global consensus on dealing with
terrorism.

To us in India, terrorism is not a new
phenomenon. We have suffered from that cross-border-
inspired scourge for nearly 25 years. Over 60,000
Indian citizens have lost their lives as a direct result of
terrorism. India has consistently maintained that
terrorism constitutes one of the most serious threats to
peace and security, and that it recognizes no border or
boundary, observes no code of conduct or constraints
of religion, and is not restrained by humanism or the
bounds of civility.

Fifteen days ago, on 5 July, five heavily armed
militants, believed to be affiliated with the Lashkar-e-
Toiba, stormed the complex in Ayodhya with the
intention of spreading mayhem and terror at a sensitive
site. Fortunately, owing to the effective intervention of
the security forces deployed at the complex, the
militants were neutralized at a relatively low cost.
However, the intention of the perpetrators of that act of
terrorism and their external sponsors, whose
involvement has since been proven, was far more
sinister - it was to incite the flames of communal
conflagration and violence and damage India's secular
and democratic fabric.

In his address to the United States Congress
yesterday, Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh stated
that

"open societies like ours are today threatened
more than ever before by the rise of terrorism...
Terrorism exploits the freedom our open societies
provide to destroy our freedoms. We must fight
terrorism wherever it exists, because terrorism
anywhere threatens democracy everywhere."

It is important for States to be held accountable
for any lack of compliance with their international
obligations, in particular those under international legal
instruments and under Security Council resolutions on
terrorism. The international community must no longer
tolerate resort to double standards, partial cooperation
for political ends, tactical ploys, incitement,
fundamentalist training and indoctrination and support
for or sponsorship of terrorism. If global action against
terrorism is to succeed, States that profess cooperation
in the war against terrorism while maintaining intact
the infrastructure of terrorism should no longer be
allowed to act with impunity.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee, assisted by
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, must continue to play a major role in
assisting States, through capacity-building and by
ensuring that they have the means to fight terrorism.

We would like to compliment the 1267
Committee on its work. Unfortunately, we have
witnessed in recent months a resurgence of the Al-
Qaida and Taliban organizations in Afghanistan, as
manifested by the increase in attacks against civilians
and security forces along the southern and south-
eastern borders of that country. The re-emergence of
large, well-armed groups of Al-Qaida and Taliban is a
matter of concern for the international community. We
believe that the two words "moderate" and "Taliban"
are incompatible: an oxymoron. Any attempt to reach
out to former Taliban elements should totally exclude
individuals or entities on the 1267 Committee's
consolidated list. Any action to the contrary would
constitute a clear Violation of Chapter-VII resolutions.

The recent listing of Lashkar-E-Tayyiba by the
1267 Committee in its consolidated list of entities, in
the Al-Qaida section, has been an important step
forward in the fight against terrorism. Lashkar-E-
Tayyiba enjoys a clearly defined agenda, hierarchy,
sources of funding, protection and infrastructure. Its
philosophy has been to merge jihadi education with
modern curricula not only to train young students in
religious principles but also to make them adept in
science and technology, a philosophy that can be put to
devastating effect to serve the needs of terrorism. We
would encourage the 1267 Committee to continue to be
active in securing the listing of more individuals and
entities.

India welcomed the adoption of resolution 1566
(2004), which, in our View, represented a logical
extension of existing multilateral cooperation on
counter-terrorism. In our View, the United Nations
should not leave unchallenged or unaddressed claims
of moral, political or diplomatic support for terrorism.
We hope that the working group established pursuant
to resolution 1566 (2004) will earnestly set out to reach
an understanding on the ways and means to move the
Council's counter-terrorism agenda forward.

The work of the 1540 Committee remains critical.
Recent revelations regarding the extensive
international network that facilitated the proliferation
of nuclear equipment and technology have amply
brought home to us all the danger of the acquisition by
terrorists of weapons of mass destruction and the
means of their delivery. We urge the 1540 Committee
to be more proactive and to move quickly to minimize,
through international cooperation and co-option, the
possibility of any further proliferation that could pose a
threat to international peace and security.

As we have conveyed to the 1540 Committee in
our national report, India's track record on nuclear
non-proliferation is impeccable. Even though we have
witnessed unchecked proliferation in our own
neighbourhood, which has affected our security
concerns, India has not only adhered to the existing
regulatory framework governing controls over weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery, but
has proceeded to strengthen those controls. The
Weapons of Mass Destruction and Their Delivery
Systems (Prohibition of Unlawful Activities) Act,
adopted on 6 June 2005, provides overarching and
integrated legislation prohibiting unlawful activities in
relation to weapons of mass destruction and their
delivery systems. In that context, the Prime Minister of
India stated yesterday,

"India, as a responsible nuclear Power, is fully
conscious of the immense responsibility that has
come with the possession of advanced
technology, both civilian and strategic. We have
never been, and will never be, a source of
proliferation of sensitive technologies".

While the Security Council has been justifiably
proactive on the counter-terrorism agenda, we believe
that it is equally important for the general membership
of the United Nations to engage on that critical issue.
The Secretary-General has called for a comprehensive
counter-terrorism strategy to be adopted by heads of
State or Government at the High-Level Plenary
Meeting of the General Assembly to be held in
September. The international community must endorse
his call. My delegation strongly supports the
conclusion, during the sixtieth session of the General
Assembly, of a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism.

There can be no justification for terrorism in any
of its forms or manifestations. Those who resort to
terror often clothe it in the garb of real or imaginary
grievances. No grievance can justify the resort to
terror. At the same time, the fight against terror has to
be fought within the boundaries laid down by our
obligations regarding the rule of law and fundamental
freedoms. The Government of India, recognizing the
need to continue fighting terror without impinging on
essential individual freedoms and liberties, has
repealed the Prevention of Terrorism Act.

It is a curious and striking paradox that both
Mr. Samuel Huntingdon and certain terrorist groups
such as Al-Qaida speak of a clash of civilizations. Our
experience is that that paradigm is profoundly
mistaken. India's capacity to deal with the vicissitudes
of terrorism can be traced also to its ability to
accommodate different cultural and civilizational
traditions over time. Historically, the Bhakti and Sufi
movements absorbed the best values of thought and
civilization. Those traditions have contributed to the
emergence of a secular democracy that in itself serves
as a bulwark against societal tensions. Not a single
Indian has been identified or detained for terrorist acts
perpetrated by Al-Qaida or the Taliban anywhere in the
world. As the largest democracy, with secularism at its
heart, and as the second largest Islamic society in the
world, we feel that we do not need any lessons from
either the Western democracies or the self-appointed
guardians of Islam.

The deliberate weakening of secular democratic
forces in many parts of the world over decades left the
fundamentalists as the only vehicle for popular dissent.
It is only through a strengthening of those secular
democratic forces that we can hope to gain the upper
hand in the battle against terrorism. At the same time,
the brutal anti-humanism, the absence of any realistic
programme for social regeneration and, above all, the
extreme reactionary Vision of the terrorists can only
strengthen the reaction.

It is our sincere hope that the United Nations will
move forward the international agenda on counter-
terrorism through the actions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council. The intricate linkages and
networks that unite terror groups can be challenged
only through concerted international cooperation and
efforts. The international community can no longer
accept double standards or half measures on the part of
States in the fight against terrorism. The United
Nations will have to ensure that all States are
committed equally to the fight against terrorism.

