Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would first
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jean Pierre
Lacroix for his briefing and welcome President Vueie
of the Republic of Serbia and President Thaci of the
Republic ofKosovo to the Council. I will focus on three
points - first, the sovereignty of Kosovo; secondly,
the background to the current tensions; and thirdly, the
need for a resumption of the European Union (EU)-
facilitated dialogue.

On my first point, I want to emphasize that
the Kingdom of the Netherlands fully supports the
independence and sovereignty of the Republic of
Kosovo. As a sovereign State, Kosovo has the right to
create its own institutions. That said, we believe that
the transformation of the Kosovo Security Force should
be a transparent and inclusive process, in line with
Kosovo's Constitution. The Netherlands encourages
Kosovo to work on the transformation in consultation
with NATO and other relevant international actors. The
inclusivity of the process is important to ensuring that
the 10-year transition has the support of all in Kosovo
and especially its non-majority communities. More
broadly, Kosovo's path towards further normalization
should be an orderly process in which the Council's
resolutions and decisions should be respected and fully
implemented by all players on the ground.

That brings me to my second point, the background
to the current tensions. The decision by the Kosovo
authorities to start the transformation of the Kosovo
Security Force comes at a sensitive moment. We have
recently seen both sides take a series of steps that
have not been conducive to a climate furthering the
normalization of relations between Kosovo and Serbia.
Almost two decades after the adoption of resolution 1244
(1999), Belgrade and Pristina have made significant
progress in reaching agreement on important issues.
Yet they still have to agree on many aspects of their
future relationship. Understandably, the process is not
easy and has its ups and downs. It is also the reason why
we still have to spend time in the Council discussing
the situation in Kosovo, even if it no longer constitutes
an imminent or grave threat to international peace and
security. We call on both countries to act responsibly
and to work to calm the situation.

That brings me to my third point. It is essential
that both sides resume the EU-facilitated dialogue as
soon as possible, without preconditions, and implement
the agreements made in the past. They should realize
that the status quo is not a long-term solution. Security
depends on good-neighbourly relations. Everyone in
the region stands to gain from political normalization,
more economic integration and fewer trade barriers.

It is key for Kosovo to improve the daily lives of
all its citizens. The implementation of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement with the European Union,
as well as of the European reform agenda, is crucial
to achieving that lofty goal. Both parties should avoid
unilateral actions that go against the spirit of dialogue
and undermine mutual trust. We therefore regret the
fact that some members of the Council insisted on
having a public debate today rather than an interactive
dialogue.

In conclusion, we ask Serbia and Kosovo to
demonstrate their political will and commitment to
normalization by continuing to work in the framework
of the EU-facilitated dialogue.

