Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me at the outset join others in welcoming Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam to the Security Council. Allow me also to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency for the month of January. I would also like to thank the United States for successfully presiding over the Council during the month of December 2019. My delegation would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Mohamed Ibn Chambas for his comprehensive briefing and his team for the work that they have been doing in the region. We welcome some commendable progress in the region, including political dialogues in several countries and advances in transitional justice mechanisms and in security sector reform. We note with concern, however, the election-related tension in some countries that has led to violent confrontations, and we would like to reiterate the importance of peaceful political processes. Notwithstanding the positive developments, we remain deeply concerned at the spread of terrorism and criminal activities and at intercommunal violence resulting in human and material losses. In that regard, I would like to highlight three points. First, the work of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) remains crucial. We take note of the strategic review of UNOWAS based on the assessment that stakeholders found the Office’s activity to be useful and that it has effectively carried out its mandate in preventive diplomacy in the subregion. As we consider the renewal of the mandate of UNOWAS, we view several areas of focus to be of particular importance. UNOWAS should continue performing its mediation and good offices roles to support countries in the region in the context of electoral and peace processes. Regional analysis, including with regard to political and security trends, threats to peace and security, as well as root causes of instability in the subregion, is also necessary. UNOWAS should enhance synergy and complementarity with the United Nations country team and regional and subregional organizations based on their respective mandates and capacities. terrorism and stated in the combat AS Secondly, we must transnational organized crime. Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/1005) and in his Special Representative’s briefing, terrorist attacks, maritime crime and drug trafficking are increasing in the subregion. Terrorist groups continue to expand their areas of influence and inflict harm on security personnel as well as civilians. It therefore remains crucial to support the countries in West Africa and the Sahel to combat terrorism and transnational organized crime. Collective initiatives such as the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and the Multinational Joint Task Force should be continuously supported. In addition, the limited presence of State authorities contributes to insecurity in the region. As a result, strengthening State capacity and institutions is key to ensuring the security of the population, the provision of basic services and the building of community trust. Thirdly, it is important to address the root causes of instability. Our security approach must be part of a wider strategy. Countries in the subregion must intensify efforts to address poverty, inequality, marginalization and the lack of basic and social services. International partners should continue to support the implementation of the Regional Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin Region, the G-5 Sahel Priority Investment Programme, the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel. In conclusion, building lasting peace and stability in the subregion requires political will, national and regional efforts and support from the international community. Ensuring political stability, combating terrorism and organized crime and addressing the underlying causes of instability are key to enabling peace to take root in the subregion, which will pave the way to sustainable development.
