Archbishop Auza (Holy See): The Holy See
thanks the presidency of the People's Republic of
China for convening this open debate on strengthening
peacekeeping operations in Africa - a topic that
affects the whole international community, whose
response has come, in part, in the form of peacekeeping
operations, seven of which are currently active on the
African continent.

It is through the presence of the immediately
recognizable blue helmets that the United Nations
is most visible around the globe. In a world that is
increasingly fragmented, peacekeeping operations
provide a concrete opportunity for the international
community to collaborate through diplomatic activities,
financial contributions, expertise, troops and personnel.
Frequently working amid immense challenges, those
missions have the arduous task of re-establishing
peace, protecting civilians and facilitating political
processes with a view to restoringjustice and laying the
foundations for lasting stability. At times, the men and
women serving under the United Nations flag literally
build bridges, only to have the enemies ofpeace destroy
them. Armed groups and terrorist organizations on
the African continent, often manipulated by political
machinations from within or from beyond the borders
of the country, cause chaos to reign.

A peacekeeping operation can at times be
something of a misnomer. It seemingly implies that
peace is already enjoyed and simply needs to be
maintained. Sadly, we know that all too often that is not
the case. Today, United Nations peacekeepers serve in
some of the most dangerous and hostile environments
on the planet, risking their lives to ensure the delivery
of the most basic services to those in need. Caught in
conflicts that they have come to defuse, some have
made the supreme sacrifice. We are right to pay tribute
to them, while also ensuring that the positive impacts
that United Nations peacekeeping missions have made
and continue to make are not overlooked or undermined
in the face of unrealistic expectations or stretched or
limited resources or because of the abhorrent cases of
human rights abuses and sexual exploitation that have
come to light.

While it may be true that significant financial
resources are devoted to Africa in terms of development
programmes, it is nonetheless worthwhile recalling that
the cost of peacekeeping represents only a tiny portion
of the world's military spending - a very small fraction
indeed. Strengthening peacekeeping operations
certainly requires increased financial support, which
should go hand in hand with the indispensable diplomatic
efforts aimed at preventing or resolving conflicts. For
that to happen, the international community must be
prepared to invest. As Secretary-General Guterres has
remarked, the chances of success increase dramatically
when we work together with Member States and share
burdens, risks and responsibilities. We urgently need a
quantum leap in collective engagement.

For truly effective and collective engagement,
we must look to the young and vibrant populations of
Africa, who deserve to have better access to quality
education and to decent work in order to realize their
great potential, thereby enabling those young men
and women to be key players in building up their own
countries and taking their rightful place as future
leaders. The alternative is the sad reality that leaves
many young Africans without schooling or training
of any kind. Without prospects, they become prey to
a future of exploitation and violence. As a preventive
measure, the international community, in particular
through United Nations peacekeeping missions, should
seek greater collaboration with local populations so as
to put the incredible resources, both human and natural,
with which the African continent has been endowed to
good use. The abundant natural resources in Africa
become a curse when their exploitation does not benefit
the people and, worse, when wars and conflicts are
exacerbated or even artificially provoked to provide a
smokescreen for the illicit and abusive exploitation of
those precious natural resources. During his in-flight
press conference on his return to Rome from the Central
African Republic, Pope Francis noted the sad reality
that there were Powers that sought only to take the
great wealth of Africa but did not think about helping
it to grow.

Heightened attention to peace and security on the
African continent, as well as the very specific role
of strengthened peacekeeping operations, will help
African countries to prosper. That will benefit not only
the countries of the region but even those beyond it.

