Mr. Nebie (spoke in French): I can see,
Mr. President, from the ball on the table, which we can
see even from here in Bangui, that you are also in the
football spirit. I wish good luck to your national team,
and may the best team win.

I would like to thank all the members ofthe Security
Council for the invitation today, and especially for their
continued support with regard to the situation in the
Central African Republic.

My briefing will touch on five points: first, the
activities of the panel of facilitators for the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic; secondly, the outcome of the
second round; thirdly, the steps taken by the panel
following the recent incidents; fourthly, the agenda
for the preparations for the dialogue; and, fifthly,
financing needs.

With regard to the panel's work, from 19 February
to 1 April, the panel undertook a second visit to armed
groups. Members will recall that I provided a partial
report on 21 March while the panel was in the midst
of its mission. The 14 armed groups all renewed their
grievances, which can be summarized in 70 points that
cover issues of defence, security, political matters,
justice, reconciliation, humanitarian concerns and
socioeconomic recovery. Following the mission, a
report was presented to the country's President, Prime
Minister and National Assembly, as well as to the
diplomatic corps, the political parties, the victims'
group and civil society. Recommendations were made
to the Government for speeding up the implementation
of various programmes, including on disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation (DDRR);
the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan; and the
deployment of State authority throughout the country.

Secondly, on the results of the second round, as I
mentioned, we received 70 written, detailed grievances
from 14 armed groups, which serve as a working
paper for the Government. There was relative calm
and acceptance of State authority in several parts of
the country, including Kaga Bandoro, Birao, Kouki,
Bria and Mobaye. Certain groups that initially did not
endorse it also accepted the DDRR programme. In
addition, it is important to note the commitment of the
country's President to carefully consider the grievances.

Thirdly, with regard to the steps taken by the
panel following the incidents in April and May, the
unfortunate events in April in the PK5 neighbourhood
resulted in fatalities and a number of injuries. Those
incidents had consequences for the central part of the
country, in Ndele and Kaga Bandoro, where armed
groups hoped for a coalition in order to approach
Bangui. Given the gravity of the situation, from 15 May
to 1 June, the panel engaged in intensive consultations
with armed groups both in the centre of the country
and in Bangui in order to remobilize them towards the
African Initiative and to urge them not to succumb
to escalation and confrontation. The panel also made
contact with stakeholders, leaders and those with
influence on the PK5 criminal group to dissuade
them from conflation, rumours and chaos, with a
view to restoring calm in the country and to provide
an opportunity for dialogue as a way out the crisis.
Such action, together with goodwill, including on the
part of the diplomatic corps and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), resulted in
the return to relative calm since mid-May. Since then,
the panel has been working to step up the process, since
the incidents that I mentioned, as well as the issue of
the international agenda, has somewhat delayed our
provisional timetable for convening the dialogue.

Fourthly, with regard to the timetable for preparing
the dialogue, the panel is taking time to reflect on
the preparation, in particular the convening and
handling, of the dialogue. Preparing the armed groups
for dialogue is taking place in terms of workshops to
teach them basic negotiation skills, particularly on
how to resolve the crisis peacefully. That has started
and continues as I speak. In the context of preparing
the Government delegation to the dialogue, tomorrow I
will meet the Government delegation appointed to take
part in the dialogue. There is also the preparation of
civil society actors to monitor the implementation of
the agreement resulting from the dialogue. With regard
to visits to former Presidents, the visit to President
Djotodia took place in Cotonou on 8 June, while the
one to President Bozize' is still to take place. There are
also plans to organize visits to some countries of the
Economic Community of Central African States. A
little earlier, my brother Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga
told the Security Council a bit about the subregional
repercussions of the crisis.

Following all that, the holding of the dialogue
should therefore be successful and, in principle, the
negotiations should lead to a consensus-based agreement
that will cover the responsibilities of all parties,
both Government and armed groups, the budgetary
implications, the related timetable and activities and
the follow-up mechanisms. The preparatory activities
seek to create an atmosphere conducive to preparing
the parties' minds for calm, tolerance and consideration
of one another with a View to a peaceful, fruitful and
high-quality dialogue. It is pointless to hurry today
while minds are still not ready for dialogue. If we
launch it immediately, we risk reaching an impasse.
However, I believe that, with the preparation of the
armed groups, it is already falling into place. I think
that we are on the right track. By then, we will have
visited the armed groups and, when our preparations
with the Government are ready, we will be in a position
to convene the dialogue.

Fifthly, on financing needs, the panel is determined
to complete its work in the coming weeks, that is, as
soon as possible, with the convening and the holding of
the dialogue. However, despite the efforts to mobilize
funds, we sorely lack financial resources. A sum of
$3 million is needed for the remaining activities. I
would like to take this opportunity to thank the United
States of America, which has just disbursed $500,000
to the panel's funds. Participants will well understand
that I am looking at the other members of the Security
Council. I also thank the European Union, which is
organizing the preparation workshops on behalf of the
panel. I thank MINUSCA and Special Representative
Onanga-Anyanga, who has worked tirelessly to support
us. I would also like to thank the Peacebuilding Fund
and the United Nations Development Programme for
also supporting us.

In conclusion, in order not to take long - I have five
minutes - I would like to underscore to the Security
Council that failure is not an option. The only option
is the success of the dialogue and a return to peace for
the Central African people. To that end, a significant
part of the peacekeeping and re-establishment of
international peace and security falls to the members of
the Security Council. It is up to them to take specific,
concrete and robust measures and actions in support
of the stakeholders of the international community on
the ground so as to promote and accelerate a return
to peace for the Central African people, who, I would
emphasize, implore the Council to do its utmost to quite
simply ensure them peace and freedom of movement in
their country.

If the Security Council members step up their
efforts and provide concrete support to the panel, at
the next meeting on the Central African Republic I will
be very happy to tell them that the dialogue has been
held, a consensus-based agreement has been reached,
a follow-up mechanism is in place, peace is no longer
an empty word and the time frame for implementing
activities under the agreement is in place. I thank
the Security Council for its attention. I would like
to reiterate my gratitude to my brother Mr. Onanga-
Anyanga and the European Union for all the goodwill
that we have seen on a daily basis. We work together
with all the diplomatic missions represented here daily
because we know that we are all bound by the same fate
to the Central African Republic. Our common goal is
to ensure that the Central African people emerge from
the crisis, which has lasted too long. I assuure members
that when we are in the field, the only demand made of
us is that they want peace, to move freely in their own
territory and for us to do our utmost for the Government
and the armed groups to reach an understanding and
give them peace. I thank the members of the Council
and wish them all good luck and success in the meeting.

