Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): Mr.
President, we, too, congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of July. We would like to assure you of our full
cooperation and support. I should like also to commend
Ambassador de La Sabliere and his delegation for his
energetic leadership during the month of June. We also
thank Mr. Danilo Turk for his comprehensive briefing
on the progress made in Bougainville and the outline
for its future.

We congratulate Mr. Joseph Kabui and the newly
elected members of the Bougainville House of
Representatives on their success in the Bougainville
elections. We wish them well in meeting the challenges
ahead. In the same spirit, we also acknowledge the
invaluable contributions of many other individuals and
institutions to the peace process in Bougainville. We
trust that those positive contributions will continue to
revitalize the Autonomous Bougainville Government
as it prepares to embark on a new dispensation and a
secure future.

We also congratulate the Government and the
people of Papua New Guinea for their understanding
and cooperation, which enabled the elections for the
presidency and the Bougainville legislature to proceed
competently, transparently and peacefully, as certified
by the International Observer Team.

We pay tribute to the United Nations Observer
Mission in Bougainville (UNOMB) and its
predecessor, the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB), for their critical contribution
in resolving the Bougainville conflict in an efficient
and effective manner. The two United Nations missions
in Bougainville have ably demonstrated the
resourcefulness of small missions with clearly defined
mandates in difficult circumstances.

The support provided by the international
community, in particular the significant contributions
by countries in the region together with those of the
Commonwealth and the Pacific Islands Forum, is
commendable and should serve as a model for regional
initiatives and approaches in conflict resolution
elsewhere.

It is our hope that the newly inaugurated
Autonomous Bougainville Government will honour the
commitment made during the elections to find ways of
keeping other leaders, including competing candidates,
actively involved in contributing to the common
aspirations of the country. In the same spirit, the new
leadership should seek to form an inclusive
Government that draws on the experience, commitment
and abilities of other leaders. As for those who did not
participate in the electoral process, we urge them to
respect the outcome, and we urge those with concerns
about the outcome to pursue them peacefully in
accordance with the law.

Bougainville faces many future challenges,
including the need to develop an administrative
capacity and an economy capable of sustaining
autonomy by providing the people with opportunities
for self-advancement and wider community prosperity.

As the Autonomous Bougainville Government
takes office, it is our hope that it will maintain close
cooperation and understanding with the national
Government to make sure that the agreed arrangements
for Bougainville autonomy work efficiently for their
mutual interest and accommodation.

In the wake of the shocks and tribulations of the
recent past, Bougainville needs to rebuild and
rehabilitate. It needs the continued support of its
partners and friends to revive its economy and to
survive in a sustainable fashion.

From the depths of the crisis, Bougainville has
successfully emerged to embark on a promising future.
The people of Bougainville should be given a new
opportunity to build on the peace that now prevails.
That consideration needs to be reflected in the current
exit strategy and the future strategy of the coordinated
United Nations presence in Bougainville, as outlined
by Mr. Turk in his presentation this morning.

