The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of the Kingdom of Spain.

My remarks will be in the following order: a brief
introduction, the peace process in the Middle East,
Syria, Daesh, Libya and Yemen. To begin, I wish to
make three points.

When I assumed the post of Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Spain in late 2011, the
Middle East was experiencing a period of unrest, yet
there still were prospects for hope and a window of
opportunity. In some cases, dramatic events had led
to successful political processes, but in many others
conflict intensified and new threats emerged, with
tragic humanitarian consequences.

What we have learned since 2011 is that diplomacy
and negotiation, when accompanied by determined
goodwill and perseverance, are effective instruments for
resolving conflict. One such example was the success
of the nuclear negotiations with Iran. The award of the
Nobel Peace Prize to the Tunisian National Dialogue
Quartet demonstrated once again the value of dialogue
to the international community. The conclusion is that
we must restore the spirit of cooperation and the will to
build mutual understanding, if we wish to put an end
to the major conflicts affecting the Middle East. That
calls for concerted action on the part of the international
community. To that end, as a priority measure, the
Council must act in unison.

Allow me to make a few observations on the peace
process in the Middle East, beginning with one in
particular, namely, that the viability of the two-State
solution is in serious jeopardy. In 2016, the coming year,
25 years will have passed since the historic Madrid
Peace Conference, where, for the first time, Israelis
and Palestinians sat at the same table to negotiate. The
Madrid Conference was a major turning point. We
were no longer discussing the Arab-Israeli conflict, but
rather a peace process in the Middle East with prospects
and hope for making gradual progress towards the
possibility of two States, Israel and Palestine, living in
peace and security within internationally recognized
borders.

Twenty-five years afterthe Madrid Conference-afull
generation later - peace between Israelis and Palestinians
is still far from settled, and the path outlined by the
Madrid Conference and the Oslo accords is in danger
of abandonment. We find ourselves facing an alarming
outlook, including the exhaustion of the negotiation
path, the progressive loss of confidence in the viability
of the two-State solution and a worrisome upsurge of
violence.

Let me be very clear on the following. there are
only two solutions to the Middle East conflict: either
a single, binational State, or two States coexisting in
peace and security. I think that we all agree that the
creation of a binational State is not a viable solution. We
must therefore renew our support for and confidence
in the two-State solution. We must do so decisively
and swiftly, distinguishing what is urgent from what
is important. What is urgent is to put an end to the
tensions that are endangering the process. I have three
observations to make in that regard.

Among the factors that triggered the recent
escalation of violence and terrorism are troubling
elements of a religious nature. Therefore I believe
that the proposal of the French presidency, which is
intended to guarantee the maintenance of the status
quo of the Haram Al-Sharif and holy sites with the
most scrupulous respect and tolerance for the different
religious beliefs, is an initiative that we must all work
on.

Secondly, to defuse the current conflict, we also
need to facilitate an interreligious dialogue that
condemns the use of violence in the name of religion.
The situation cannont be allowed to become a war
of religions. Spain, my country, offers to host that
dialogue, which we believe to be absolutely essential
and, I stress, extraordinarily urgent.

Thirdly, the settlement policy in the occupied
territories is one of the major threats to the viability of
the two States. In order to make progress towards the
establishment of a Palestinian State - of which Gaza
must necessarily be part - it is fundamental that there

be unity between the Palestinian political forces on the
basis of the principles of the Quartet.

Besides dealing with urgent and immediate
matters, we must also deal with what is important. The
persistence of the occupation, which leaves no horizon
for a political solution, generates frustration among
the Palestinian population. It perpetuates the risk of
violence and does not contribute to Israel's security.
The unsustainability and instability of the status quo
become clear and demonstrate the cost of confining
oneself to conflict management. We must aspire to
solving the conflict, not managing it.

It urgent to restore hope to the Palestinian people
for the realization of their legitimate aspirations
to establish a State of their own. It is also urgent
to help Israel coexist with its neighbours in the
region in peace and with assurances of its security.
To achieve those ends, we must not fall into either
naivete or fatalism. Peace is possible because peace is a
commitment and a vision. The path has been drawn, but
we lack the will, determination and political courage to
walk its course.

We are pleased that both parties, Israel and the
Palestinian Authority, have formally declared their
willingness to negotiate, but that willingness must
be translated into specific steps that can change the
situation on the ground and generate the necessary
confidence, which is a precondition to returning to the
negotiation table. These steps include compliance with
ongoing commitments in the framework of the Oslo
Accords.

The major issue is what we should do to relaunch
the peace process and reach a lasting solution. The
aforementioned Madrid Conference was a success
because it combined dialogue between the parties
with a multilateral path, that is, with the support
of an international architecture representing a
consensus of the international community at the time.
Among other things, it made it possible to launch the
Barcelona process - today known as the Union for the
Mediterranean - exactly 20 years ago.

That is why I believe that we need to redirect
our efforts to setting up an international structure
acceptable to the parties, one that could re-establish
a political horizon for the definitive solution of the
conflict. That architecture must involve the countries of
the region and draw up a road map that would optimize
possibile incentives for peacebuilding, such as a review
and update of the Arab Peace Initiative. We commend
ongoing efforts to start a new political process, such as
those being undertaken by Secretary of State Kerry at
this very moment. The expanded Quartet, which met
in New York this past September, should be a suitable
forum for the search for a solution.

The Security Council must fully assume its
responsibility in this context and promote measures
that help re-establish calm and security. The Council
should be able to pronounce itself and adopt a solid
and legitimate political framework. Any framework
agreed upon must include a tight timetable - I stress,
tight - for negotiations, and parameters based on
internationally accepted principles as a base for a
solution to the conflict. We must go beyond a simple
declaration of policy. I propose that our efforts
culminate in a new international peace conference - a
Madrid Two, an ambitious conference opening the path
to peace and concord and facilitating the conclusion of
a definitive accord between the parties that will put an
end to so many decades of conflict.

Now I shall move to comments on Syria.

It is also urgent that we be much more ambitious
and effective when we deal with the Syrian conflict.
Here, the main victims are the civilian population.
Our inability to reach an agreement to promote a
political solution to the conflict in Syria is leading
us to an accelerating series of initiatives that open
scenarios of great uncertainty for the region and
for the entire international community. The United
Nations - particularly the Security Council - must
play a key role in the solution to the conflict. It is Spain's
opinion that we must continue working in accordance
with the following parameters.

First, we must support the plan of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura,
which allows for partial and comprehensive ceasefires
that in turn will make it possible to send humanitarian
assistance to the Syrian population and stem the flow of
refugees towards neighbouring countries and now also
towards Europe.

Second is unity in the fight against Daesh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. The international
community must continue deepening this fight, in a
coordinated and collective fashion, through a response
that goes much farther than the military dimension.
International cooperation in areas such as the fight
agains the influx against foreign fighters, financial
resources and dealing with the Daesh phenomenon in
the media is particularly important when it comes to
putting an end to the barbarity and terror of Daesh.
Spain is fully commited and participates in that
collective effort in its various facets.

Third is the humanitarian area. The Security
Council must continue working on the different
initiatives for protection and support for the population
affected by the conflict. We are working with France
and the United Kingdom to promote an initiative that
will put an end to indiscriminate attacks on the civilian
population by all parties to the conflict, including, in
particular, the use of barrel bombs. It is also important
to respond immediately to other humanitarian
requirements, specifically respect for medical neutrality
and humanitarian access to areas under siege. We are
working on that with Jordan and New Zealand.

Fourth is the systematic involvement of the most
heavily affected regional Powers, including Turkey,
Iran, Saudi Arabia and Egypt.

Fifth is to start a process oftransition to an inclusive
Government with full executive powers, in which the
Syrian population feels fully represented and with
enough legitimacy to push for a political change in the
country. We will need, first, to ensure the restoration of
the rights and freedoms of the Syrians so as to create
conditions that will make it possible, in a second, later
phase, to move on to the political transition proper, with
the legalization of political parties and the holding of
free and fair elections.

Sixth, Syria will be whatever the Syrians decide
it will be, but there are principles that cannot be
renounced: the territorial integrity of the country, the
secular nature of the future regime, and maintaining
the structures of the present State so as to avoid the
mistakes of the past.

Seventh, we must work to achieve the participation
in the peace plan of the various parties to the conflict.
Their commitment is needed to pave the way for a
transition process in Syria.

On Lebanon, I wish to stress two ideas.

First, we must promote peace and stability in
the Middle East region, which calls for support and
solidarity for the countries that are suffering the most
direct impact of regional conflicts and that with great
generosity have welcomed the growing influx of
refugees, in particular Jordan, Turkey, Lebanon and
Egypt, among others.

Secondly, we are concerned at the situation in
that country, because in order to address the various
challenges facing the region and consolidate national
coexistence, it is vital to overcome the current
institutional paralysis. The international community's
commitment to Lebanon is reflected in the support
provided by the provisional presence of the United
Nations, in which Spain participates as one of the major
contributors, with 566 troops.

Let me conclude by touching on the situation in
Yemen. The catastrophic humanitarian situation is
aggravated by the repugnant activities of terrorist
organizations in Yemen such as Al-Qaida in the
Arabian Peninsula and Daesh, which make the most
of the security vacuum created by the conflict. The
international community, in particular regional actors
and the parties themselves, must continue to work
to relaunch the inter-Yemeni political dialogue, so
as to achieve an inclusive and lasting solution that
will guarantee the stability, unity, independence and
territorial integrity of Yemen.

In the quest for such a solution, the United Nations
must continue playing a leadership role. Unity among
all of us is indispensable in order to successfully
respond to this crisis. It is our hope that in the days
to come, the parties will initiate conversations in
good faith so as to lay the foundation for the peaceful
coexistence of all Yemenis in a post-conflict scenario.
To that end, a genuine, renewed commitment on the
part of the international community will be required
to support the authorities, civil society and the
people of Yemen as a whole in a process of political
transition, institution-strengthening, stabilization and
reconstruction.

Let me conclude by saying that in such situations,
the Security Council must be able to shoulder its
responsibilities and offer a way out that guarantees
international peace and security, because what is at
stake is the very credibility of the Council itself.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.

