Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): Allow me to begin by
expressing my delegation's congratulations to you, Sir,
upon your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month. We are convinced that your diplomatic
skill will guide the Council effectively.

My delegation would also like to express its sincere
appreciation to Ambassador Li Zhaoxing, the Permanent
Representative of China, for the excellent manner and
wisdom with which he presided over the work of the
Council.

It is a distinct honour and privilege for me to deliver
this statement on behalf of the States parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) that
are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
We have noted with appreciation the endeavours made by
the nuclear-weapon States to meet the legitimate security
concerns of the vast majority of non-nuclear-weapon
States by submitting the draft resolution as well as by
issuing separate statements.

We believe that those statements contain some
elements that deserve our careful consideration, especially
on the eve of the convening of the NPT Review and
Extension Conference. The non-aligned countries continue
to believe that Security Council resolution 255 (1968) and
the assurances of 1978 fall short of providing adequate
security assurances and therefore need to be
supplemented. Nor do the unilateral pledges contained in
the statements of 6 April 1995 by themselves create the
necessary confidence that nuclear weapons will not be
used: such declarations leave ample room for subjective
interpretations. There is also the danger that, in certain
circumstances, especially after the initiation of hostilities,
such assurances may be unilaterally withdrawn. They
therefore do not meet the security needs of
non-nuclear-weapon States since they were not
multilaterally negotiated, are unverifiable and conflict
with each other. Above all, they do not offer legitimate,
reasonable and binding assurances to meet the valid
concerns of non-nuclear-weapon States.

To the non-aligned countries, nuclear issues are of
world-wide significance because of the global reach of
nuclear weapons. It is a truism that there is no protection
against the use of nuclear weapons, which can be
triggered by technical malfunction, political misjudgment
or by miscalculation. The consequences of their use

 

cannot remain limited, and there is no way to contain them
within predetermined national or even regional boundaries.
In addition to the human cost, the ecology of the world
would be severely affected and its infrastructures shattered.

We are therefore encouraged that there are signs of a
positive change in the approaches adopted by the nuclear-
weapon States on this crucial issue at this crucial juncture.
In this context, we welcome the individual declarations
made by them last week as well as the draft resolution
submitted by them now before us. These endeavours, in our
View, reflect concerted and serious efforts by the nuclear-
weapon States to assuage the concerns of the non-nuclear-
weapon States to ensure their security. However, they do
not meet the long-standing demand of the non-aligned
countries for legally binding commitments to enhance their
security. Such a demand is fully consistent with the Final
Document adopted by the General Assembly at its first
special session devoted to Disarmament, held in 1978, as
well as with the resolutions adopted by the Assembly since
1979 which have emphasized the urgency of seeking an
agreement for a binding international instrument to assure
non-nuclear nations against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons. This issue was also accorded priority in
all four NPT Review Conferences.

The declarations of last week made by the nuclear-
weapon States contain inherent weaknesses and
deficiencies, as they are unilateral and non-binding. Because
security can never be assured on the basis of hortatory
declarations, and because of the threat that continues to be
posed by the very presence of vast nuclear arsenals, the
non-aligned countries regard security guarantees in a
binding international convention without any loopholes as
the legitimate right of all non-nuclear nations. In the
context of an unacceptable balance of obligations and
responsibilities as between the nuclear and non-nuclear
countries, the NPT parties that have renounced the
manufacture and acquisition of nuclear weapons have a
legitimate right to unconditional and legally binding
assurances. For without such iron-clad guarantees, the non-
aligned countries would remain under the threat of nuclear
weapons, or suffer their actual use, and they are therefore
committed to a common formulation incorporated into a
legal instrument.

Hence, it is deeply regrettable to note the lack of
tangible progress in the Conference on Disarmament despite
concerted efforts by the Group of 21 since 1979. It was the
expectation of the non-aligned countries Parties to the NPT
that the improved international political atmosphere and
achievements in the field of disarmament, as well as greater
military openness and transparency, had provided a
qualitatively new environment for a fresh appraisal of this
question. Yet, despite widespread support for an
international convention for security guarantees, a
consensus on a common formula or approach has
continued to elude us due to the maintenance of
established positions and the reiteration of existing
unilateral assurances.

It is in this context that Parties to the NPT that are
members of the Non-Aligned Movement have considered
the draft resolution now before us. We have noted with
appreciation that it contains some of the proposals
advanced by the Non-Aligned Movement caucus. It
rightly reiterates the importance of the NPT to the global
community and calls upon the States parties to comply
fully with their obligations, in particular with Article VI.
It recognizes the legitimacy of the demand of the non-
nuclear-weapon States for security assurances, and calls
for appropriate measures to safeguard their security. And
it contemplates the initiation of measures to counter
aggression involving the use of nuclear weapons and
seeks to render necessary assistance to victims of such
aggression.

We regret, however, that the draft has failed to
acknowledge the right of the non-nuclear-weapon States
to unconditional security assurances in an international
convention. Furthermore, it remains to be asked how a
veto-bound Council could conceivably stem aggression
committed by a nuclear-weapon State and take
appropriate measures against that State. Another lacuna in
the draft resolution is the failure to include the Non-
Aligned Movement's proposal that aggression with
nuclear weapons or the threat of such aggression against
a non-nuclear-weapon State Party to the NPT constitutes
a threat to international peace and security and
necessitates immediate measures on the part of the
Council, in conformity with Article 39 of the Charter and
consistent with the substance and spirit of the relevant
Articles of Chapter VII. This failure has rendered actions
and measures envisaged in the draft insignificant.

It is against this backdrop that the non-aligned
countries Parties to the NPT have doubts concerning the
purported significance of security assurances in the form
of a resolution by the Security Council, however solemnly
proclaimed and well-intentioned. Such assurances, to be
credible, must be reinforced by a firm commitment to
non-use of nuclear weapons and renunciation of such
strategic doctrines; this would offer an immediate and
more satisfactory solution to the universal quest for

 

security. We therefore believe that more far-reaching action
will be needed to ensure the security of all nations. None
the less, we recognize that the draft resolution constitutes
an initial step towards a legally binding international
instrument which should be broader in scope and
multilaterally negotiated. It will only be useful if the
nuclear-weapon States pursue this objective and ensure its
ultimate consummation. Its successful outcome could
further strengthen the non-proliferation regime and also
constitute an important step in the broader process of
nuclear disarmament.
