Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): First of all, let me thank Deputy Special Envoy Matar for her briefing, which, among other things, also mentioned the concerns about military operations in Idlib province in the north-west of Syria. As we said this morning (see S/PV.8707), Estonia joins those countries calling for an immediate ceasefire in Idlib and across Syria. In looking at the Constitutional Committee, it is clear that challenges surrounding its work are growing. Little - not to say no progress - has been made since last month's briefing in this Chamber (see S/PV.8696). We are four months into the Committee's meetings, but even a proper agenda is yet to be agreed on. Is that really progress that would satisfy the Syrian people or the Security Council? The apparent deadlock is a direct result of the Syrian authorities' unwillingness to commit themselves fully to the political process, as set out in resolution 2254 (2015). Instead, Damascus has gradually distanced itself from the provisions of the Council, despite the continuous efforts of the Special Envoy, who was in Syria just today. There are those who insist on not setting artificial deadlines to the work of the Constitutional Committee. However, let us be absolutely clear: no deadlines should not mean no results. No deadlines cannot mean no results. We use this opportunity to ask our Syrian colleagues: What can be done to bring Damascus to the negotiations table to actually seek a comprehensive solution? If undermining the work of Constitutional Committee continues, then we must be ready to look at other pending issues. Fortunately, resolution 2254 (2015) is rich in means to enhance the political process. In that regard, we also want to underline the crucial role of confidence-building measures that can give the political process more substance. Ordinary Syrians, as well as Ms. Matar, have highlighted the issue of arbitrarily detained and missing people. Syrians, both within the country and abroad, want to know the fate of their friends and relatives and are demanding the release of those who have been arrested without any just cause whatsoever. We recognize the Astana format working group for its efforts in the mutual release of detainees, and we welcome the announcement of a joint committee with the United Nations. However, equal exchanges are not sufficient, owing to the disparity in the number of detainees. The Syrian Government holds eighttimes more prisoners than other groups and parties combined - eight times more. In that light, it is clear that equal prisoner exchanges are not sustainable for the long-term. What is instead required is a unilateral release of arbitrarily detained people, especially political prisoners, women and minors. Such an act of unilateral release would help to restore the trust of Syrians in State institutions, send a positive message to Syrians abroad and support the political process, as well as the work of the Constitutional Committee.
