At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his detailed presentation describing the situation in the Middle East. The Niger has followed with great interest the latest developments in the region, including the declaration of 13 August, which announced the resumption of relations between the United Arab Emirates and Israel. The agreement between the two countries promises, among other things, the establishment of diplomatic relations, the resumption of air links, the intensification of trade, cooperation in the military and health fields, as well as Israel's suspension of its project of annexation of territories in the West Bank. If a rapprochement between Israel and the Arab countries contributes to easing tension and helps peace prevail, it will undoubtedly be welcomed with great enthusiasm as a long-awaited sign of hope for the Middle East. In the past decade, we have witnessed a great many announcements described as historic and strategic turning points without the expected positive effects. From Palestine to Syria, from Iraq to Afghanistan and Yemen, many countries and peoples are still facing the torments of violence, desolation and despair. That observation should challenge us and encourage us to support every sign of hope on the road to peace, at the altar of which so many innocent lives have been sacrificed and in pursuit of which many initiatives have failed. In the absence of Israel's official abandonment of its plan to annex the territories in the West Bank, the prospect of relaunching peace talks in the Israeli- Palestinian conflict will unfortunately remain an illusion. My country remains convinced that in order to achieve peace, which we have been seeking for nearly 70 years in the Middle East, the Palestinian cause cannot be circumvented. It stands out as a haunting reminder of the right of peoples to self-determination. The Palestinian question remains a priority that cannot be subject to an agreement between Israel and another third State. A sustainable treatment of this question necessarily requires talks between Israel and Palestine based on just and unanimously accepted terms, that is to say a two-State solution for Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and security, in strict compliance with the 1967 borders. Now more than ever, it is time for us to give hope to this people, so long exposed to the torments of instability and violence. The restraint shown by the Israeli authorities in not carrying out the threat of annexation, as well as the readiness expressed by the Palestinians to resume negotiations with Israel, are the signs of a new positive political momentum that the Security Council, the Middle East Quartet and the international community must do everything possible to maintain with a view to restarting Israeli-Palestinian peace talks and, thus, giving peace a chance. In that regard, we support the Secretary- General's proposal of the creation of a platform among the countries of the region that will enable them, through peaceful means, to resolve any problems that may arise between them. In conclusion, my delegation would like to express its great concern about the increase in the number of cases of coronavirus disease infections in Israel and the Palestinian territories. While two months ago the exemplary cooperation between the two authorities made it possible to manage the crisis effectively, today an exacerbation of the pandemic could be particularly disastrous on both sides. It will certainly be more so in the occupied Palestinian territories, especially in Gaza, where several factors, such as poverty, food insecurity, overpopulation, and the precariousness of the health system, accentuated by an unacceptable embargo, contribute to making the population even more vulnerable. In order to resolve this particularly worrisome situation, it is urgent that Israel, the occupying Power, take the effective measures required by international humanitarian law to ensure the well-being of the population in territories under its control. The international community must also support the efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East on the ground, because millions of needy people depend on its action. The Niger salutes the tireless efforts of Nickolay Mladenov and reaffirms its full commitment to supporting the efforts of the international community for a rapid settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which has a definite impact on peace, stability and security in the entire Middle East.
