Mr. Sauer (Finland): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the
United Kingdom. The full written version of these
remarks will be circulated in the Chamber.

The situation in the Middle East continues to
deserve full international attention. The European
Union (EU) wishes to express its serious concern about
the current trends on the ground, which threaten the
viability of the two-State solution and are dismantling
it piece by piece.

As already recalled in recent debates, the Middle
East peace process remains a key priority for the
European Union. The EU's position has been consistent
and remains unchanged. Our position is determined
on the basis of what we believe is in the best interests
of peace and stability in the region, as well as our
adherence to international law and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

We see no viable alternative to a negotiated two-
State solution that falls within the internationally agreed
parameters set out in the European Council conclusions
of July 2014; fulfils the legitimate aspirations of both
parties, including both Israeli and Palestinian security
needs and Palestinian aspirations for an independent,
democratic, contiguous, sovereign and viable State of
Palestine; ends the occupation that began in 1967; and
resolves all final-status issues, including the status of
Jerusalem as the future capital of both States.

It remains our first priority to keep the two-
State solution alive and, to that end, to safeguard the
possibility of new peace negotiations being held. We
hope that both the new Palestinian Government and
the future Government of Israel will share with us the
importance of resuming the peace process. In order to
achieve a just and lasting peace, any future plan for
Israel and Palestine must recognize and build upon the
internationally agreed parameters.

Israeli settlement construction has continued
unabated in recent months; plans for more than 4,600
new housing units were advanced by the Israeli
authorities only last week. The European Union's
position on the Israeli settlement policy is clear and
remains unchanged: we will continue to consider
Israeli settlements and their expansion in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, as illegal under
international law. The settlement policy erodes the
viability of the two-State solution and the prospects for
a lasting peace, as reaffirmed by resolution 2334 (2016).

The EU also expects the Israeli authorities to
take steps to restrain the increasing settler violence.
The situation in the occupied Palestinian territory has
continued to deteriorate, with no clear political horizon
in view. The EU firmly condemns all acts of violence,
terrorism and incitement to violence and hate, which are
fundamentally incompatible with advancing a peaceful
two-State solution.

The EU wishes to express its concern regarding
the recent funding crisis of the Palestinian Authority,
which has been exacerbated by Israel's decision to
withhold a percentage of the revenues it collects on
behalf of the Palestinian Authority and the latter's
subsequent refusal to accept any clearance transfers
unless the full amount is reinstated. Israel must fully
implement its obligations under the Paris Protocol.
The EU also supports the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance
to Palestinians, which contributes to safeguarding the
two-State solution, and it encourages the parties to
closely coordinate with the donors.

The EU reiterates its call upon all Palestinian factions
to engage in good faith with a view to reconciliation. A
single, legitimate and democratic Palestinian Authority,
with a common national vision and full control over
the whole Palestinian territory, including Gaza, is
critical for fulfilling the national aspirations of the
Palestinian people and achieving a viable Palestinian
State. We reiterate that there is no State of Palestine
without Gaza, or with Gaza alone. In that context, the
EU encourages the prompt establishment of a date for
the planned Palestinian elections.

We continue to follow the situation in Gaza with
great concern. We have repeatedly called on all parties
to take swift steps to bring about a fundamental change
in the humanitarian, political, security and economic
situation in the Gaza Strip, including the end of the
closure and the full opening of the crossing points,
while addressing Israel's legitimate security concerns.
The EU pays tribute to the efforts led by Egypt and the
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process to avoid further escalation and attempt to
improve the humanitarian situation in Gaza.

We welcome Israel's decision to increase part ofthe
fishing zone from 12 to 15 nautical miles off Gaza's
coast. We hope that decision will lead to additional
steps towards the further lifting of restrictions. As the
health system in Gaza continues to be under severe
strain, we urge all parties to facilitate the entry of much-
needed personnel and medical supplies. The lifting
of restrictions on the movement of people, including
to benefit those in need of medical care, services
and goods - in particular many goods designated
as dual-use items - is essential for reconstruction,
service delivery and required infrastructure projects.

In addition, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), which supports over 5 million Palestinian
refugees, is facing serious financial challenges for 2019.
The majority of Gaza's population is directly dependent
upon UNRWA'S food support for their basic needs.
The Agency lacks sufficient funds to meet its food
delivery to Gaza past June. UNRWA is key to regional
stability. We would like to commend UNRWA's efforts
to overcome the recent financial crisis. We firmly
support UNRWA's mandate and encourage others to
also demonstrate their support for its work.

The European Union is concerned by the findings
in the report of the United Nations Independent
Commission of Inquiry (A/HRC/29/52), in particular
that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the use
of live ammunition by Israeli security forces against
demonstrators may be unlawful. The Commission is of
the opinion that the Israeli Government has consistently
failed to meaningfully investigate crimes and violations
committed against Palestinians.

We urge the Israeli Government to carry out
meaningful investigations. The EU recalls that
compliance with international law, including
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law, by States and, when applicable, by non-State
actors is a cornerstone for peace and security. All those
responsible for non-compliance with those norms must
be held accountable. Human rights must be respected
on both sides.

The EU recalls the importance of a thriving and
diverse non-governmental organization (NGO) sector
and broader civil society sector and the vital role that
they play in open and democratic societies. We are
concerned that, in the current political landscape, the
efforts of those on all sides who seek to bridge the gap
between Israelis and Palestinians are being undermined.
The EU recalls the importance of the unhindered work
of civil society organizations, in particular human
rights organizations, both in Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territory, as they contribute to finding
common ground and work towards the achievement of
the two-State solution. In that regard, we urge Israel to
allow Mr. Omar Shakir and Human Rights Watch to
continue their human rights advocacy work unimpeded.
The EU will continue to grant financial support to
projects proposed by both Israeli and Palestinian NGOs
to address issues relating to human rights, equality and
peacebuilding, as it does for similar proposals from all
over the world.

While upholding its policy of clearly distinguishing
between the territory of the State of Israel and the
territories occupied by it since 1967, the EU rejects any
attempts to isolate Israel and does not support calls for a
boycott against Israel. The EU stands firm in protecting
the freedom of expression, the freedom of press and
the freedom of association, in line with the Charter of
Fundamental Rights of the European Union. The EU
stresses the importance of ensuring that journalists in
Israel, the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and
Gaza can perform their professional duties without
undue interference.

Lastly, the position of the European Union on the
status of the Golan Heights has not changed. In line
with international law and resolutions 242 (1967) and
497 (1981), the European Union does not recognize
Israeli sovereignty over the occupied Golan Heights.
International law affirms very clearly that borders
cannot be changed by military force.

