Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): I thank you
very much, Mr. President, for organizing this important
meeting. Let me start with some remarks concerning
the Israeli-Palestinian question.

Brazil supports a two-State solution, with peace
and security for Israelis and Palestinians. Recent
developments in Gaza only underscore the need for a
political solution to the question. In that regard, Brazil
welcomes the United States initiative to present a peace
plan. We understand that both sides will be asked to
make difficult decisions and concessions in order to
achieve peace, and we urge Israelis and Palestinians to
negotiate in good faith and with open minds. We need
to work towards a solution that is fair and just for all
parties involved. We note with satisfaction the current
rapprochement between Israel and the countries of the
Arab and Muslim worlds, as demonstrated by the recent
visits of heads of State and high-level authorities.

Regarding the situation in Syria, Brazil urges
all parties to engage constructively with the new
Special Envoy, Mr. Geir Pedersen, to whom we wish
every success. Brazil calls for the convening of a
constitutional committee in Syria without further
delay. That is a crucial step towards a much-needed
political solution, based on the parameters set forth in
the relevant resolutions, in particular resolution 2254
(2015), and the Sochi declaration. We are convinced
that a political process mediated by the United Nations,
while owned and led by the Syrian people, will bring
the conflict to an end.

Concerning the situation in Yemen, Brazil
welcomes the efforts of United Nations Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths to reach a ceasefire in the port of
Al-Hudaydah, through which crucial humanitarian
aid can be delivered to the population affected by
the conflict. We urge the parties to refrain from any
measures that might lead to a breach of the truce
established by the Stockholm Agreement. We believe
that, at the present moment, United Nations mediation
is fundamental to launching the negotiation process. We
confirm that Brazil will contribute military observers
to the new United Nations Mission to Support the
Hudaydah Agreement, approved by resolution 2452
(2019).

The recent crisis along the Blue Line between
Israel and Lebanon underscores the importance of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for
stability in the region. Brazil is proud ofits ongoing role
in UNIFIL, in which we currently deploy our largest
contingent of troops and have been in command of the
Maritime Task Force since 2011. We commend Israel
and Lebanon for their restraint and for avoiding any
provocative steps that could have further exacerbated
the situation, as well as for their shared commitment
to continue to work in coordination with UNIFIL to
maintain the prevailing calm along the Blue Line.

