Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): For the sixth time in 20 days, the Security Council is meeting to consider the situation in my country, the Syrian Arab Republic. For the third time in 20 days, the Council is listening to briefings by Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and his deputy. Some well-meaning individuals may believe that these repeated meetings reflect a commitment to the interests of Syria and the security and well-being of its citizens. However, that is not at all the case. While Member States of the Council are committed to the principle of international law and to the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, which they uphold, Governments of other Member States unfortunately seek to repeatedly exploit this platform to offend my Government and its allies, to make unfounded allegations and to obstruct the measures taken by the Syrian Government to fulfil its constitutional responsibility towards protecting its citizens from armed terrorist organizations. Some Member States even seek to turn the Council into a platform for NATO, thereby covering up acts of aggression that violate the Charter and threaten international peace and security, which it is incumbent on the Council to maintain. My delegation followed very carefully the briefing by Mr. Pedersen. We stress once again that the political process must be led and owned by the Syrians themselves and should be facilitated by the United Nations without any external interference. We also stress that all Member States inside and outside the Council must respect the sovereignty of the Syrian Arab Republic, its unity and its territorial integrity. It is strange that when the Constitutional Committee has been established and started work, Western Governments have significantly intensified their hostile actions and coercive economic measures against my country. That defies common sense and logic. It proves what we have often warned against. Indeed, those Governments are seeking to prolong the crisis in Syria, prevent its resolution and hinder the efforts of the Syrian Government and its allies to combat terrorism. The Governments of such countries have supported interference in the region through their agent, namely, Erdogan's regime, which violates international legitimacy, and encouraged it to undermine the sovereignty of my country and to launch direct military aggression against it in an attempt by that regime to save its armed terrorist groups. That regime and its operators have worked for years to recruit, finance, arm and move those terrorist groups from all over the world to my country through Turkish territory. Those in the Council who defend the aggression of the Turkish regime should remember that Idlib province is a part of the Syrian Arab Republic controlled by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which is an organization on the Security Council list of terrorist groups, as well as by other terrorist entities affiliated with it. They should also remember that the Astana agreements and the Sochi de-escalation agreement on Idlib excluded terrorist organizations from any ceasefire. In those agreements, the Turkish guarantor undertook to withdraw terrorist organizations, disarm them and prevent them from shelling and waging aggression against neighbouring regions. The agreements in no way allow terrorist organizations to transform Idlib and the surrounding areas into their stronghold, or to continue to take our citizens living there as hostages and use them as human shields. The agreements stressed the right of the Syrian Government and its allies to continue their fight against terrorism. We will not hesitate to do so until we liberate every inch of the territories of the Syrian Arab Republic. What is most important is that Syria is fighting terrorism and those who sponsor terrorism on our territory, rather than on the territory of other States. As the whole world has seen, the suffering of the Syrian civilians in Idlib is caused by the Turkishregime, which in recent days has supplied huge amounts of weapons and munitions to terrorists through the so- called humanitarian crossings. The Turkish regime has also targeted populated areas and certain military positions. It has provided military support to terrorists who use Syrian civilians as human shields in order to create a situation that enables them to continue to carry out their terrorist schemes. We have liberated parts of Aleppo and its rural areas in the north and south from the terrorists, who had been occupying them for many years. Just this morning, the first civilian aircraft took off from Damascus airport to Aleppo airport, with several journalists on board. Millions of Syrians took to the streets, particularly in Aleppo city, to express their joy at being liberated from the armed terrorists groups that had shelled and bombed them every single day, resulting in thousands of martyrs and wounded people. It is strange that some States in the Council ignore the crimes committed by terrorists, others sometimes defend them as being angels. I ask those members to take the angels back to their own countries. The Syrian State, the one most concerned about its own citizens, needs help rather than being besieged and having its image tarnished. Furthermore, thousands of Syrians have started to return to their homes in liberated areas of Aleppo, Idlib and Hama. We call on all Syrians who had to leave their villages because of the war against terrorism to return to their homes. The Syrian State will guarantee their security and protection and will ensure all the necessary conditions for a normal life. Those running terrorist organizations in Turkey and in certain countries in Western Europe should compel their terrorists to allow our citizens to go back to their homes. Syria once again calls upon United Nations agencies to ensure humanitarian assistance to our citizens, rather than publishing communiques and providing briefings that do not reflect reality. We also stress that those terrorist organizations are responsible for all the destruction and the suffering of Syrians in Idlib and elsewhere. We once again express our disappointment about certain United Nations agencies, particularly the World Health Organization, that do not deliver medical assistance through the Boukamal crossing point to Syria. My delegation condemns the fact that the United States occupation forces and their armed militias have prevented staff of the Ministry of Health from delivering medication to patients who suffer from leishmaniasis along the eastern banks of the Euphrates River. In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its call for ending the practice of using the Security Council to further particular agendas, which is contrary to the Council's role and its relevant resolutions, which all stress the need for respecting the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Syria and its people. We also reiterate that achieving a solution to the Syrian crisis requires us to abolish terrorism and put an end to the practice of Governments supporting terrorism and stop their flagrant interference and aggression against my country.
