Mr. Konuzin on assuming office as the new Chairman
of the CTC and to thank him for his detailed
presentation on the recent work of the CTC. I also
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
Ambassador Ruperez on taking up the post of
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, (CTED) established
in accordance with Security Council resolution 1535
(2004). There can never be any justification
whatsoever for terrorism, which takes the lives of
innocent people, and we expect the CTC, under its new
Chairman, and the CTED, under its Executive Director,
to provide the international community with the
leadership it needs to respond with effective counter-
terrorism measures.

I would like to make three points.

First, I wish to emphasize the importance of
assistance for capacity-building. Providing assistance
to enhance a Member State's counter-terrorism
capacity not only helps to prevent acts of terrorism on
its territory and to contribute to its security and
development, but also contributes to maintaining the
security and prosperity of the neighbouring States and
of the region as a whole. For recipient States,
establishing counter-terrorism measures and preventing
terrorism are also important preconditions for
development. We appreciate the priority that the CTC
places on technical assistance. We hope that the CTC
might at the same time endeavour, through its planned
visits, to promote actual, appropriate technical
assistance projects.

We also believe that it is important for Member
States to share information on terrorism. Through the
Secure and Facilitated International Travel Initiative,
announced at the Group of Eight (G-8) Summit
Meeting in June this year, G-8 members will raise
standards, modernize procedures and exchange
information in order to deter threats, reduce costs and
help to ensure the safe and efficient movement of
passengers and cargo. Taking into account that such
international cooperation is being undertaken, we think
it would be worthwhile for the CTC also to consider
setting up a forum for the CTC and other interested
Member States to conduct a joint study on more
effective counter-terrorism measures.

My Government provides counter-terrorism
assistance, especially to the countries of South-East
Asia, and it intends to strengthen such efforts. We are
placing particular priority on three areas: capacity-
building of law-enforcement organizations, preventing
the movement of terrorists across borders through
stricter immigration control and promoting accession to
counter-terrorism-related international treaties and
protocols. We also intend to continue our cooperation
with counter-terrorism measures through official
development assistance and other means. For example,
Japan recently decided to grant approximately $6.8
million to Indonesia in order to improve security at its
airports and seaports. Also, in June this year my
Government hosted the Heads of Asian Coast Guard
Agencies Meeting in Tokyo with a View to building
cooperative relations among agencies and enabling
them to share information on maritime security in the
Asian region.

Next, in relation to my first point - the
importance of capacity-building - we need to put
more effort into preventive measures. If the terrorists
of today have a weakness, it is the routes they use to
procure weapons and funds, which we can cut off. To
do that, however, it is necessary to put in place
preventive measures based on international
cooperation. In that regard, it is becoming more
important to raise standards with regard to the
capabilities of States to combat terrorism by providing
assistance for capacity-building. I wish to inform the
Council that this month, together with the Malaysian
Government, my Government hosted a seminar on the
prevention of terrorism employing chemical weapons
and managing crises in which they are used. It was the
first cooperative programme of the Southeast Asia
Regional Centre for Counter-Terrorism (SEARCCT) in
Malaysia.

Third, my Government has high expectations for
the organizational plan, which is expected to be
submitted to the CTC by the end of this month, as its
implementation will strengthen the counter-terrorism
function of the CTC. On the other hand, upon the
establishment of the new structure, we request that the
Executive Director of the CTED and the CTC create an
efficient organization, one that avoids waste. We wish
to reiterate that although Japan supports the
revitalization of the CTC, that does not mean that
expenditures for such purposes should be allowed to
grow unrestrained. We also request that steps be taken
to ensure transparency with regard to the sources of
financing of the CTC's activities. In addition, it is
important to enhance cooperation with the Al Qaeda
and Taliban Sanctions Committee, in accordance with
the CTC's work programme for the twelfth 90-day
period - the third quarter of this year. We hope that
the CTED will establish a strong working attitude that
will further strengthen its cooperative relationship with
related organizations such as the Al Qaeda and Taliban
Sanctions Committee and concerned Member States.

Although the CTC is going through a transitional
period while it establishes the CTED, we would like to
see the new organization begin full-scale operations as
soon as possible. My Government wishes to cooperate
in making that process a success. I would again like to
express our appreciation for the dedication shown in
this important period by Mr. Konuzin, Ambassador
Ruperez, their outstanding staff and the Committee
secretariat and experts.

