Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the Permanent Representative of Poland
to the United Nations, Ambassador Joanna Wronecka,
for the briefing she delivered in her capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005), concerning the Sudan.

After taking part in the meetings of the Committee
and reviewing the reports of the Panel of Experts,
including the final report (see S/2019/34), it became
apparent that the topics of internally displaced persons,
security and the future of Darfur prevailed in the
discussions and reports of the Committee.

We express our satisfaction about the continuous
decrease in the number of internally displaced persons
in Darfur for several years. We look forward to Member
States offering all the necessary support to the Sudan
in creating the conditions conducive for the return and

resettling of internally displaced persons, as well as
providing them with basic services and the continued
delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need.

Concerning the security situation, we are near
full agreement on the stability that most of Darfur
is witnessing, with the exception of some combat
operations near Jebel Marra. The time has come for
the Security Council to review the sanctions regime in
accordance with resolution 2400 (2018), with the aim of
lifting it gradually and in a manner that would enhance
the Government's ability to enforce its authority
throughout all of its territories. That would be in line
with developments on the ground and with the degree
of cooperation that the parties exhibit with respect to
the peaceful efforts being made.
We reiterate our appreciation for the efforts of the
Sudanese authorities to collect arms and renew the
ceasefire. Bringing about security in Darfur has pushed
most of the armed factions out of the Sudan, but they
will continue to threaten peace and security wherever
they go next.

In conclusion, with regard to the future of Darfur,
a political solution remains a priority for us all. Despite
the fact that no major political breakthrough has taken
place during the reporting period, the Government of the
Sudan continues to be the only side that has participated
in all of the negotiations on Darfur. Moreover, the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur remains the foundational
guiding document for the future of Darfur, in accordance
with resolution 2429 (2018). All of this is also related to
the Security Council's review of sanctions pursuant to
resolution 2400 (2018). We had hoped that this review
would have taken place within a year of the adoption of
that resolution.

We would like to reiterate our support for the Sudan
in moving forward to build and sustain peace in Darfur.

