Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I should
like to thank Special Representative Mr. Jan Kubis for
his briefing. I should like also to thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, for
his statement.

In recent years, thanks to the hard work of the
people and the Government of Afghanistan, the
peaceful reconstruction of Afghanistan has registered
positive progress. But the country is also facing many
challenges and risks. China hopes that a peaceful
transition will be realized so that the Afghan people
can focus their energy on development.

Here I should like to emphasize the following
points.

First, China welcomes the fact that the two rounds
of presidential elections were held in a largely smooth
manner, marking an important step in the building of
Afghan State institutions and reflecting the aspirations
of the Afghan people to peace and a better life. At the
same time, China has taken note of the disagreement
between the relevant parties over the ballot count in
the second round. We welcome the positive role that
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) has played in the auditing process. We also
sincerely hope that the relevant actors in Afghanistan
will put the fundamental interests of their country and
people first, properly settle their differences through
dialogue and consultation, complete the election process
and form a new Government as soon as possible, and
maintain national stability and unity.

Secondly, China staunchly supports the efforts
of the Afghan people towards the realization of an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned national reconciliation

process. We support the playing of an important role
by the Afghan High Peace Council. We hope that the
international community will help Afghanistan to
independently move forward with the reconciliation
process. We also welcome the constructive assistance
provided by neighbouring countries in this regard.

Thirdly, China is deeply concerned at the
increasing number of security incidents in certain parts
of the country and the mounting civilian casualties. We
support Afghanistan's efforts to enhance the capacity of
its National Security Forces and police force in order to
respond to the various security threats. We welcome the
continued assistance of the international community in
that regard. At the same time, international initiatives
should appropriately accommodate the reasonable
concerns of the relevant parties, in particular the
countries of the region.
Fourthly, China calls on the international
community to honor its commitment and ensure
uninterrupted economic assistance and support. The
key is to help Afghanistan implement the priorities of
its national development plan, increase its capacity to
achieve independent economic and social development,
and eliminate the sources of terrorism, drug production
and trafficking, and cross-border organized crime.

Fifthly, China supports Afghanistan's efforts to
participate more intensively in regional cooperation,
and, on the basis of mutual respect, equality and mutual
benefit, enhance mutual trust with the countries of
the region and deepen cooperation in various fields.
We should give full play to the role of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and other regional
mechanisms so as to achieve common security and
development and allow the question of Afghanistan
to move along its trajectory in line with the common
interests of the Afghan people and the peoples of the
region as a whole.

Sixthly, China supports the United Nations
taking the lead in coordinating international efforts
for the resolution of the question of Afghanistan. We
hope that UNAMA will actively perform its duties
according to its mandate, enhance communication with
the Government, coordinate international assistance
efforts and build the confidence of the international
community in the transition process in Afghanistan.

We appreciate the important role played by
Special Representative Jan Kubis in promoting the
peaceful transition of Afghanistan, and we wish
him all the best in his future endeavours. As one of
Afghanistan's neighbours, China has always respected
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Afghanistan and respects the path of development
chosen by its people in accordance with their national
reality. We are participating actively in the peaceful
reconstruction of Afghanistan and are committed to
deepening our strategic partnership. We look forward
to a united, stable and friendly Afghanistan that enjoys
sustainable development.

The Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs has
recently appointed a special envoy for Afghanistan in
order to enhance communication. We will maintain
close communication with the Afghan Government and
the relevant stakeholders so as to finalize, as soon as
possible, the dates of the fourth Ministerial Conference
of the Istanbul Process. China stands ready to work
together with the international community to play a
constructive role in helping Afghanistan to achieve
political reconciliation, economic revitalization, lasting
peace and sustainable development.

