I thank members of the Security Council for the opportunity to brief them once again. I want to go back to this time last year. Then, the political situation was fragile. Parties had just agreed to a second extension of the pretransitional period, further delaying the peace deal for 100 days. The lack of political will among the leaders was provoking disillusionment and anger among their citizens. I am pleased to report, as we come to the end of 2020, that there has been progress. Through compromise, parties have successfully formed a transitional Government, led by President Salva Kiir with First Vice-President Riek Machar. All states and counties positions have been allocated, and nine out of 10 Governors are in place. The Council of Ministers is meeting, and most national institutions are functioning, at least at a basic level. Those achievements are to be commended. Progress, however is lagging. Transitional security arrangements aimed at unifying security forces are stalled, leaving combatants in training centres often without adequate food or shelter. The dispute over the proposed governorship of Johnson Olony in Upper Nile - the only Governor yet to take up office - is being used to halt the appointment of country commissioners, an essential level of local Government. The hold-up leaves a local vacuum of power and makes it difficult to nip in the bud brewing intercommunal violence. Momentum in South Sudan's peace process is linked to the strength of international engagement. However, attention by Member States in the Horn is understandably directed elsewhere, contributing to the sense of drift, which is frequently remarked upon. Nevertheless, collectively, we need to remain focused on South Sudan to guide peace implementation. So far this year, more than 2,000 civilians have lost their lives during local- level conflict, which is being weaponized and turbocharged by external actors acting in their own economic or political interests. In the past quarter, violent incidents dropped 64 per cent compared to the previous quarter, but as the dry season approaches, we are preparing ourselves for a possible resurgence of volatility. Several underlying factors have created a perfect storm for those already facing hardship. Acute food insecurity is affecting more than half the population. It is driven by displacement from conflict, severe flooding affecting 1 million people, with the loss of livestock and crops, and a worsening economic situation owing to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), on top of existing pervasive poverty. The latest Acute Food Insecurity analysis of the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification has found that communities in six counties are facing "famine likely" or "catastrophic" conditions. Humanitarian workers are doing their best to assist those in need although, tragically, nine have been killed this year, three times the number killed in 2019. Historically, the dry season exacerbates those problems. Farmers and pastoralists have lost crops and cattle, and often seek to recover their losses through violent raids on others. Competition for scarce resources like grazing land and water also become points of tension between farmers and cattle herders during migration. Anticipating that, we have established five new temporary bases in conflict hotspots in line with our "proactive, robust and nimble" approach to peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Our integrated military and civilian teams are in place right now to deter violence, and support reconciliation so that communities can reach an agreement to peacefully coexist. That presence has markedly de-escalated conflict, particularly where we can make contact among parties early. The South Sudan Government's refusal to enable access to the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to many areas has hampered this kind of work considerably. While those restrictions have eased over recent weeks, we will continue to monitor and report progress. In the medium-term, the addition of the multi-donor Reconciliation, Stabilization and Resilience Trust Fund in South Sudan will target the underlying causes of violence. It harnesses the particular skills of United Nations agencies, non- governmental agencies and UNMISS in the pursuit of a common strategy. Our seven engineering contingents have also undertaken a major road- building programme to repair 3,200 kilometres of roads. Improving roads will boost connections and communication among regions and will increase trade, which generates economic incentives, create jobs and development but, most significantly, builds peace. Meanwhile, at the national level, UNMISS is working to establish underlying agreements on vital aspects of the peace process. A number of dialogue forums have been held with political parties, women, youth, media and faith-based organizations, most notably on the essential issue of drafting the Constitution. Let me touch on the transition of the protection of civilians (POC) sites to conventional displacement camps. The POC sites were established seven years ago to protect people fleeing from intense conflict. That threat no longer exists today, with most residents now moving daily among the camps and towns, while still being able to access humanitarian services. In the past three months, Bor, Wau and Juba POC sites have been successfully transitioned. That occurred smoothly, as a result of joint planning and consultation with national and local authorities, security services, humanitarians and the displaced communities themselves. Planning is under way at Bentiu, where the Government and the opposition began joint policing, and Malakal, which is more complex and will only transition when the time is right. At the newly designated camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs), the transition has occurred without incident, and UNMISS remains engaged in support of the displaced communities. Our United Nations police officers provide comprehensive support for their national counterparts, have co-located with them in police posts and are providing training for community policing. The Government, with UNMISS technical support, has assumed ownership of the sites and is now obliged to work towards more durable solutions whereby IDPs can return home to live safely and with dignity. I also want to touch briefly on the recently completed independent strategic review of UNMISS, which was sparked by the changed situation in South Sudan. A ceasefire has been in place for three years and a peace agreement for two, and the Transitional Government is functioning. Although subnational violence has been a tragic feature this year, it is important to remember that the scale of violence and displacement is significantly less than in 2016 when the war among political actors was at its peak. That progress has enabled the redesignation of the POC sites. The changed circumstances also require the UNMISS mandate to evolve, which was the rationale behind the Council's instructions for the review, pursuant to resolution 2514 (2020). UNMISS strategy going forward creates important opportunities, some of which are touched on in the independent strategic review. First, although UNMISS is termed a peacekeeping mission, our central task is a political one. We understand that politics must have primacy in our efforts to achieve our peacebuilding and protection goals in a country that has suffered from a persistent lack of political will among its leaders to implement change. That cannot happen on its own but requires the Mission to have a close strategic partnership with the countries of the region and continent. Secondly, our duty is to provide protection to those who need it most. The withdrawal of troops from passive, static duties at POC sites will enable increased outreach, through hub-and-spoke action and enhanced mobility, to areas where civilians' lives are threatened. Retaining assets in order to be nimble and proactive is essential to our effectiveness. The change will also allow for a gradual downsizing of overall force numbers. Thirdly, the shift out of POC sites will enable a focus on strengthening the capabilities of the South Sudan police and addressing the insidious impunity that persists. That will occur together with increased support for prosecutors and courts, building on the success of the mobile courts. Only by extending the domestic rule of law can we end impunity, particularly with regard to gender-based violence. Fourthly, as well maintaining the momentum of the peace process, preparations must begin for elections and for becoming more proactive on security-sector reform and, ultimately, disarmament and reintegration. Yes, there have been some political gains, despite the impact of COVID-19. However, we are acutely aware that the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan continues to stagnate, with many benchmarks well behind schedule. We urge the parties to take concrete steps to breathe fresh life into the process and above all to compromise in order to achieve the peace dividends that citizens deserve. As always, we will be right by their side, doing everything we can to make the hopes of the South Sudanese people for a peaceful and prosperous future a reality.
