Mr. De Mistura: I am briefing members of the
Council from Geneva as we prepare for the eighth
round of the United Nations convened intra-Syrian
talks. Allow me to explain how we got here over the
past month and decided on the approach to the talks at
the moment.

Last month (see S/PV.8076), as those present
will remember, I said that after Raqqa and after Deir
eZ-Zor - and let us now perhaps also say after the
Government of Syria recently defeated the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in its last stronghold
of Abu Kamal - the operation to combat and defeat
the territorial foothold of ISIL in Syria would have
completed its main tasks and there would be a moment
of truth to bring about a real political process. I still
believe that the moment of truth has arrived, although I
want to register my serious concern over the tremendous
escalation of violence in eastern Ghouta in recent
weeks and the ongoing restrictions of humanitarian
access in that area. As ISIL is being defeated, neither
side should turn their guns back on the de-escalation
areas. I therefore would like to urge, together with
those present, the Astana guarantors to address those
challenges in order to avoid the problem reaching the
de-escalation areas.

With respect to the talks, in order to prepare for
real talks in Geneva I have been calling and asking for
real diplomacy. My messages have essentially been the
following. First, the Government delegation should
come ready to negotiate. Secondly, we need a united
opposition delegation with common positions that will
come ready to negotiate. Thirdly, negotiations will take
place in Geneva and with no preconditions. Fourthly,
they should initially negotiate a work plan, focusing on
the essential 12 living principles and the constitutional
and electoral issues with a view towards implementing
resolution 2254 (2015). Fifthly, all other initiatives
should support the United Nations mediation process
that the Security Council has mandated that the United
Nations alone conduct.

We have seen signals on all those points, and we
will now see what happens in Geneva. I note with great
interest that in Danang, Sochi and Riyadh, important
meetings have taken place that might help us, in my
opinion, to begin a genuine negotiation process in
Geneva. International players are clearly looking for
some common ground based on the implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015), resulting from our urging
Syrians to begin to find some common ground, too.

In Danang, President Putin of Russia and President
Trump of the United States affirmed that the political
process

"[m]ust include the full implementation of United
Nations Security Council 2254 (2015), including
constitutional reform and free and fair elections
under the United Nations supervision, held to the
highest international standards of transparency,
with all Syrians, including members of the diaspora,
eligible to participate".

The statement of the two Presidents followed their
taking note of what they termed

"President Assad's recent commitment to the
Geneva process and constitutional reform and
elections as called for under United Nations
Security Council resolution 2254 (2015)".
As a mediator, I also noted that President Al-Assad
said in Sochi, after meeting President Putin on
24 November, "We do not want to look back. We will
accept and talk with anyone, who is really interested in
a political settlement".

Notwithstanding those potential interesting
and frankly, important signals, when my Deputy,
Ambassador Ramsay, held consultations in Damascus
with the Government over the weekend, the Government
had not yet confirmed its participation in Geneva, but
indicated that we would be hearing from it soon. Last
night, we received a message that the Government
would not travel to Geneva today. Naturally, we hope,
and indeed expect, that the Government will be on its
way shortly, particularly in light ofPresident Al-Assad's
commitment to President Putin when they met in Sochi.

Turning our attention to the opposition, last week
over three intensive days - and I witnessed at least one
and a half, if not two of them - an expanded opposition
conference was convened in Riyadh. The participants
reflected components of the Syrian mosaic and the
ideological diversity within the Syrian opposition
and society. Resolution 2254 (2015) mentions three
meetings by name: Riyadh, Cairo and Moscow. They
were all present.

Armed groups controlling territory inside Syria,
including those involved in Astana and the various
de-escalation arrangements, were active participants in
Riyadh. There was finally significant participation by
women. There was a strong presence of independents,
including activists, business people and tribal figures.
Several parties based inside Syria were actually
represented through their own political umbrellas. As
the Riyadh initiative was clearly designed within the
framework of advancing resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva process, which speaks clearly of three by name
and others, I was glad to attend it to urge the participants
to move ahead. I therefore took note of the international
attendees at the opening of the conference, including
Russian President's Special Envoy Lavrentiev.

After I left to travel to Moscow for useful
consultations, Foreign Minister Lavrov and I were both
active in assisting the efforts of Saudi Foreign Minister
Al-Jubeir, whose determined efforts we really should be
appreciating in order to obtain the outcome that we saw.
The Syrian High Negotiations Commission formed in

Riyadh is arriving in Geneva as we speak. I expect
all arrivals from various locations to be complete by
tomorrow morning. I publicly noted that participation
in Riyadh was an unequivocal rejection of terrorism
and an affirmation that the only solution to the crisis is
political and not military.

I noted that a united opposition delegation was
formed, its composition reflecting that of conference
participation. I noted that the delegation was tasked
to negotiate in Geneva without any preconditions,
to discuss all issues on the agenda and to use the
implementation of relevant United Nations resolutions
as the sole reference for the negotiations. Assuming
that both parties arrive in Geneva, we will seek to assist
them in commencing serious discussions and, I hope,
negotiations. I should like to make one thing in particular
clear - we will not accept any precondition from either
party. Let us be clear what a precondition is. It is when
one party says "I will not begin to negotiate with the
other side unless they do or say the following ...". I
hope that both parties hear this message.

I will also assess, as a mediator should do, the
parties' engagement by what they do in the room, how
positively they engage on a work plan, and whether
they show genuine readiness to discuss and negotiate,
regardless of their publicly stated positions on any
issue. We know there will always be differences; that
is why negotiations are needed. All sides have the
right to express their opinions, which may not be
pleasant for the other to hear, as long as they do not put
preconditions or refuse to talk to the other side. That is
what negotiations are all about.

Resolution 2254 (2015) is a guideline for this
endeavor. What, then, will the work plan look like,
more or less? We can get an idea by working backwards
from the end goal of resolution 2254 (2015). Members
will recall that that resolution culminates in the
end goal of free and fair elections held under United
Nations supervision and meeting the highest standards
of accountability and transparency, with all Syrians,
including members of the Diaspora, eligible to vote.
This includes refugees, of course; there can be no
exclusion. The elections must be preceded by the
popular ratification of a new constitution. The draft
constitution should be prepared through an inclusive
process and according to an inclusive schedule set, as
resolution 2254 (2015) says, via a process in Geneva.
Clearly, the drafting and approval process must be
include everyone. A national dialogue and/or national
conference would be important components of the
overall process.

Syria's engagement in and negotiation on these
matters should proceed on the basis of resolution
2254 (2015) and be guided by the 12 living principles
developed during the process, which project a clear
vision for the future of Syria that can be shared by all.
I believe that, with good will, it should be possible to
bridge the gaps regarding these principles. If possible,
we will also begin to explore issues pertaining to baskets
l and 4: governance and counter-terrorism, and security
governance and confidence-building measures.

I will engage all those in Geneva in discussion
on all of this. I will share with them thoughts on and
a work plan for the negotiation process. And as I
do so, I will remind them that the time has come to
demonstrate, not to us, but to the Syrian people, that
they care about their survival, their lives and the lives
of their loved ones through immediate, unhindered,
sustained humanitarian access, medical evacuations
from the besieged areas, a willingness to address the
plight of detainees, abductees and missing persons, and
a concrete beliefin negotiations on a political process.

Throughout the process, various ideas have
emerged on a wider gathering of Syrian stakeholders.
Indeed, the Geneva process itself does call for such
a gathering of Syrians, and I have been building the
foundation for it by inviting Syrians from all walks
of life, from inside and outside, to participate. In this
context, I also wish to stress that more than 200 - I
repeat, 200 - civil society actors will be engaged here
in Geneva in the United Nations-led political process
over the coming weeks as part of the intra-Syrian talks.
In the coming days, the Women's Advisory Board will
be fully engaged once again, just as I hope it will be in
the real negotiations.

I will engage a group of Syrian legal and
constitutional experts and hear their advice and
expertise. I will engage with a civil society organization
with human rights expertise, including on detainees,
abductees and missing persons. Aided by technology,
we will be able to get in touch with refugee community
leaders in Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey, and with civil
society actors working in hard-to-reach and besieged
areas. All of this will be done from here in Geneva.
I count on their commitment to the political process,
sense of citizenship and real contact with the real
problems on the ground and their own insights and ideas
in order to strengthen our ongoing mediation efforts.
I note the initiative of France to bring together in
Geneva representatives of the five permanent members
of the Security Council for a preparatory meeting
tomorrow, in which I have been invited to participate
and give further detail on the agenda of this round. I
warmly welcome any expression of support by the
international community, including in particular the
Security Council, for efforts to implement resolution
2254 (2015) through a United Nations-led political
process in Geneva.

As Council members are aware, the Russian
Federation has continued to pursue plans for a large
gathering related to Syria, on a date in the relatively
near future to be confirmed. It has been reported that
the Presidents of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Russian Federation and Turkey met recently in Sochi.
The Russian Federation has indeed sought United
Nations support for this conference. I have been in
continuous and open consultation with them. I have
also continued to assess the views of Syrians and the
wider international community, including all members
of the Security Council, bearing in mind the mandate
entrusted to the United Nations by the Council. It is
therefore, as far as I can see, premature for me to say
anything regarding this initiative at this stage. I will
continue to view this proposal and all other initiatives
through the same prism - does it contribute to effective
United Nations-led intra-Syrian negotiations in Geneva
to implement resolution 2254 (2015)?

Syria has been at war for the past six years. Half
of its population has fled their homes. Reconstruction
will cost at least $250 billion. There have been myriad
obstacles to this settlement: a constellation of actors, a
variety of shifting agendas, and a real and continuing
danger of soft but concrete fragmentation of Syrian
territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence. We
have also witnessed the largest terror group in history,
bringing terrorists from over 100 countries, and the
use of force against civilians on a horrific scale. All
of that has transpired before our eyes over the past six
years. This crisis - one of the worst in the history of
the United Nations - now has the real potential to
move towards a genuine political process. A clearer
map of the de-escalation, ceasefire and de-confliction
arrangement has emerged, largely enabled by the Astana
and Amman processes. We now see the emergence of
international consensus. We must begin to stitch the
process together into concrete results, thereby enabling

Syrians to determine their own future freely. The united
support of the international community, centred in the
Council, will be vital for negotiations to move forward
in a concrete way.
