Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish ): My delegation has always felt that the success of
the peace process in the Middle East depends to a great
extent on compliance with the commitments agreed by the
parties and on guaranteeing the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people. There have been many achievements
since the Madrid Peace Conference three years ago. That
event, together with the signing of the Declaration of
Principles between the Palestine Liberation Organization
and Israel and the historic meeting in Washington in
September 1993, were factors that made it possible for the
parties to recognize each other and for the Middle East
region to enter into a new stage, which the international
community welcomed as an encouraging sign in that
negotiation and respect for the norms and principles of
international law would replace the tension and the violence
that for so long had afflicted the peoples of the region.
With the initiation of this new era in the relations between
Palestinians and Israelis it was hoped that those practices
that might mean a return to the past or that might obstruct
the transition to the negotiation of a definitive agreement
would be abandoned. Unfortunately, at the present time the
peace process is confronted by problems that are the result
of practices that could frustrate any possibility of success in
the negotiations.
Jerusalem, as we all know, remains a central issue, not
only for the Palestinians, Arabs and Muslims, but also for
Israelis the world over. East Jerusalem is a religious,
cultural, economic and political centre for the Palestinian
people. It is an important part of their life, and therefore a
territory where they legitimately can and should exercise
their rights freely. T 0 try to take sovereign action over all
Jerusalem simply shows a lack of realism and can only lead
to obstructing the possibility of completely changing the
present situation into one of true peace.

This is why my delegation, as other permanent
representatives have stated, considers unacceptable the
confiscation, by the Israeli Government, of Palestinian lands
in the city of Jerusalem. Those acts violate international
law, the relevant resolutions of this Council and the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949, and in our view, could also
affect the resolution of other sensitive matters in the
negotiating process, such as the question of the settlements
or the recognition of sovereignty.

My delegation believes that the peace process must
be preserved. Therefore, we are of the view that the
Government of Israel must respect its international
commitments and that, as occupying Power and party to
the negotiations, it must refrain from imposing limitations
on the Palestinian people's exercise of its rights.

Lastly, my delegation believes that recognition of the
rights of the Palestinian people is a necessary condition
for attaining the objective of a lasting peace in the Middle
East, and that, in the negotiations towards a peace, it is
essential for there to be continuous progress and for
inflexible or discouraging attitudes to be avoided at all
costs.

