Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): I thank Under-Secretary- General Mark Lowcock and Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for their briefings on the situation in Syria. First of all, Viet Nam would like to share its grave concern over the intensified hostilities in north-west Syria, particularly in Idlib. The substantial escalation in the past few days only compounds the plight of hundreds of thousands of civilians who are already in a dire situation, paying an inestimable price in this protracted crisis. The recent numbers given by our briefers today are heart-rending, especially with regard to children. The protection of civilians has to be among the top priorities for all parties. We would also like to emphasize the utmost importance of maintaining and ensuring the functioning of health facilities and humanitarian services on the ground. Secondly, to prevent any further deterioration, we call on all parties concerned to put an end to hostilities, exercise maximum restraint and strictly observe international law, including international humanitarian law, and the relevant Security Council resolutions. We reiterate our consistent position that the conflict in Syria must be settled through a sustainable political solution, in accordance with international law and the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, including respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference in the internal affairs of Syria, as well as the aspirations of the Syrian people. We urge the Syrian Government and all parties concerned to redouble their efforts to de-escalate the situation, paving the way for a comprehensive, lasting solution. We call on international partners to further intensify diplomatic efforts, bilaterally and multilaterally, to help ensure conducive conditions for peace and stability in Syria. Last but not least, we would like to reiterate our support for the work of Special Envoy Pederson, the United Nations system and its humanitarian partners working on the ground, assisting Syrians. The Syrian people have suffered too much for too long. Let us work together to help them to end this crisis in the interests of the peace, stability and development of Syria and the region.
