Ms. Burgstaller (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.

At the outset, I should like to thank Pakistan
for taking this initiative to hold an open debate on
the multidimensional approach to United Nations
peacekeeping. The Nordic countries share the basic
premises of the concept note distributed ahead of
the meeting (S/2013/4, annex) and fully agree with
the notion that a multidimensional approach is key
to building lasting peace. I will focus my statement
on three main issues related to the topic of today's
debate: multidimensional operations, coordination and
coherence, and financing.

Multidimensional peacekeeping operations provide
the basis for a strong link between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, but a multidimensional approach also
puts new demands on the missions. There is a need
to train police and military personnel to operate in
multidimensional settings to ensure that the United
Nations will have the right person in the right place
at the right time. Also, more effort should be directed
at strengthening the peacekeepers' capacity to create
an enabling environment for peacebuilding activities,
which include such critical areas as security sector
reform, the rule of law and human rights. The global
focal point could be an important contributor to
achieving these objectives.

In addition to police and military personnel,
missions also require stronger civilian capabilities.
We fully support the Secretary-General's initiative
to respond to the increasing demands for civilian
personnel. In this context, the creation of CAPMATCH
was a very important step forward. We commend the
Secretariat and the civilian capacities team for making
good progress in getting this new system for mobilizing
civilian capabilities from both the global South and
the global North up and running. Furthermore, we
also encourage the Secretariat to continue its efforts
to improve the gender balance of the mission staff,
including in leadership positions.

The United Nations must deliver as one, including
in a mission setting where there needs to be a very close
integration between the United Nations country team
and the peacekeeping mission, especially on planning
and implementing civilian tasks. There should be a
stronger focus on coordination and coherence with
other actors in the field, such as international financial
institutions, regional organizations and bilateral
partners. Finding pragmatic ways to operate in close
coordination, building on each other's comparative
advantages, is key. The joint ventures in the Liberian
context between the United Nations police and bilateral
partners is a useful example of how this can be done.

Such an integrated approach also allows the Security
Council to achieve its goals without overloading the
peacekeeping missions with tasks others may be better
equipped to carry out in the peacebuilding area. In
this regard, we encourage closer cooperation between
the Council and the country configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Finally, I would like to make a few comments
on financing. Proper resourcing is important. The
elaboration of mandates in the Security Council cannot
be delinked from the debates about budget in other
forums, and this is essential in the context of ensuring a
smooth transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding
and long-term development. In his report for the 2013
session of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
(A/67/632), the Secretary-General emphasizes the
need to ensure sustained international support in the
transition phase. The Nordic countries believe that such
support is crucial to reach the relevant end-states.

Let me conclude by stressing that in all these
efforts nothing is more important than the role of
the host country. To reach the desired end-states in
United Nations missions, broad national ownership
is of vital importance. Good political leadership and
accountability are essential for successful outcomes.

