Today the Security Council is renewing its call to action from resolution 2292 (2016), whereby, to contribute to the enforcement of the arms embargo on Libya, the Security Council authorized Member States, acting nationally or through regional organizations, to inspect vessels on the high seas off the coast of Libya that are believed to violate the arms embargo. Four years later, against the backdrop of a steady escalation of fighting and attacks on civilians and civilian targets, sadly, that call to action remains relevant. Extending the authorization to inspect ships sends an important signal that the international community remains seized of the situation in Libya and is willing and ready to act. I commend the efforts of the European Union (EU), which has mobilized considerable resources pursuant to that authorization, in particular with the deployment of the former European Union military operation in the Southern Central Mediterranean, SOPHIA, and the current European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI. Operation IRINI, with its naval and aerial surveillance capabilities, serves as an effective deterrent and is an important partner to the Panel of Experts supporting the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya. Operation IRINI has supported the implementation of the arms embargo and has hailed ships on multiple occasions since its launch at the end of March this year. The European Union has proven its willingness to operate in a transparent manner and is living up to its obligation to act strictly within the parameters of Security Council resolutions. Operation IRINI will be present where it is most needed, thus ensuring that efforts to implement the arms embargo remain balanced and effective. The strict implementation of the arms embargo is of the utmost importance for creating the much-needed space to bring about a political solution to a conflict that cannot be resolved by military means. With resolution 2526 (2020), the Security Council has put a valuable tool in the hands of the international community. It is not a resolution tailored to the EU, but addresses the international community as a whole. Germany therefore welcomes the commitment displayed by neighbouring States and other regional organizations to remain continuously involved, which is reflected in the current text of the resolution, alongside a reference to resolution 2510 (2020) as a reminder of the pledges made at the Berlin Conference. For other actors to come forward and support the efforts made by Operation IRINI, the predictability of Security Council actions will be crucial. It is a complex operation involving financial, logistic and planning efforts from several European Union member States. A 12-month renewal provides the certainty required to conduct such an operation. In closing, I would like to thank the European Union for its continued willingness to brief the Council on its operations. As a new penholder, we are also grateful to the former penholder (the United Kingdom) and Council members for their ongoing support.
