Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I warmly
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for her very enlightening
briefing and, more broadly, for her exemplary
commitment and action as well as that of her teams. I
also thank Ms. Justine Masika Bihamba, Coordinator
of Synergy of Women for Victims of Sexual Violence,
for her important and inspiring testimony. Finally, I
thank Ambassador Alotaibi, Permanent Representative
of Kuwait, for his briefing in his capacity as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

At this crucial time for the future of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, our shared priority is clear.
The aim is to hold the elections on the scheduled
date in December, and to ensure that they are held
in good conditions. Indeed, only full respect for the
Constitution and democratic transition can guarantee
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the entire region. This is a challenge but also an historic
opportunity for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
From there, our road map is to encourage the
authorities to take all steps in this direction and to call
on all stakeholders to respect the spirit of consensus that
prevailed when the political agreement of 31 December
2016 was signed. In this context, maintaining the
unity of international partners will be crucial to the
success of the process. Beyond the unity shown by the
Security Council, we must continue to work closely
with the African Union and the countries of the region,
which play an essential role. In this regard, I welcome
the adoption of the 19 July joint communique by the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union
and the Security Council, which perfectly illustrates
the convergence of views between the two Councils
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This is an
essential point.

In this regard, I would particularly like to stress two
elements that are essential to the success of the process
under way. The first element is the need to restore
Congolese confidence in the technical preparations for
the elections. Most of the deadlines have been met so
far, which is a positive point. The audit of the electoral
register by the International Organization of la
Francophonie showed that the register could be improved
and the Independent National Electoral Commission
undertook to make the necessary corrections. This is a
good thing, and we expect concrete action to be taken
quickly to that end.

However, some uncertainties remain, particularly
regarding voting machines and election logistics.
With respect to logistics, we have taken note of
the willingness of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to pay for the organization of the elections in
its entirety. However, I would like to reiterate what
Ms. Zerrougui has just said, that the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) is at the disposal
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to provide
logistical support. The necessary resources have
been made available by the General Assembly. It
is essential that the relevant authorities transmit to
MONUSCO all necessary information to enable the
Mission to provide such support in a timely manner, as
appropriate. It is imperative that the timing and proper
conduct of the elections not be called into question for
logistical reasons.

With regard to voting machines, we call on the
Independent National Electoral Commission to be
transparent so that all citizens have access to the
machines and can become familiar with how they work.
There are a number of technical questions, which must
be answered in order to ensure everyone's confidence
in the technical preparations for the elections.

The second element required for success is the
importance of ensuring the credibility of the political
process leading up to the elections. Above and beyond
respect for the various stages of the electoral calendar,
transparency in the process, along with the opening up
of the political and democratic space, are vital to the
holding of credible and peaceful elections. The political
meetings that took place without incident in Kinshasa
in recent weeks is a positive sign. We must continue
along that path.

We call in particular upon the Congolese
Government to lift the ban on demonstrations and take
tangible action to implement the 31 December 2016
agreement through de-escalation measures, the release
of political prisoners or prisoners of conscience, and
the end of politically motivated legal proceedings.
All candidates should be able to compete freely and
on equal footing, and voters should be able to make
their choice with full awareness and without being
coerced. In that regard, respect for human rights, and
in particular the commitments made by the authorities
to the Human Rights Council in Geneva, is obviously a
crucial element.

I will end my remarks with a word on the security

and humanitarian situation, which remains of concern.
New pockets of tension have emerged in the east of
the country, which have resulted in several civilian
casualties. Investigations of the situation in the Kasai,
conducted by the Group of Experts commissioned by
the Human Rights Council, have revealed that war
crimes and crimes against humanity may have been
committed in that region. MONUSCO took swift action
to respond to tensions, which proves the relevance
of its new operations concept of protection through
projection. I commend the Mission on its important
work and encourage it to continue its transformation in
order to achieve optimal efficiency.

The Security Council has sent a clear message to
the perpetrators of abuses by imposing new sanctions
against individuals responsible for committing serious
human rights violations. Impunity will not be tolerated.
France encourages the Congolese authorities to conduct
a prompt investigation into abuses reported by the
Human Rights Council so that those responsible can be
brought to justice.

France, together with its partners in the Security
Council, the African Union and the region, will remain
resolute and committed to supporting the Democratic
Republic of the Congo so as to ensure that the elections
are conducted in the right conditions and that they
usher in a new era of stability and development for the
country and its people.

