Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): The conflict in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is a matter of deep concern to Indonesia.
In this regard we note that we are now entering a decisive
phase with regard to developments in the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as reflected by the positive
outcome of the meeting in Geneva between the Foreign
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. My delegation attaches
great importance to any peace initiative in the region.

The long-called-for decisive action by the
international community to protect the United Nations-
declared safe areas has finally been realized. The North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) air operations
authorized by the United Nations are consistent with
Security Council resolutions - in particular, resolution
836 (1993), which, inter alia, authorizes the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), acting in self-
defence, to take necessary measures, including the use of

 

force, in reply to bombardments against the safe areas by
any of the parties. The same resolution decides that
Member States, acting nationally or through regional
organizations or arrangements, under the authority of the
Security Council and subject to close coordination with the
Secretary-General and UNPROFOR, may take all necessary
measures through the use of air power, in and around the
safe areas of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
support UNPROFOR in the performance of its mandate.

Furthermore, this action illustrates the effectiveness of
the recent measures to streamline the decision-making
process within the United Nations, and is reflective of the
close cooperation between the United Nations and NATO.

My delegation would like to call upon the Bosnian
Serb party to respond positively and without delay to the
steps called for by the United Nations and NATO by
ending the threat to the safe area of Sarajevo - in
particular, by withdrawing their heavy weapons from the
20-kilometre exclusion zone around the city.

My delegation would like to emphasize that a
comprehensive solution to the conflict in Bosnia and
Herzegovina can be achieved only through peaceful means.
In this regard, we welcome the results earlier today in
Geneva at the meeting, held under the auspices of the
Contact Group, of the Foreign Ministers of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It is our hope that this
meeting will usher in a new phase, one that is marked by
a renewed effort towards a just, comprehensive and
peaceful settlement of the conflict in the former Yugoslavia.
