Mr. Braun (Germany): The Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA), agreed in Vienna one year
ago, and the subsequent resolution 2231 (2015), which
endorsed the Vienna agreement, were indeed historic
achievements. Since then, considerable progress has
been made towards the implementation of the agreed
provisions. On 16 January, the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) confirmed that Iran had
fulfilled its obligations under the JCPOA. Since that
implementation day, two subsequent IAEA reports have
indicated Iran's compliance with its commitments.

Today, Germany would like to thank the Secretary-
General and Under-Secretary-General Feltman for the
first biannual report (S/2016/589) on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). I would also like to thank
Security Council member Spain and Ambassador
Oyarzun Marchesi for his interesting briefing, and
European Union Ambassador Vale de Almeida for his
very relevant briefing. Please allow me to highlight
three points.

First, Germany welcomes the close cooperation
between Iran and the IAEA, which has repeatedly
confirmed the implementation of Iran's nuclear-
related commitments under the JCPOA. Monitoring,
verification and reporting are essential to ensuring
the full implementation of the Vienna agreement.
We will continue to support the IAEA in fulfilling
its mandate. With regard to the work of the Security
Council, Germany welcomes the establishment of
the operational linkages between the Council and the
Procurement Working Group of the Joint Commission
as a crucial step towards ensuring the functioning of
the procurement channel.

Secondly, in line with the Secretary-General's
report, Germany is deeply concerned about the
ballistic-missile tests conducted by Iran in March. We
regard them as inconsistent with resolution 2231 (2015).
Germany also notes with concern all further incidents
listed in the report. We call on Iran to refrain from any
action that could give rise to mutual mistrust. And we
call upon Iran to play a constructive role in resolving
regional conflicts, as a responsible member of the
international community.

Thirdly, Germany reaffirms its commitment to
further developing and intensifying relations with Iran.
We continue to pursue the goal ofa full re-engagement
of German and European banks and businesses in Iran.
Together with the European Union, France and the
United Kingdom, we have been actively ensuring the
full implementation of the J CPOA. To that end, we deem
it important that Iran make further efforts to improve
economic and fiscal policy, create a reliable business
environment and fully implement the rule of law. We
stand ready to provide further support if needed. From
a German perspective, exports are door-openers for
investments, and therefore for development. We are
particularly glad to be again in a position to use export
credits to facilitate trade with Iran.

In conclusion, the Vienna agreement and resolution
2231 (2015) have ended the decade-long conflict
surrounding Iran's nuclear programme. They are
a victory for diplomacy and for the principles of the
United Nations, and Germany is proud to have been, and

to remain, one of the parties to the agreement. It will
now be crucial to effectively implement the agreement,
as well as resolution 2231 (2015), in all its aspects. We
are confident that all partners ofthe Vienna agreement
are on the right path towards that common objective.

The meeting rose at 11.55 am.
