Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are deeply disappointed that our initiative
aimed at extending and improving the quality of
the work of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) to investigate instances of the
use of chemical weapons in Syria did not receive the
necessary support.

We assumed that various tricks would be used in
an attempt to blame Russia for a possible shutdown of
the JIM's activities. On 24 October, with exactly the
same intention, we were deliberately made to exercise
our veto when there was no need for a vote in the
first place (see S/PV.8073). We are not ruling out the
possibility that the intention of defaming our country
has superseded that of preserving the Mechanism.
We will now listen to numerous comments from our
colleagues around this table, intended for the press.
The world will be awash in lies about what transpired
today in the Security Council. As usual, Russia will be
blamed for everything.

I get the impression that no one listens to me or
hears me when I speak. Everything that I said in
my statement - two statements, actually - was
essentially ignored. We were accused of not taking
part in consultations, even though we met at least
three times at the expert level with our United States
colleagues. We were accused of saying from the outset
that we would not permit the adoption of the United
States draft resolution. That is true, because the draft
resolution proposed by the United States entrenched the
JIM's fundamental errors. But we proposed our own
initiative. We have been accused of playing games. We
think it is not we who are playing games but others
who are playing games with us. We have been told
that we welcome the results of the work of the JIM
when terrorists are accused of chemical attacks while
at the same time we are covering up for the Syrian
Government. That is not true.

We are protesting about the JIM's blatant
unprofessionalism, which is most likely intentional.
To give an example from a different area, in an
argument put forward in the Mechanism's seventh
report (S/2017/904, annex) in support of the claim that
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) used
mustard gas at Umm Hawsh, the only evidence was that
it was claimed that ISIL had been observed using it in
the past, and the other group involved had not. Is that a
professional investigation? It is simply ridiculous.

We firmly believe that people who are paying
attention will understand what is really going on.
Let me reiterate that in the past few years Russia,
as a conscientious party to the Chemical Weapons
Convention, has done a great deal of work with regard
to the chemical demilitarization of Syria, including,
among other things, helping to establish and support
the JIM. During that entire time we have consistently
sought to boost the effectiveness of its work, with no
effort at understanding from a number of our Western
partners. Today it was made crystal clear that we need
a robust, professional investigative mechanism that
will help to prevent the threat of chemical terrorism
in the region from spreading, but what others want
is a puppet entity so that they can manipulate public
opinion, an entity that will repeatedly accuse the Syrian
Government of violating international norms, based on
false information.

Those who voted against the draft resolution
submitted by Russia and China bear full responsibility
for shutting down the activities of the JIM.

