Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to take the floor on behalf
of the 120 States members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

I would ask you, Mr. President, to extend our
greetings to Mrs. Retno Lestari Priansari Marsudi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs ofthe Republic oflndonesia,
a fellow country of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The hardships suffered by innocent civilians
trapped in armed conflict tend to be compounded by
deliberate, indiscriminate and, in some cases, systematic
attacks that clearly violate the norms of international
humanitarian law. Peacekeeping operations are of
key importance to the protection of civilians, in cases
where such a mandate exists, and can support national
efforts, as the principle responsibility rests with the
host country. That protection, however, should not be
used as a pretext for United Nations military intervention
in conflicts. To be effective, protection-of-civilians
mandates must be clear, achievable and supported by
sufficient financial, human and equipment resources.
Without those conditions, the ability of operations to
protect civilians is unrealistic.

The protection of civilians is one of the core issues
on the agenda of the Security Council, as a result of
the challenges faced by civilians in countries affected
by conflict, which range from threats or attacks
against them to forced displacement, food insecurity
and the need for humanitarian assistance. For that
reason, the Council must ensure that the norms of
international law, including international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, are upheld
and respected. The Movement calls on all parties
to armed conflicts to comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law, including the
principles of precautions in attack, proportionality
and distinction, by prohibiting the targeting of civilian
populations and property during conflicts. The parties
to any conflict are obliged to ensure that civilian
facilities, schools, hospitals, means of transportation
and emergency aid, as well as other vital infrastructure,
are generally protected against dangers arising from
military operations.

We stress that humanitarian agencies and their
personnel must respect international humanitarian
law and the laws of the countries where they do
their work, along with the Guiding Principles of
Humanitarian Assistance, as set forth in the annex to
General Assembly resolution 46/182, among which
are humanity, neutrality and impartiality, as well as
the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs
of the host countries and respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, national unity and independence
of States.

We would like to point out that 88 per cent of
peacekeeping personnel deployed in the field come
from non-aligned countries and are implementing
protection-of-civilians mandates. Their success
depends on whether personnel are trained to operate
under the highest standards at all times. Every measure
must therefore be taken to ensure their safety. Basing
efforts on the tripartite coordination between the
Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat, much more can be done
to involve local communities and those affected by
conflict in designing and implementing measures to
ensure the protection of civilians.

Lastly, the 120 States members of the Non-Aligned
Movement categorically condemn all acts of violence,
attacks and threats against civilian populations, which
in certain instances may amount to war crimes. They
also stress the importance of ensuring that those
responsible are held accountable before the law, in order
to break cycles of impunity and send a clear and united
message of zero tolerance for such despicable acts.

