The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States.

I came to New York as the United States
Permanent Representative to the United Nations on
23 April. On 24 April I left to go on the mission to
Kosovo that we are discussing today. I mention this to
convey to the Council the very high priority that my
Government and I personally give to the resolution of
the Kosovo issue.

I would like at the outset to thank the Russian
Permanent Representative, Mr. Churkin, for having
proposed the Security Council mission, and our chief,
Belgian Permanent Representative Ambassador
Verbeke, for his skilful leadership of the mission.

The trip, as the Council is aware, consisted of
stops in Brussels, Belgrade, Kosovo and Vienna.

In Brussels, I was impressed by three points that I
heard. The first point was that resolving the status of
Kosovo was important for the European Union (EU),
that the continuation of the current situation was not
sustainable, and that the current situation poses a
potential threat to the peace and stability of the
Balkans and of Europe as a whole.

The second point I heard was that EU
membership is the ultimate goal of both Kosovo and
Serbia, but that clarifying the status of Kosovo was
important for making progress towards that goal.

The third point was that the European Union is
ready to shoulder their heavy responsibilities, as
spelled out in Special Envoy Ahtisaari's proposal for
Kosovo's final political status.

I am grateful that the EU has stepped forward to
play a leading role in guiding a multi-ethnic Kosovo to
a future in the European Union.

In Belgrade, I heard Serbia's political leaders
reject the Ahtisaari plan. But their proposal did not
take into account the history of the area and the
polarization that has grown between Kosovo and
Serbia due to the policy of ethnic cleansing during the
Milosevic era.
In Pristina, we saw and heard that Kosovo's
government, police and courts have taken more and
more responsibility from the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), to the
point where Kosovo is today virtually functioning as
an autonomous State. As we toured Kosovo, we saw

the vestiges of violence and ethnic animosity, but we
also saw signs of progress and the potential for ethnic
coexistence.

When I reflect on the political views I heard in
Belgrade and Pristina, I understand that there is no
potential for compromise on the independence
question. Nothing further can come about from these
talks, and there is no potential for the passage of time
to change the polarization in the foreseeable future.
Therefore, delay, I believe, has no potential to help the
situation. I think, on the other hand, that delay has
great potential to destabilize Kosovo and the Balkans.
The balance of international resources that sustain
Kosovo today cannot remain in place indefinitely.
UNMIK and the Kosovo Force are the pillars of an
interim administration and security forces - not
occupiers. Delay, leading to more delay, is not a policy;
it is a prescription for rising resentment and economic
stagnation - and unsupervised independence.

We should surely recognize that much remains to
be done in Kosovo to implement fully the standards we
have pronounced. But UNMIK tells us - and our trip
made this clear - that we have made about all the
progress we can make with the Provisional Institutions.

As I reflect on our stop in Vienna, I appreciate
the work performed by Special Envoy Ahtisaari over
the past 18 months. I am convinced that he has
considered all relevant issues. He has proposed a
compromise solution that offers far-reaching
decentralization of government and elaborate
protection for religious sites. The United States
supports Mr. Ahtisaari's plan for Kosovo.

Kosovo is an entity administered by the United
Nations that used to be part of Yugoslavia, a country
that no longer exists. The set of circumstances that
brought us to this point exists nowhere else in the
world. Recognizing this unique problem, Mr. Ahtisaari
and, I know, the Secretary-General have proposed a
unique solution; and the EU has stepped forward to
become Kosovo's implementing partner for
independence. The United States does not find this path
forward to be perfect or easy. But what Mr. Ahtisaari
has proposed is the best option for bringing to an end
the last chapter in the dissolution of former Yugoslavia.

I look forward to working with my colleagues to
help assure the success of this plan.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
14

There are no further speakers. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.25 am.
07-33839
