Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I first wish to thank
Malaysia for organizing this timely high-level debate
and to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and other
speakers for their briefings.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement made
earlier today on behalf of the European Union.

Slovenia shares the concerns expressed by many
other delegations that 2014 was the worst year for the
tens of millions of children affected by conflicts around
the world and deplores all grave violations committed
against them. Children should not be recruited as
soldiers, used as suicide bombers, trafficked or sold
for use in hostilities, forcibly married, raped or used as
sex slaves. They should not serve as deliberate targets
of killing or maiming, including as a consequence of
unexploded remnants or landmines.

My delegation has been very concerned about
the increased prevalence of mass abductions in 2014,
particularly those by extremist groups. Abductions
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and by
Daesh in Syria and Iraq and by Boko Haram in
Nigeria and neighbouring States are just examples of
the most striking cases. Abductions have long-term
consequences, not only for the abducted children and
their families, but for communities. Sometimes, as
outlined in the Secretary-General's latest annual report
on children and armed conflict (S/2015/409), such
acts also impact national and international peace and
security.

In addition, abductions may trigger the recruitment,
mobilization and indoctrination of children and can
be seen as an early warning signs for mass atrocities.
Those issues were discussed at the conference Rights
for Peace: Challenges and Opportunities, organized by
Slovenia earlier this year. Slovenia therefore welcomes
the Security Council's decision in resolution 2225
(2015) to add abductions as a trigger for listing parties
in the annexes of the Secretary-General's annual report.
We would also like to reiterate our concern
regarding the increased number of attacks and the
military use of schools in 2014, such as the attacks by
the Taliban in Afghanistan and Pakistan and by Boko
Haram in Nigeria. In that regard, we would like to
recall resolution 2134 (2014) and call on all parties to
the conflict to respect the civilian character of schools
in accordance of international humanitarian law.

On the other hand, we would like to take note with
appreciation ofthe progress made in 2014 towards ending
and preventing the recruitment and the use of children
by armed forces and groups. We note with appreciation
the progress this Council has made in including issues
of children and armed conflict in country-specific
resolutions, presidential statements, sanctions regimes
and mandates of relevant peacekeeping and political
missions, in the work of the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, and in briefings
to the Council by relevant United Nations stakeholders.

However, there is a gap in the implementation of the
Council's decisions on the ground. In the 10 years since
the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), the normative
framework on children and armed conflict has been set,
and efforts to transform this framework into actions
by the Council have been addressed. We now need to
translate Council decisions into concrete actions on the
ground. We agree with the Secretary-General's report
on the need to address the lack of accountability and the
issue of impunity that accompanies it, and we therefore
welcome the inclusion of the call to fight impunity in
resolution 2225 (2015), adopted today. Perpetrators
of such violations must be held accountable in order
to prove that crimes committed against children in
conflict are inadmissible.

Ten years ago, the Security Council adopted that
landmark resolution, 1612 (2005), which established
the monitoring and reporting mechanism and the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Slovenia has always paid particular attention to the
plight of children affected by armed conflict, especially
their physical and psychosocial rehabilitation. In 2014
and 2015, we have supported projects focusing on the
rehabilitation of children from Ukraine, Belarus and
Palestine, implemented by the International Trust Fund
Enhancing Human Security, which is based in Slovenia.

Finally, let me use this opportunity to encourage
the Security Council to continue to address the issue
of children and armed conflict and to seek the most
effective means to improve their situation. The adoption
of a new resolution today is an important step in that
direction, and for that reason, Slovenia was proud to
join other Member States in co-sponsoring it.

