Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
now wish to speak briefly in my national capacity.

As is well known, Argentina is firmly committed
to the fight against terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, because terrorism is a serious threat to
international peace and security and violates the most
basic human right - the right to life - and constitutes
an attack on civilized coexistence.

Incidents such as those that took place in London
strengthen our determination. Without listing all cities
that have been Victims of terrorism, as the
representative of the United States has done, we wish
to recall that 11 years ago, in 1994, Buenos Aires too
was a victim of international terrorism, when the
AMIA building was bombed, killing some 100
individuals. Thus, my country is committed to
combating terrorism, as is reflected in its decision to
chair the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions Committee
for the second time.

My country believes that the United Nations,
because of its universal character, has the central role
to play in the struggle, because terrorism is
international. To that end, it is important to coordinate
efforts and develop international mechanisms to
combat terrorism. We, the Member States, must
support the work of our Organization through strict
compliance with all Security Council resolutions, not
only by applying the sanctions against Al-Qaida and
the Taliban but also through all instruments adopted by
the Council, such as through the timely submission of
all national reports to the Committees so that, among
other things, they can evaluate shortcomings and
requirements for technical assistance.

Argentina believes that the international
community's fight against terrorism should be carried
out in full respect of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law, human rights and humanitarian law.
The fight against terrorism must also must be
conducted in complete transparency and ensure due
process and respect for individual rights, thereby not
only ensuring its legitimacy and effectiveness but also
securing the active cooperation of all Member States.
Argentina will continue to strive for the full respect of
those principles.

Finally, with respect to the format of today's
meeting, we support the joint presentation of the
reports of the three Committee Chairmen. We believe
that this practice strengthens cooperation and
collaboration among the Committees while further
clarifying their mandates and their respective areas of
competence. We believe and hope that this format
should be maintained. We also believe in the
importance of the solid coordination of the three
groups of experts of the three Committees.

