Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Sir, to the
presidency of the Security Council.

We have listened with interest to the statements
made today. The difficult challenge to Governments in
post-conflict crisis situations requires the development
of balanced strategies to resolve them, based on the
interrelationship between the issues of security, socio-
economic development and the protection of human
rights. We need a comprehensive approach that enables
the achievement of sustainable peace and ensures that
conflicts do not recur. There is no other alternative.
There is no doubt, however, that peacebuilding
activities must be based on the principles of national
responsibility for identifying the priorities and
approaches to implementing the strategy.

Assistance in any form from the international
community should be extended with the agreement of
national Governments and in respect for the principles
of sovereignty and territorial integrity. Ultimately, the
specific characteristics of each country must be taken
into account.

In successful post-conflict peacebuilding, it is
very important to strengthen national institutional
capacities. The United Nations undoubtedly plays a
special role in coordinating international efforts in
post-conflict socio-economic development. We
understand very well that such activity presents many
difficulties and that the United Nations Secretariat,
programmes and funds, Member States, regional
organizations and international financial institutions
must be involved. In that respect, we support the
Secretary-General's resolve to improve the
Organization's effectiveness in post-conflict response,
to strengthen the Secretariat's organizational
mechanisms and to coordinate its work.

Many early peacebuilding tasks - such as
security sector reform, disarmament and
demobilization - are currently undertaken by United
Nations peacekeeping operations. In assuming the main
task of facilitating peace processes, United Nations
peacekeepers play a critically important role in
establishing conditions conducive to more
comprehensive peacebuilding. We must bear in mind
that peacebuilding is a long-term and multifaceted
process that extends far beyond the framework of

peacekeeping operations. In the light of the
increasingly complex and multifaceted nature of
peacekeeping mandates, it would be desirable for
peacekeepers to be assigned only the primary task of
peacekeeping.

We should draw upon the Peacebuilding
Commission, regional organizations, the international
financial institutions and donors and involve them in
post-conflict peacebuilding. Here, we consider that the
Peacebuilding Commission should focus on
coordination, especially in areas that need particular
attention in a post-conflict context. Its work should be
complemented by mechanisms for cooperation with
national Governments. We trust that the ongoing
review of the Peacebuilding Commission will facilitate
strengthening its coordinating role.

We support measures for enhancing strategic
coordination between the United Nations and the
World Bank, which is an important partner for the
Organization in the peacebuilding sphere. We attach
importance to the Peacebuilding Fund as an emergency
financing mechanism in support of long-term
peacebuilding mechanisms.

Peacebuilding requires close cooperation among
the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council. We consider that the
draft presidential statement prepared by the Japanese
delegation will facilitate the strengthening of that kind
of partnership, and we support its adoption.

