Mr. Kolby (Norway): The agenda item under
consideration by the Security Council at today's meeting
relates to the complex character of one of the most
fundamental purposes of the United Nations: to maintain
international peace and security. Conflict resolution and
peace-building involve mediation, peacekeeping,
humanitarian efforts, demobilization and disarmament
efforts, reconstruction and reconciliation, enhancement of
human rights and good governance, and long-term
economic and social development.

We appreciate this opportunity to participate in a
debate within the framework of the Security Council on the
challenges of post-conflict follow-up and the consolidation
of peace. Experience has taught us that a ceasefire and the
establishment of a peacekeeping operation are not sufficient
to ensure peaceful development in a war-tom society. Too
often we have seen the hopes for a better future shattered.
Too often the vicious cycle of violence has proved to be
stronger than aspirations for peace. It is important to plan
for post-conflict peace-building from the outset, when
armed conflict is still ongoing.

Norway therefore supports the efforts by the Security
Council over the past few years to develop and adopt
more comprehensive mandates for United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Recent mandates have
encompassed aspects that are critical for long-term peace-
building, including the facilitation of the reintegration of
refugees, the demobilization of combatants, the collection
of weapons, the reintegration into society of child soldiers
and the reinstatement of legitimate Governments.

Successful implementation of post-conflict peace-
building efforts requires a clear commitment by the
parties involved. Measures must be identified and
designed in close cooperation with those directly
concerned, taking into account the specific conditions and
needs in each particular situation. It is therefore of vital
importance to address the need for post-conflict peace-
building measures in the very early stages of conflict-
resolution efforts, and to include such measures in the
negotiations on peace accords.

The implementation of such comprehensive activities
also necessitates close coordination among the various
departments and agencies of the United Nations. We
commend the initiatives taken in this respect by the
Secretary-General, both at Headquarters level in the
context of United Nations reform - most notably through
the efforts by the Administrative Committee on
Coordination - and in the field through the enhancement
of the role of the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General. These efforts must be pursued and
developed in the light of experience gained.

The large number of small arms available in conflict
areas represents an important problem both during and
after conflicts. There is a need to establish better control
over transfers of small arms. There have been a number
of encouraging regional initiatives in this regard, most
notably the moratorium on the manufacture, export and
import of light weapons declared by leaders of West
African States on 30 October this year. Norway supports
the call for a voluntary embargo on arms sales to conflict
zones in Africa, as suggested by the United States. We
welcome the proposal by the Secretary-General for
increased transparency with regard to the supply of
weapons to areas of actual or potential conflict, including
measures to monitor and regulate the role of arms
brokers.

 

The international community should support the
implementation of such initiatives. In order to help the
United Nations assist in national and regional initiatives
effectively and without delay, Norway recently launched a
trust fund for support to prevention and reduction of the
proliferation of small arms. We encourage other countries
to contribute to the fund.
Anti-personnel landmines also constitute a formidable
obstacle to post-conflict reconstruction and the
consolidation of peace. Norway is strongly committed to
the follow-up to the Ottawa Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-
Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction, including
demining and rehabilitation activities, to which we have
allocated $120 million over the period 1998-2002.

The report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa (S/1998/318) clearly underlines the
need for a holistic approach, where economic and social
issues must be an integral part of international endeavours
to secure and strengthen peace. This is true for Africa, but
it is also true for other regions. Coherence must be ensured
between the work of the Security Council and that of other
bodies of the United Nations, in particular the General
Assembly.

In many instances, it will also be important to improve
coordination and information-sharing between the United
Nations and regional organizations such as the Organization
of African Unity and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). The United Nations should
play a leading role to ensure that all international efforts are
carried out in a coordinated and efficient way. We must
secure a better unity of purpose and integrate United
Nations peace-building efforts with those of other
stakeholders. Norway will assume the chairmanship of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in
1999, and we are determined to further refine the already
well established working relationship between the United
Nations and the OSCE.

Although each country has the main responsibility for
ensuring a political climate that is conducive to stability and
economic growth, the international community must provide
broad support. Norway is strongly committed to doing its
part. An important target of Norwegian development
cooperation is to provide adequate funds and human
resources to ensure that the critical post-conflict phase
represents a bridge from despair to sustained peace and
long-term development.

