Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): Allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on Pakistan's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of January. I am confident that, under your able
stewardship, the Council will be able to undertake
the task entrusted upon it by the membership in the
most productive and effective manner. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his statement,
which gave us an update on the status of the various
peacekeeping missions operating globally.
At this juncture, I also wish to align my statement
with that of the Permanent Representative of Egypt,
made earlier this morning, on behalf ofthe Non-Aligned
Movement.

Today peacekeeping missions have become
increasingly complex, since the nature and characteristic
of conflicts have changed. Major peacekeeping and
peacebuilding challenges remain and many conflict-
ridden countries continue to experience instability
years after the end of armed conflict, with high
levels of relapse into violence. Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon's statement at the Security Council debate on
post-conflict peacebuilding of December 2012 was apt
when he stated that the reason for relapse, although it
varied among countries, had a common thread, that is, a
deficit of trust in the wake of conflict between different
political parties and social groups, between the State
and society, and between the State and its international
partners (see S/PV.6897).

While we have seen positive progress in United
Nations peacekeeping efforts through the years, it
would be prudent to go back to the basics and to
focus more on strengthening partnerships within and
between peacekeeping missions. We should refocus our
efforts on integrating peacekeeping core capabilities
and we should find ways to improve the transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding. In that connection,
the various actors in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts cannot continue to work in silos. The Council,
in collaboration with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Peacebuilding Commission, should
find ways to further integrate and to strengthen
collaboration among those actors, namely, the military
and police components in peacekeeping, civilian actors,
civil society and regional organizations.

In pursuit of an integrated approach, Malaysia
would encourage the participation of Member States
in the online platform CAPMATCH, as established
by the Civilian Capacities Team. CAPMATCH, with
its providers of training and assistance, will be able
to play an important role in support of the successful
transition from conflict to governance. In our view,
such an integrated approach would further facilitate the
transition between peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

A successful transition from the peacekeeping
stage to peacebuilding depends very much on building
State institutions during the peacekeeping period. A
failure to work closely and effectively with national
Governments and local actors to ensure the existence of
a sustainable institutional architecture at the end of the
peacekeeping period might bring back instability to the
country concerned. In working towards an effective and
sustainable outcome, the focus should be on enhancing
State institutions, especially those relating to the
judiciary, law and order and economic development. A
potentially stable State needs such institutions to form
the backbone of its democracy. The United Nations plays
a substantial role in ensuring that those institutions are
stable at the end of the peacekeeping mandate.

International assistance through quick-impact
projects can also be useful as a complement to
peacekeeping work done through the United Nations.
International development assistance given in
coordination with the Peacebuilding Commission,
including helping to develop civilian capacity
and expertise, can contribute to the successful
implementation of such quick-impact projects, which
benefit local populations directly. Positive outcomes
of such projects encourage local actors to work more
closely with the international community in bringing
sustainable stability to the country concerned, since
they can see the benefit of such collaboration. In that
connection, I would suggest that future mandates for
peacekeeping missions should include a component of
that nature.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Malaysia's
firm support for the central role of the United Nations,
through the Security Council, in the maintenance of
international peace and security. We are mindful of the
daunting task that the United Nations faces in keeping
the peace in regions of conflict. Its peacekeeping
missions can be successful only if close collaboration
between the various actors is given priority. Our task
does not end with the expiry of the mandate. The
United Nations will be remembered fondly by the
local populace only if we can bring long-lasting peace
and subsequent prosperity to their troubled nations.
Together we can succeed.

