The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

I thank the representative of Australia for
presenting the briefing on the activity of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006).

For over a decade now, the Iranian nuclear
programme has been a source of concern for the
international community, given that country's inability
to prove its exclusively civilian nature. That situation is
a threat to international peace and security and has led
the Council to put in place a sanctions regime through
the adoption of five resolutions imposing sanctions,
while calling on Iran to negotiate on those issues. From
2005 to 2013, in spite of all of our efforts, Iran refused
to enter into negotiations, despite all the efforts and the
open and firm approach of the E3+3 Government, as
mandated by the Security Council. An apparent change
in attitude since the presidential election in Tehran has
at last made it possible to engage in the first substantial
discussion on the nuclear issue.

The interim agreement reached in that context
between Iran and the E3+3 on 24 November is an
unquestionable step forward for peace and security
in the Middle East and beyond, but we must remain
vigilant. For the first time for almost 10 years, the
E3+3 has obtained from Iran a suspension of the most
sensitive aspects of its nuclear programme. It is a solid
and credible agreement that respects the necessary
requirements set by the E3+3 to halt uranium enrichment
to 20 per cent, to neutralize the stock of enriched
uranium at 20 per cent, and to freeze the main activities
linked to the Arak heavy water reactor. By halting the
most sensitive aspects of its nuclear programme for
six months, Iran provides more time for the diplomatic
track, which France has always favoured.

Moreover, the mechanism agreed provides for a
close monitoring of the commitments undertaken. We,
together with our partners, will remain very vigilant
regarding the scrupulous implementation of the
agreement. The agreement, however, is only an interim
agreement and not a lasting settlement of the nuclear
crisis. We, together with our partners of the E3+3,
therefore remain mobilized in order to reach a long-
term agreement with Iran.

In parallel, the dialogue between Iran and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has made
progress. Not all issues have been resolved - far from
it. The adoption of a joint statement on 11 November
providing for the strengthening of cooperation with the
E3+3 was, however, a step in the right direction. The
transparency measures provided for in that statement,
in particular with regard to the Gachin uranium mine,
the heavy-water production facility at Arak and the
heavy-water research reactor projects are positive. It
remains no less crucial to shed full light on the issues
linked to the possible military dimension of the Iranian
nuclear programme, on which the IAEA still awaits
answers from Tehran.

The core of international sanctions, in particular
those of the Security Council, will remain in place
until a comprehensive settlement of the crisis has been
found. We must therefore pursue our efforts to prevent
their possible circumvention. In that context, the report
of the 1737 (2006) Committee that has been transmitted
to us (S/2013/331, annex) reminds us that, during the
reporting period, Iran continued to conduct nuclear and
ballistic activities in violation of the resolutions of the
Council.

We therefore studied with great care and attention
the report of the Panel of Experts regarding the seizure
in December 2012 of a shipment of high-quality carbon
fibre bound for Iran that could be used in the context
of a nuclear programme. In the report, the experts
unaminously and unambiguously conclude that Iran has
repeatedly violated the Security Council's resolutions,
thereby affirming concern about a nuclear programme
that has no identifiable civilian justification.

In that regard, I Wish to pay tribute to the
remarkable work of the Panel of Experts, which has
made an essential contribution to the functioning of the
Committee. I hope that the Committee will be able to
promptly implement the recommendations contained in

the Panel's final report seeking to make the sanctions
regime more effective.

1 resume my function as President ofthe Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.

The meeh'ng rose at 4.15 p.m.
