Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Mr.
President, allow me first of all to congratulate you on
your conduct of the work of the Security Council
during this month and on your initiative to present
jointly the reports of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004), respectively. This is an excellent sign of
transparency and coordination in the fight against
terrorism.

I believe that there is also agreement on the
importance of the contribution that can be made by the
Working Group established pursuant to resolution 1566
(2004), and I extend my best wishes to Ambassador
Baja with respect to the work that has just begun.

I wish to express my appreciation for the kind
words about the work that I did in chairing the Al-
Qaida Committee for a period of nearly two years. As I
said before, this was not an individual effort, but,
rather, a question of teamwork, since the members of
the Committee and an efficient and professional
Secretariat team made a vital contribution to the
Committee's success, and valuable assistance was also
rendered by the Monitoring Team.

I also extend my best wishes for success to the
Ambassador of Argentina, Cesar Mayoral, and his
team. I am sure that they will continue to perform with
dedication the demanding work called for in resolution
1526 (2004). I wish to reaffirm my own personal
commitment and that of the Chilean Mission to support
him in any way needed.

As you can well imagine, I wish to refer first to
the Committee on sanctions against Al-Qaida and the
Taliban.

It should be recalled that, with the adoption of
resolution 1526 (2004), the Committee was given a
much more demanding substantive and conceptual
structure for the performance of its tasks. For the first
time, new methods and a new modus operandi were
introduced in the area of finances. Progress was made
in terms of definitions, the provision of data and
identification, and strengthened monitoring of the
implementation of sanctions in order better to
understand the needs and problems of States as well as
the challenges facing them and to more effectively
assist them in their work.

Visits to States by the Chairman of the
Committee provided opportunities for learning about
realities on the ground and for improving dialogue with
countries, clarifying doubts, and establishing ties of
confidence and communication with States. I am
therefore pleased to hear of the forthcoming visit to be
made by my successor to Europe and the Middle East.

I noted with satisfaction the holding of the first
meeting with a Member State earlier this year, in
accordance with the provisions of operative paragraph
11 of resolution 1526 (2004). I believe that this is the
beginning of a process of dialogue that can grow in
strength through the participation of an increasing
number of countries.

We must take into account, as has already been
stated here, that in June the Security Council will have
to reflect on the future mandate of the Committee. I
should therefore like to mention a number of points
that, in my delegation's view, must be taken into
account.

First, we must continue to urge States to observe
international codes and norms for combating the
financing of terrorism. Individual States, regional
organizations and financial institutions such as the
Financial Action Task Force have created a pool of
international best practices, codes and norms that can
be helpful and that should be taken into account.

Second, more decisive action is needed to prevent
the abuse of non-profit organizations and of charitable
organizations, and to monitor informal or alternative
systems for the sending of remittances, perhaps by
moving from recommendatory to mandatory language.

Third, it is essential adequately to address other
new methods of financing for terrorist purposes, such
as the trans-border movement of foreign currency. It
would therefore be useful if States were required to
establish criteria and procedures for monitoring the
transport of currency.

Fourth, I believe that it is important to strengthen
the element of due process with respect to persons on
the list without detracting from the efficiency of the
implementation of sanctions. In that regard, I should
like to recall the offer made by Switzerland of
technical assistance in the form of software for the
immediate freezing of the financial assets of persons
and entities once the appropriate decisions are taken.

Fifth, it would be useful to explore the possibility
of creating incentives to increase the number of
individuals and entities included in the list. It is evident
that the 437 individuals and entities associated with Al-
Qaida or the Taliban that appear on the list represent a
small fraction of those that should be included. This
should also be accompanied by qualitative
improvement, including, as the Ambassador of
Argentina mentioned, the status of deceased persons
who are still on the list.

Sixth, I believe that it is also necessary to take
into account the valuable recommendations made by
the Monitoring Team in its two reports last year and to
take into account many of the recommendations made
by the Secretary-General in his report entitled "In
larger freedom", including the need to reach a
consensus definition of terrorism.

Seventh, it would be useful to have a strategy for
requesting selective and specific reports, with a view to
achieving greater effectiveness and preventing fatigue
on the part of States due to excessive demands for
reports.

Lastly, it is essential to address the vacuum that
exists regarding what to do with individuals who,
despite being on the list and the object of sanctions,
move freely within certain countries even though they
are wanted for terrorist acts in other nations. I think
that it is important to consider the advisability of not
granting political asylum to such individuals and to
cooperate in bringing them to justice before the
competent authorities in the countries in which they are
wanted.

I wish to associate myself with those who have
underscored the excellent leadership provided to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee by Ambassador Denisov
and his team and also to wish Ambassador Loj success
in her new functions.

We acknowledge the work that has been done to
complete the process of revitalization of this
Committee, especially the progress made towards
ensuring that the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate is fully operational. We appreciate the work
done by Ambassador Ruperez in the Committee, for
example, in identifying and tackling the problems
encountered by States in the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and in contributing to
improving States' counter-terrorism capacities, as well
as towards an increase in the number of accessions to
and ratifications of international conventions and
protocols.

We attach particular importance to the work being
done by the CTC in the area of technical assistance to
States. I have frequently noted the urgent need for such
cooperation.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee has also set an
example in terms of its ties with international, regional
and subregional organizations.

With the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), the
Council decided that all States should establish
national controls to prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, in particular for terrorist
purposes. This newest of the three Committees, under
the capable chairmanship of Ambassador Motoc, has
responded well to the demands of its mandate, and we
wish it all the best. We agree that the Committee is
complex and sensitive in nature, as it is operating in a
relatively new field. I commend the Committee on the
number of reports it has received and for the review
currently being carried out by the Committee experts.

In closing, I wish to reiterate my satisfaction with
the work done by the three Committees to implement
their mandates, and in particular with the excellent
spirit of cooperation they have demonstrated. Lastly, I
would like to say that in the fight against terrorism,
success in achieving objectives and the effectiveness of
sanctions ultimately depend upon the States Members
of the Organization. I think it will be a long struggle.
Unfortunately, terrorist attacks are dramatic reminders
that we must do much more through collective action
and cooperation to defeat terrorism.

