Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): At the beginning, let me
express our delegation's dismay at the recent course of
events in Angola, which forced the members of the Security
Council and many other delegations to come to this
Chamber to debate the imposition of additional measures
against UNITA. This should not have happened. By now
we should have been enjoying the results of further
progress in the process of reconciliation in Angola and
looking ahead with optimism. At least that was the mood
among us when we last discussed this question in June.
Then we were ready to congratulate the parties on their
achievements, for we believed that reason was prevailing.
As we can see today, this has not been the case and the
Council once more has to act in order to protect the
complex, delicate and lengthy peace process.

The present political tensions and military hostilities
in Angola constitute one of the most serious crises in that
country since the Lusaka Protocol was signed in 1994.
They even threaten to drag Angola back into civil war.
We fully share the Secretary-General's view that although
both parties to the conflict bear a heavy responsibility for
the future of the peace process, the current state of affairs
is mostly the result of delays by UNITA in implementing
its obligations. Despite the declarations made and some
concrete steps taken by UNITA in recent days, its overall
attitude is indeed frustrating. The delays in the
normalization of the State administration, the hostile
propaganda and the incomplete disarmament and
demobilization of all UNITA troops are the most striking
examples of this lack of cooperation.

Even more disturbing is UNITA's failure to submit
complete and credible data on the number and location of
troops and weapons in its possession. This cannot be
tolerated.

The question of how to make parties to a conflict
cooperate and meet their commitments does not go away,
and it is still unanswered. Dialogue, persuasion, and
political pressure are probably the most common means
to bring about such cooperation. Today, when the flow of
information is so fast and practically unhampered, these
methods certainly gain in value. The light cast by the
mass media of today's world also helps. But, as the case
of Angola proves, all this might not be enough, and,
unfortunately, this is frequently the case.

This brings us to the question of sanctions. No one
favours sanctions because they hurt. All of us would have
preferred not to use sanctions at all. At the same time,
over and over again, we are faced with circumstances
which justify the introduction of sanctions. Why? Because
they are seen as a last resort. Today we are dealing with
such circumstances.

Working on the draft resolution before us, members
of the Council thoroughly and extensively examined the
sanctions regime that we are about to establish vis-a-vis
UNITA. The question was treated very carefully. We all
were aware of its seriousness. We are satisfied that the
humanitarian aspect of this particular regime has been
given due consideration. The fact that we managed to
work out an acceptable text rather quickly shows how
determined we were to save the peace process in Angola.

There is some time - 33 days to be exact - before
the draft resolution is implemented. Therefore, there is
still a chance that sanctions can be avoided. We very
much hope that UNITA leaders will give it serious
consideration and promptly resume effective cooperation.

 

Angola is waiting, Africa is waiting, the whole world is
waiting. The international community is fully entitled to
become impatient and even - forgive the word -
exasperated, for it has devoted much of its energy and
means to try to help this beautiful and potentially
prosperous country, which has been torn by so much war
and suffering.

May I add that Poland associates itself with the
statement made by Luxembourg on behalf of the European
Union.

