Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): 1 would
like to begin by thanking the delegations of Egypt and
Spain for convening this meeting. I would like to also
express my gratitude for the timely distribution of the
context note on the destabilizing effects that climate
change can have when they further exacerbate the
traditional causes of conflict in the Sahel. I would also
like to express my gratitude to Mr. Mohammed Ibn
Chambas, Ms. Monique Barbut, Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde,
Ms. Hindou Oumarou Ibrahim, Mr. Pierre Buyoya and
Mr. Angel Losada for their briefings.

Having perused the aforementioned context note,
Uruguay is convinced that the international community,
including the United Nations system, needs to focus its
efforts on addressing the structural causes of poverty and
inequity. It should do so through adequate mechanisms,
such as cooperation, official development assistance,
access to resources and the transfer of technology for
adapting to climate change. However, it should not take
a security approach, but rather one that addresses the
underlying causes, understanding that climate change
can pose a further challenge to the stability of societies
and international security. There is no easy answer.
That is why we must continue with our efforts in the
context of the Climate Change Convention, the Paris
Agreement, and the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction 2015-2030, among others, and fulfil the
commitments made.

An isolated approach positing a single possible
cause of a conflict linked to socioeconomic and
environmental factors might provide us with a
partial and even distorted view or understanding of
the dynamics that might lead a society to conflict.
Adequate and fluid cooperation among the various
bodies, under the terms set forth by the Charter of the
United Nations, the programmes of the Organization
and specialized bodies, is necessary in order to address
factors that might affect security, including the extreme
consequences of climate change. That does not mean
that the topic of climate change needs to be on the
agenda of the Security Council. We do not believe that
would be relevant.

In any event, we should not underestimate the
importance that the United Nations should attach to
helping to prevent conflicts in the most vulnerable areas
through its peacebuilding activities and projects and
programmes implemented by various United Nations
agencies, the goal of which is to provide an environment
that is more suitable to human development.

Uruguay is cognizant of the fact that the security
situation in the Sahel deserves the special attention of
the Council, especially given the terrorist activities
being developed there, as well as the significant
trafficking of drugs and weapons in that vast region,
where many areas lie beyond effective State control.
Periodically in the north of Mali, terrorist, criminal
and extremist activities advance despite the progress
achieved after the signing of the Peace Agreement.
The civilian populations in the north continue to face a
series of difficulties in accessing State institutions, and
are unable to enjoy the peace dividends that stem from
the agreement.

In the meantime, the number of displaced persons
continues to grow, while terrorist attacks - more
than 200 of which have been perpetrated since early
2015 - are increasingly effective and sophisticated and
claim an ever-larger number of victims. United Nations
forces on the ground have been the targets of more than
40 per cent of such attacks, against which they have
trouble defending themselves given their asymmetric
nature and the scarce resources and personnel available
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. In that regard, the
strategic review to be formally presented next week is
not just relevant but indeed urgent.

In order to address the regional problem, we
need tailor-made campaigns. That is why we applaud
such initiatives as the Group of Five Sahel, which has
become an institutional framework for coordinating
and overseeing regional cooperation. We commend
the initiative of the Lake Chad Basin countries in
establishing the Multinational Joint Task Force to
address the problem ofBoko Haram. We also appreciate
the recent restructuring of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and hope that it will provide us with
a better overview of the situation in the Sahel and of
the progress made in the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, which is relevant to a number of
countries that are not within the region itself.

The 4.5 million displaced persons in the Sahel will
continue to grow in number due to political instability
in Libya and the terrorist threat in the region, including
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Ansar el-Dine,
Boko Haram, and the Mouvement pour l'unicite et
le jihad en Afrique de l'Ouest, to mention just a few.
All of this is made possible by the porous borders and
lack of State control. The best way to address it is by
building the institutional capacities of the States of the
region, providing education, increasing the capacities
of Government security forces, and providing greater
access to justice and health-care centres.

