Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to welcome Justice Renate Winter, President of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone, and Stephen Rapp,
Prosecutor of the Court, to the Council today and thank
them for their briefings. My Government would like to
congratulate them on the significant achievements of
the Court to date. I would also like to welcome the
representative of Sierra Leone to the Council.

Today's briefings come at a critical juncture as
the Court completes the final phase of its mandate. The
successful completion of the Court's work and the
establishment of a viable residual mechanism remain
priorities for the United States.

The United States was instrumental in the
establishment of the Special Court for Sierra Leone
and has been its largest financial supporter. Since the
Court's inception in 2002, the United States has
contributed more than $60 million to it. We welcome

the broad financial support that the Court has enjoyed
in the past, and we encourage all Member States to
support the Court to help ensure that justice is served,
impunity is not tolerated and Sierra Leone and the
region can sustain accountability, peace and security in
the years to come. The Court must be supported if it is
to conclude its mandate.

The Government of Sierra Leone has been a
strong and committed partner in the work of the Court.
The Court has been instrumental in contributing to
peace and stability in Sierra Leone through the creation
of a transparent and independent judicial process.
When the Court closes, it will effectively end a chapter
in Sierra Leonean history.

The United States fully supports the Court's
efforts to transfer its institutional knowledge to Sierra
Leone authorities. We believe it important to the
country's ongoing democratic development that all
lessons of the past be fully absorbed, and the Special
Court has much to offer in that regard. After the
Court's mandate is completed, the international
community will, of course, continue its efforts to
support peacebuilding and long-term social and
economic development in Sierra Leone.

The United States has appreciated the opportunity
to serve on the Special Court's Management
Committee. We commend the work of the Canadian
Chair. We also commend the work of the Court's staff
in evaluating options for a residual mechanism, and we
applaud their efforts to reduce cost and improve
efficiency in the Court's operations. The United States
remains committed to an efficient, cost-effective and
successful residual mechanism.

Finally, we again thank the President, the
Prosecutor, the Acting Registrar and their staff for their
dedication and commitment. The Court has broken new
ground in the field of international criminal law,
including the recognition of the use of child soldiers as
an international crime and sexual slavery as a war
crime and crime against humanity. And it has built a
powerful legacy by fighting against impunity and
working to bring justice to the people of Sierra Leone.

