Mr. Morales Lopez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the French delegation for organizing this
important debate and the guiding concept note
(S/2016/503, annex). We also welcome the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of France in the
debate, as well as the briefings to the Security Council
by the Secretary-General, the President of the Central
African Republic and the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross.

Colombia recognizes the importance of this forum
for discussion, which facilitates assessment of the
efforts of peacekeeping operations in the protection of
civilians in situations of armed conflict.

While it may seem paradoxical, peacekeeping
operations aresuccessfulpreciselywhentheyarenolonger
necessary, as they lay the foundation for lasting peace
and empower national authorities, while coordinating
efforts to fulfil protection-of-civilians mandates.

We share the concern about the situation facing
civilians in armed conflict in some parts of the world,
and the ongoing violations by the parties to conflict
of their obligations to respect and protect civilians in
accordance with international law, and beyond that, as
a natural obligation of humankind.

We agree that respect for international law on the
part of all parties to a conflict is a condition without
which protecting civilians and guaranteeing access to
humanitarian assistance will not be possible. Likewise,
the application of due and timely justice to the crimes
committed is also crucial. Colombia supports the role
of peacekeeping operations in that task and believes
that their effectiveness requires coordinated efforts
by the United Nations with national authorities, based
on strategic policies, commitment and adherence to
international law by the parties to the conflict, as well
as clear mandates and the Organization's exemplary
work in the field.

Effectively carrying out protection-of-civilians
mandates must be strengthened by way of States'
political will and fulfilment oftheir obligations under the
Charter of the United Nations and international law. We
emphasize that protecting civilians is the responsibility
of the State, which is something that should be clear
when implementing peacekeeping mandates, that
include such tasks. In that regard, the United Nations
must continue efforts in support of national authorities'
implementation of the responsibility to protect civilians
and in promoting compliance on the part of non-State
armed groups, with international humanitarian law.

My Government highlights the role of various
accountability mechanisms in strengthening the
protection of civilians during armed conflict. Likewise,
we emphasize the importance of negotiations between
the conflicting parties to encourage the demobilization
and reintegration of armed non-State actors into
civilian life, as a strategy in the long-term rebuilding
of the country.

Colombia seeks peace and reconciliation through
justice, Victim compensation, the restoration of trust
and guarantees of non-recurrence.

My country has taken note of the Secretary-
General's report (S/2016/447) on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and of its recommendations.
My delegation would also like to reiterate the importance
of United Nations entities being fully familiar with the
work of national Governments in the area of protection
ofcivilians when prioritizing their efforts and informing
the Organization on the respective situations. Verified,
objective, balanced and impartial information includes
identifying gaps and challenges, as well as recognition
of the progress in each country.

My Government shares the concern about the
difficulties impeding humanitarian access and believes
that international assistance in that area should adhere
to the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence, as enshrined in resolution 46/182 of
the General Assembly.

Finally, I recall that three recent reports on United
Nations peace operations (see S/2015/446), the review
of the peacebuilding architecture (see S/2015/490) and
the implementation ofresolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, emphasize the importance of
seeking solutions to prevent conflicts. That is why my
country reiterates the need to protect civilians before
the start ofa crisis and meet the needs of the population.
A prevention perspective is the best way to protect and
prevent peoples' suffering.

