The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands supports the
remarks made by the representative of the United
Kingdom, who brought to our attention the urgent
matter before us today. I would like to underline
three points. They are about, first, our solidarity with
the United Kingdom; secondly, the use of a chemical
weapon; and thirdly, the importance of accountability.

Until the beginning of this month, it would have
been hard to imagine a more peaceful place in the
world than Salisbury, a quiet, historic town among the
rolling hills of southern England. But its peace has
been brutally disturbed. A man and his daughter were
poisoned with a nerve agent. The United Kingdom was
shocked. The world was shocked. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands was shocked. On behalf of my Government,
StefBlok, our Minister for Foreign Affairs, has strongly
condemned the attack and expressed our solidarity with
the United Kingdom. People in the Netherlands feel for
Yulia and Sergei Skripal and hope for the recovery of
all the victims. We fully understand the outrage of the
United Kingdom authorities. We also understand why
this new incident is particularly painful for the people
of the United Kingdom, who still have vivid memories
of the brutal murder, using radioactive polonium, of
Alexander Litvinenko in the heart of London. Now the
United Kingdom finds itself dealing with a new and
different case, of which the full details are yet to be
determined. But one thing is already beyond doubt. No
State can or should accept attacks that take place on its
sovereign territory. The United Kingdom can count on
the full solidarity of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
in this.

My second point is about the use of a chemical
weapon. We are gravely concerned about the type of
weapon that was used in this attack, a military-grade
nerve agent and a substance that no regular criminals
could easily get their hands on. This is the first time
since the end of the Second World War that a nerve
agent has been used in Europe. The recklessness of the
act is beyond words. This nerve agent was used in a
public space with many unsuspecting civilians around.
It could have had even more horrible effects. I would
also like to reiterate that any use of chemical weapons
is abhorrent. The Kingdom of the Netherlands regards
this a threat to international peace and security. It
should therefore be a matter of concern for the Council,
and we commend the United Kingdom for bringing it to
our attention. After the recent chemical-weapon attacks
in Syria, the attack in the United Kingdom is another
warning to the world that we must step up our vigilance
if we are to prevent the use of such weapons of mass
destruction. We underline the important role of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
in The Hague in that regard.

That brings me to my third and final point, which
is accountability. There must be no impunity for this
crime. My Government has stated that the Kingdom of
the Netherlands fully supports the United Kingdom in
its quest for the truth, and we call on all other countries
to do so as well. The United Kingdom authorities had
urged the Russian Federation to provide answers to
their questions by yesterday. After Russia's failure to
do so, we can understand why Prime Minister May
announced bilateral measures earlier today. We see
no reason for Russia to continue to refuse the United
Kingdom's request. Nor do we see any legitimate reason
why anyone should try to delay, sidetrack, second- guess
or discredit the investigation carried out by the United
Kingdom authorities. The international community
cannot shrug its shoulders over this crime as if nothing
had happened. The United Nations, the Council and
all Member States should cooperate with the United
Kingdom as it continues to investigate this gruesome
act. The perpetrators should be brought to justice.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The representative of the United Kingdom has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

