Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries, namely, Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.

We welcome Lithuania's initiative to hold an open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and we thank the four briefers for their important
contributions and excellent leadership.

The Nordic countries welcome the latest
report of the Secretary General under review today
(S/2013/689), as well as the adoption by the Council of
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/3 and its updated
aide-memoire. The Nordic countries also welcome
the Secretary-General's "Rights up front" action
plan, which puts the imperative to protect people
and preventive efforts at the heart of United Nations
strategies and operational activities. Promoting respect
for international humanitarian law and human rights by
States and non-State armed groups alike, and ensuring
accountability for violations, is fundamental.

A new generation of peacekeeping mandates has
emerged. Peacekeeping operations are increasingly
given a robust mandate and are being deployed to
places with high levels of violence. Efforts to protect
civilians and minimize civilian harm should begin at
the very early planning stages ofa mission. We therefore
encourage the efforts to strengthen the effective
implementation of the protection-of-civilians mandates
in United Nations peacekeeping operations. Ensuring
that Council-mandated missions have a strong human
rights-monitoring mandate and adequate, as well as
modern, resources to implement the mandate should
be part of those efforts. One starting point must be the
mission-specific conditions, recognizing the different
needs of men, women, boys and girls. The Nordic
countries support the Secretary-General's human rights
due diligence policy as an important tool to strengthen
the implementation of human rights on the ground and
to prevent atrocities.

The Nordic countries also strongly encourage
the incorporation of a gender perspective into
peacekeeping operations. As part of the Nordic Defence
Cooperation, we have established the Nordic Centre
for Gender in Military Operations in Stockholm, and
note with satisfaction that the demand for its services
is increasing.

Attacks against humanitarian workers are war
crimes, which may also amount to crimes against
humanity, and should not go unpunished. We are deeply
concerned at the increasing attacks against, and killing
of, humanitarian workers and the impunity that persists
for those crimes. We are particularly concerned that
the denial of health care and food, as well as attacks
on hospitals and schools, are deliberately used as
a tool to inflict harm on the civilian population in
some conflicts. That violates the most fundamental
principles of humanity as well as humanitarian law
itself. Attacking health care and food aid - which are
core elements in humanitarian action - is indeed an
attack against the whole humanitarian system. The
horrific tragedy in Syria is a case in point. We call
on the parties to that conflict immediately to uphold
their obligations to protect civilians and to facilitate
unimpeded humanitarian access to the whole territory.
Immediate progress in humanitarian access is crucial
for improving conditions for the civilian population in
Syria. We support the adoption of a Security Council
resolution to address this urgent matter.

Efforts to combat sexual and gender-based violence
in conflict must be strengthened. The Nordic countries
welcome Security Council resolution 2122 (2013) and
its much-needed focus on women's participation and
empowerment. We look forward to it being translated
into action.

Specialized capacity and focus are needed to prevent
conflict-related sexual violence in United Nations
operations. We welcome the deployment of women's
protection advisers in five ongoing missions. We urge
the Secretariat to undertake an early evaluation of their
work to assess their contribution in the prevention of
conflict-related sexual violence. We fully support the
development and implementation of predeployment
and in-mission training of peacekeeping personnel on
sexual and gender-based violence. We must seek to
ensure that all peacekeepers are being trained to the
same standards and operate accordingly.

In order to combat sexual and gender-based
violence, perpetrators must be brought to justice. All
parties to an armed conflict should take all the steps
necessary to ensure accountability, through national
prosecutions or by referrals to the International
Criminal Court. National capacity must be enhanced to
investigate and prosecute those crimes.

The use of explosive weapons in densely populated
areas puts the civilian population at grave risk of
death and injury and increases the destruction of vital
infrastructure. The indiscriminate and disproportionate
use of explosive weapons that we witness in many
situations today must never be accepted. The need to
ensure appropriate restrictions on warfare in such areas
remains one of the central challenges of contemporary
armed conflict.

At the same time, experience from Afghanistan
and Somalia demonstrates how armed forces may, if
the will is there, in fact restrain the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas without impeding military
effectiveness. We support the Secretary-General's call
for States to share information on policy and practice
regarding that matter. We stand ready to contribute
in developing practical measures and guidance on the
basis of lessons learned.

Lastly, I should like to recall that the adoption
and - even more important - the full implementation
of the Arms Trade Treaty will be an important
instrument in preventing armed violence and reducing
human suffering, including gender-based violence.

