Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Today is the Council's first full formal debate in
the month of March, so we finally have the opportunity
officially to convey, through you, our congratulations to the
Permanent Representative of the People's Republic of China
to the United Nations on China's presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and to thank him for his able
guidance of the Council's work.

The draft resolutions before the Security Council,
which the Russian Federation has joined in sponsoring, bear
witness to the international community's unwavering
determination to reinforce peace and stability in the territory
of the former Yugoslavia as quickly as possible. Over the
past three years, and still today, the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) has played an irreplaceable
role in limiting the conflict, providing humanitarian

 

assistance to the civilian population and putting in place
the necessary conditions for progress towards a political
settlement.

Like other members of the Council, we pay tribute
to the courage and selflessness of the soldiers, officers
and all other personnel of the United Nations Protection
Force - including Russians - who have endangered
their lives to do their duty in the former Yugoslavia.

The presence of UNPROFOR has helped stop a
cruel war in Croatia and prevent a resumption of
hostilities there; it has protected the civilian population.
Important specific results of UNPROFOR's efforts include
the achievement of a cease-fire and the conclusion of an
economic agreement between the Government of Croatia
and the local Serb authorities. This has helped create the
climate of trust between the parties that is so essential for
further dialogue on political matters.
Unfortunately, into the process of normalizing the
situation in Croatia, which had been advancing albeit
rather slowly, a destabilizing element was introduced with
the statement by the Government of the Republic of
Croatia on ending UNPROFOR's mandate in Croatia. It
was of the utmost significance that the Security Council
and the entire international community regarded this
notion of withdrawing United Nations forces as
unacceptable and insisted on maintaining a United
Nations peace-keeping presence in Croatia, the alternative
to which would have been the unavoidable resumption of
hostilities. It is a good thing that the Government of
Croatia finally agreed, and reconsidered its original
position.

In establishing the new United Nations Confidence
Restoration Operation in Croatia (UNCRO), the Security
Council - and this is reflected in the draft resolution -
states that UNCRO's mandate should be directed primarily
towards meeting the main challenges: preventing a
resumption of war, protecting the civilian population and
promoting efforts towards a political settlement through
strengthening trust between the parties on the basis of the
progress that has already been made.

The Council affirms its commitment to the
provisions of the Vance plan, in all their urgency, in
accordance with the recommendations in the Secretary-
General's report. The adoption of a new mandate for this
operation in Croatia is absolutely necessary, but is only a
first step. The Security Council has now defined, taking
account of the recommendations of the Secretary-General,

 

the necessary political and legal foundation, and on this
basis the Secretary-General and his representatives now
have work of the utmost importance to do on continuing the
consultations on the question of the actual implementation
of the mandate and the modalities for this operation, all
aspects of which have to be acceptable to both parties to
the conflict. Both the Government of Croatia and the local
Serbian authorities must show a constructive attitude and,
with assistance from the international mediators, must come
to an agreement on this matter, which is of decisive
importance for any settlement of the conflict.

Of particular importance here is the fact that right
now, before the deployment of the new operation, both
sides have already reaffirmed their firm commitment to
resolving the problems between them by peaceful means,
through negotiations. This is also a requirement set forth in
the Security Council's draft resolution. In this connection,
we are seriously concerned by reports that Croatian units
have violated the area controlled by the United Nations
Forces, and by the parties' military preparations as a whole.
The adoption of the draft resolution must be seen as a clear
signal that such actions are inadmissible and as a
reaffirmation of the United Nations mandate to stop them.

In supporting the decision to extend the mandate of
UNPROFOR in Bosnia and Herzegovina, we should like to
emphasize that the prospects for the future development of
the situation in that Republic, including the fate of the
United Nations operation, depend to a large extent on the
good will of the parties to the conflict and on how far they
comply with existing agreements. We are concerned about
the large-scale offensives by the Government forces of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and by the Bosnian Serbs'
retaliatory shelling of the safe areas and blocking of
humanitarian convoys. This concern is clearly reflected in
the draft resolutions.

We urge the parties to abide strictly by the agreements
which they voluntarily entered into on a cease-fire and a
cessation of hostilities, and to cooperate with UNPROFOR
in carrying out the provisions of those agreements. We
believe it necessary for the parties to reach agreement on
extending the duration of those agreements. Along with the
other members of the Security Council, we urge the
Bosnian Serbs also to accept the Contact Group plan.

The recent flare-up of hostilities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has a lot to do with the continuing illegal
supplies of arms to the region, which are merely hardening
the parties' positions and creating a false impression that the
conflict can be resolved by military means. The interests of

 

a peaceful settlement, and also the security interests of the
United Nations personnel, require that there must be a
clamp-down in implementing the arms embargo against
all the Republics of the former Yugoslavia provided for
under resolution 713 (1991). We believe that the Security
Council must pay greater attention to this issue, and that
it is essential also that the Committee on Sanctions should
finally take up this problem of violations of the military
supplies embargo, as it was directly instructed to do by
the Security Council.

In response to the wishes of the Government of The
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the Security
Council has decided to deploy the United Nations peace-
keeping presence there as a separate operation. We are
convinced that the United Nations forces - which are
preventive in nature - will continue to help maintain
peace and stability in this Republic and overcome many
of the problems and difficulties it faces.
The conflicts in the former Yugoslavia are very
closely interrelated. Complications arising in one place
have an unavoidable impact elsewhere. In this connection,
we attach particular importance to the fact that the
Security Council, in reorganizing UNPROFOR and
establishing three independent peace-keeping operations
in Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and The Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, has taken the important
decision to maintain a unified political and military
command for the three operations. We see this as an
important condition for ensuring that the new operations
operate successfully, and we hope that the work of the
United Nations Forces, together with the efforts of all the
international actors in the settlement process, will help
bring about a final, peaceful solution to the conflict in the
former Yugoslavia.

These important decisions agreed on within the
Security Council bear witness, inter alia, to the Contact
Group's resolve to use their collective efforts in promoting
progress towards a settlement of the Yugoslav crisis by
political means. The Contact Group has shown once again
that it is capable of maintaining its unity, even in a
situation of great emotional heat between the parties to
the conflict. We are also pleased to see - and this is
demonstrated in the joint and intensive work carried out
on the draft resolutions - that the mood for a
constructive political settlement to the Yugoslav crisis is
shared also by the caucus of the non-aligned countries
and by the other members of the Security Council.

 

Russia, whose soldiers, half a century ago, made a
decisive contribution to the liberation of all the peoples of
former Yugoslavia, is particularly interested in establishing
peace, stability and democracy in this region of Europe. It
is in our common interests, and it is part of our common
efforts, to ensure that this period, when the States of
Europe are celebrating the fiftieth anniversary of victory
and the end of the Second World War, should become a
time when there is a decisive breakthrough away from war
and towards peace in the Balkans. We hope that the
consensus arrived at in the Security Council on these three
resolutions will help towards that end.

