Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Filippo
Grandi, United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, and Mr. Miroslav Jenca, Under-Secretary
General for Political Affairs, for their briefings on the
situation in the Rakhine state of the Republic of the
Union of Myanmar.

Despite some positive developments on the ground,
we reiterate our deep concern about the continuing
effects generated by the violence perpetrated in August
2017 against several minority ethnic groups in Rakhine
state, in particular against the Muslim ethnic group, the
Rohingyas. We are struck by the fact that, according
to the report of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees dated 9 February 2018,
the number of refugees has increased from 640,000
to 688,000 people, which means that, since the last
time the Security Council considered the situation,
in December last year (see S/2017/8133), 48,000
people were forced to flee to Bangladesh as a result
of the absence of conditions that would guarantee their
security and stability in Myanmar.

This increase in the number of displaced persons
and refugees implies a more serious challenge, in the
light of the precariousness to which these people must
be exposed, given that refugee camps in Bangladesh
are at the mercy of such potential climatic events as
floods or landslide that have the potential to worsen the
already complex humanitarian situation. In addition,
the outbreak of diphtheria in refugee camps in the town
of Cox's Bazar in Bangladesh continues to be a matter
of concern, as the World Health Organization has
reported more than 5,000 clinically recorded cases and
37 deaths from the disease as of 3 February this year.

Furthermore, in order to prevent the further
worsening of conditions, it is crucial that wide and
unrestricted access to humanitarian assistance be
guaranteed to all the towns where internally displaced
persons are found, and we therefore call upon the
relevant parties, in particular the Government of
Myanmar, to fulfil their obligations. In that regard,
we want to emphasize the initial willingness that the
Government of Myanmar has shown to work with the
various United Nations agencies, and we urge it to
continue to greatly expand its coordination efforts.

We have taken note of the agreements signed
between the Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh
in November of last year and this January aimed at
launching the process for the Rohingya refugees'
return, as well as the coordination that both countries
have begun on exchanging the information and
documentation needed to achieve that goal. However, in
our view it will be essential to ensure the establishment
of conditions that will enable the refugees to make a
voluntary, informed, dignified, safe and permanent
return to their places of origin, and to make quite sure
that there is no replication of the conditions that would
make their return one of isolation and confinement in
areas where they do not belong.

We want to emphasize the efforts of Myanmar's
ministerial committee to start work on implementing
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, and we encourage it to continue its best
efforts to comply with them and produce concrete and
lasting results. In that regard, we reiterate our call for
the continuation and intensification of the investigations
needed to identify those responsible for the serious
violations of human rights committed against the
Rohingya population and to bring them to justice
to answer for their actions with no impunity, as was
established in the Council's 6 November presidential
statement (S/PRST/2017/22).

Bolivia would like to emphasize once again
that there is no alternative to dialogue for resolving
this crisis, and for that, the parties must commit all
their efforts to implementing strategies conducive to
negotiation, mediation, consultations and the exercise
of good offices and refrain from resorting to rhetoric
that may provoke confrontation or violence. We also
reiterate that if we are to achieve a stable and sustainable
solution to the issue, we must consider the root causes
of the conflict.

Lastly, my delegation wants to highlight the
willingness and spirit of brotherhood that the
Government and the people of Bangladesh have
shown in dealing with this crisis. We call on regional
organizations, and the international community in
general, to continue their valuable collaboration on the
efforts to resolve this sensitive situation.

