Mr. De Loecker (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The countries of Central and Eastern Europe
associated with the European Union - Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - and the
associated countries of Cyprus, Malta and Turkey align
themselves with this statement.

Madam President, first of all allow me to
congratulate you as you take up the presidency of the
Security Council and to congratulate Ambassador Ryan
for his outstanding work during his presidency during
the month of October.

First, I would like to thank Ambassador
Mahbubani, Chairman of the sanctions committee,
Ambassador Ayafor, Chairman of the Panel of Experts,
and the members of the Panel themselves for the
remarkable work they have accomplished. Indeed, the
report on sanctions promulgated by the Security
Council concerning Liberia is a detailed and revealing
document. We welcome the Panel's methodical and
painstaking approach and the precise information
which they have provided, and which we have
examined with the greatest attention.

Allow me to recall that these sanctions were
imposed with a clear aim: that of creating a propitious
environment for the peaceful resolution of the crisis in
Sierra Leone. A peaceful resolution implies that the
links between Liberia and the rebels of the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) should be broken,
as the latter have profited far too long from this
external support in conducting a merciless war against
the Sierra Leonean people. The European Union
reiterates that the Liberian Government has to respect
the dispositions of resolution 1343 (2001) and that it is
its responsibility to have the sanctions lifted.

Moreover, the imposition of sanctions is also part
of a more comprehensive strategy aimed at
re-establishing security in the subregion. The
international community cannot allow its efforts and
the considerable resources that it has invested in peace
in Sierra Leone to continue to be sabotaged by
manoeuvrings at the regional level.

Unfortunately, we are obliged to note that, six
months after the establishment of the sanctions regime,
the Panel of Experts reports serious violations of that
regime. In practice, rough diamonds are leaving
Liberian territory and weapons are entering it, and
despite the general effectiveness of the travel ban, 27
violations have been noted by the Panel. Moreover,
revenues from the timber industry and the shipping
registry have been collected to be used for arms
purchases, in violation of the United Nations arms
embargo. It is obvious that these violations are possible
only because of the complicity of unscrupulous
individuals and of certain countries. The Union
believes that it is indispensable that those involved
should be made to face their responsibilities and to
fulfil the obligations incumbent upon them by virtue of
the United Nations Charter. There should be no
exceptions to the implementation of the sanctions.

The Panel's report is an invaluable tool that we
very much hope will enable us to increase the
effectiveness of the monitoring of the sanctions regime.
We are aware, however, that this is only one element in
the equation. Nothing can be achieved without the
cooperation of a multitude of players, both within the
United Nations and elsewhere. In this respect, we think
that to highlight sanctions violations is far from
sufficient. The Security Council must send a firm an
unambiguous message to all those involved, urging
them to implement its decisions immediately and fully.
Furthermore, some technical improvements could be
made to the sanctions regime, particularly the
examination by other bodies of some of its aspects,
such as end-user certificates for arms. The European
Union supports the recommendation to the Security
Council to ask for a follow-up report by the Panel of
Experts next year.

Another important initiative is currently under
way: the Kimberley process, which is aimed at
establishing an international certification system for
diamonds. The European Union strongly supports this
initiative and hopes that the process will yield fruitful
results at this session of the General Assembly. The
international certification system should make it
possible to prevent any diversion in the context of
traffic in conflict diamonds. We also believe that more
transparency in diamond-trading is required,
particularly through the regular publication of detailed
statistics on diamond imports and exports.

In parallel with the problem of resources, there is
an urgent need to tackle the problem of arms from
apparently never-ending sources. Once again, closer
cooperation is needed between Member States,
particularly in West Africa. The arms traffic must be
curbed by more effective and systematic control
mechanisms, backed by a real willingness to implement
them scrupulously. In this context, the European Union
supports the effective implementation of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
moratorium on small arms.

The humanitarian impact of these measures
cannot be minimized or ignored, as Mr. Tsui has
reminded us. In considering how to follow up these
sanctions, account must be taken of the Secretary-
General's report, which contains a preliminary
assessment of the economic, humanitarian and social
effects that might arise from additional sanctions on the
Liberian people. The European Union welcomes the
fact that this aspect is being seriously taken into
account. It supports the Secretary-General's proposal to
envisage the creation of a mechanism responsible for
regularly reviewing the humanitarian and economic
impact of sanctions imposed on Liberia if the Security
Council were to adopt additional sanctions. He quite
rightly stresses that unintentional negative
consequences for the civilian population should be
avoided, and that certain erroneous views of the
sanctions regime and its objectives should be refuted.

We are all aware of the importance of an effective
dialogue at the regional level in the context of a peace
process. The European Union, in particular through its
Special Representative of the Presidency for the Mano
River Region, Mr. Hans Dahlgren, supports a meeting
between the heads of State of Guinea, Liberia and
Sierra Leone in January 2002, as proposed by the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs in September. It is clear
that the results of the efforts that have been made will
be reinforced by a wider approach at the regional level.
The European Union will continue its dialogue with
ECOWAS, and expresses its support for the ECOWAS
efforts aimed at promoting peace in the subregion.

In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm the
importance that we attach to increased respect for the
sanctions regime. We would support any de'marche or
measure making it possible to curb the flow of
resources and arms, which fuel the war and violence to
the detriment of any peace initiative, and above all to
the detriment of a people that invariable suffers the
devastating effects.

