I thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his briefing. France takes note of the holding of the third session of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva. The convening of that session teaches us above all that it is possible to continue the political process in the context of a pandemic if the necessary precautions are taken. However, France once again expresses regret over the limited progress made in these discussions and the lack of agreement on the date of the next meeting and its agenda. Nearly a year after the Constitutional Committee was formed, its record to date is nil. It is important that the regime finally agree to engage in good faith in the negotiations. All those who have influence on the regime, especially those who are members of the Security Council, must use it to this end. The regime's procrastinating tactics deceive no one; they are aimed at buying time, with the prospect of the 2021 presidential election in mind. For its part, France will not accept that the United Nations political process becomes a facade designed to relegitimize the regime. The credibility of the United Nations and the Security Council is at stake. In this context, we must clearly recall that the criteria for credible elections in Syria are set forth in resolution 2254 (2015): free and transparent elections under United Nations supervision and with the participation of all Syrians, including from the diaspora. France and its partners will not recognize results of elections that do not meet these criteria. It is essential that the United Nations address the election issue as soon as possible, so that it is ready to act as soon as the work of the Constitutional Committee is completed. The political process cannot be reduced to the workings of the Constitutional Committee alone. After nearly 10 years of conflict, it is our duty to bring about concrete improvement in the lives of millions of Syrians. This will first of all require that the ceasefire in the north-west be sustained and that a nationwide cessation of hostilities be implemented, in response to the Secretary-General's appeal as endorsed by the Council in resolution 2532 (2020). The current truce is fragile and reversible and offers no guarantees to the Syrian people. In this regard, France is concerned at intensification of hostilities south of the M4 motorway and warns against the resumption of an offensive by the regime and its allies, including a limited one. It is also high time to achieve parallel progress on the issue of detainees, which is stalled despite repeated calls from civil society and members of the Security Council. There is an urgent need for action in the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic, with the regime authorizing the large-scale release of detainees, particularly political prisoners, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). It is equally urgent, all the more so in the context of the pandemic, that the regime finally put an end to obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian aid and allow access for humanitarian actors to meet the needs of its population. We are not fooled by attempts to attribute the humanitarian tragedy in Syria to sanctions. I recall in this regard that the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic concluded in its latest report (A/HRC/45/31) that the regime has committed crimes that may amount to crimes against humanity. In conclusion, I would like to call on the Council to set aside its differences and unite its efforts to implement resolution 2254 (2015). In particular, I appeal to Russia's sense of responsibility. Without a credible political settlement, France and its European partners will not deviate from their line on sanctions, reconstruction and normalization. No one will benefit from the deterioration of the situation in Syria, of which the Syrians are the first victims. The stability of the region and international peace and security are at stake. France is ready to play its full part in relaunching an ambitious political process that produces results on the ground. At the same time, we will continue to lend our full support to the fight against impunity in Syria.
