Mr. Motoc (Romania): I wish to begin by
commending the delegation of the Russian Federation
for the timely initiative that is now embodied in the
resolution that the Council has just adopted, namely,
resolution 1566 (2004).

Romania shared in the shock and horror
experienced by the Russian Government and people in
the face of the latest terrorist attacks on their territory.
We supported the wider motives that prompted the
Security Council to adopt this resolution. Indeed,
terrorist acts are proliferating and are growing in both
number and horror; countries and regions affected are
increasingly diverse, as we have, unfortunately,
recently witnessed in Asia, Europe and the Middle
East. The international response and the multilateral
reaction to this mounting threat should be characterized
by stronger and better-articulated norms, procedures
and mechanisms, including, in particular, at the level of
the United Nations.

In the course of consultations on the resolution
just adopted, all Council Members offered analysis,
ideas and proposals with a view to making the most out
of this important pronouncement of the Security
Council. The outcome of those extensive consultations
is a good text and a good basis for future hard work
within the United Nations, the Security Council and the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), within the
framework of the regimes they have set up.

These were important reasons for Romania to
co-sponsor the draft resolution and to support the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1566 (2004) this
morning.

I would like to take a moment to acknowledge
contributions made from outside the Council. In that
regard, we appreciate the very constructive and
forthright statement we just heard delivered here by the
Ambassador of Turkey, speaking on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.

A lot of hard work lies ahead of us. As terrorism
evolves, so should our response. Romania looks
forward to supporting the working group of the
Security Council in the expeditious and responsible
discharge of the broad mandate entrusted to it in
operative paragraph 9 of the resolution. There is strong
political will in the Council for the working group to
identify the most appropriate ways and means of more
effectively combating terrorism, including by making
appropriate recommendations for the development of
an adequate list of individuals and entities involved in
or associated with terrorism beyond those already dealt
with by the 1267 Committee. Romania is assuredly a
part of that political will.

