Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would also like to make a brief statement. I should like
to begin by thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Alan Doss, for his briefing on
the situation in Eastern Democratic Republic of Congo
and the work of the United Nations Mission in the
Democratic Republic of Congo (MONUC). I also
welcome the presence of the Foreign Minister of
Belgium and the Permanent Representatives of Rwanda
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

China has closely followed the situation in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and is
pleased to note signs of improvement there in recent
days, including the facts that most parties to the
conflict have been observing the ceasefire and that
Nkunda's armed forces have begun to withdraw from
certain areas. We welcome those developments.

We highly appreciate the good offices and
achievements of the Secretary-General, Mr. Obasanjo
and the countries and regional organizations
concerned. We sincerely call on all factions in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the parties in
the region to seize the opportunity afforded by the
easing of tensions in the eastern part of the country to
cooperate in good faith with the mediation efforts of
the international community and to take regional
stability and the national interests of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to heart with a view to restoring
general stability in the eastern part of the country.

We note that, in his report (S/2008/728), the
Secretary-General expresses concern about the security
situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The conflicts there have complex root causes
involving multiple factors, including political
differences, the unequal distribution of economic
resources and tribal clashes. The potential recurrence

of the conflict and its spillover remains. Attaining
peace will continue to require the tireless efforts of all
parties.

The Nairobi and Goma peace processes were
launched in the second half of 2007 and have since
made some progress. We appeal to the parties
concerned to base their actions on those processes and
to initiate dialogue and negotiations to settle their
differences, build mutual trust and move the Great
Lakes region towards lasting peace and stability. We
support the mediation efforts of the United Nations,
African countries and regional organizations.

The United Nations peacekeeping resources are
sorely stretched at present, yet a few days ago the
Security Council nonetheless adopted resolution 1843
(2008), in which it decided to increase the number of
troops deployed to the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC). That decision clearly demonstrates the high
priority and attention accorded by the international
community to peace and stability. We hope that the
resolution will be implemented as soon as possible and
the reinforcements deployed on schedule.

MONUC, the largest United Nations
peacekeeping operation to date, has made important
contributions to the maintenance of international peace
and security in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We agree in principle with the Secretary-General's
recommendation to renew the Mission's mandate, and
expect the Security Council to begin consulting on the
draft resolution submitted by France.

