Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): I wish first of all to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. I have no doubt that the
deliberations and decisions of the Council under your able
leadership will serve the purposes and principles of the
United Nations.

This is a particularly important occasion for me, as it
is my very first address to this body. I look forward to a
long and fruitful relationship with the members of the
Council in our collective effort to promote international
peace and security.

The adoption of the draft resolution establishing the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) will
be a landmark development in the search for durable peace
in Sierra Leone that will have an impact on the United
Nations, the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), Nigeria and, of course, Sierra Leone.

For the United Nations, the draft resolution is an
opportunity to fulfil its primary responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security. It also
represents a concrete attempt to assist the West African
subregion in resolving a local conflict. ECOWAS and its
military Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) can today breathe
a sigh of relief in the knowledge that the United Nations
has finally taken concrete steps to assume its responsibility
to maintain peace and security in the subregion.

For Nigeria, the creation of UNAMSIL not only
vindicates our conviction that the Sierra Leone crisis is a
threat to international peace and security, but also relieves

us of a disproportionate burden in human and material
resources.

There is no doubt that the children, women and men
of Sierra Leone are the biggest beneficiaries of the
decision to be taken by the Council today. After many
years of destruction and deprivation on a monumental
scale, bringing untold hardship to, and wreaking havoc
on, the population, the people of Sierra Leone can now
aspire to a normal life of peace and stability, which is
necessary for the socio-economic development of not only
the country but also of the entire ECOWAS subregion.

The process leading to today's decision has been
long and tortuous. Following its success in Liberia, the
ECOWAS Monitoring Group took on the Sierra Leone
assignment at a time when the initiative was attracting
very little international attention. In spite of limited
resources and inadequate logistical support and amid
considerable international apathy, ECOMOG was still able
to contain the crisis. Its actions culminated in the Peace
Agreement signed in Lome on 7 July 1999. It is largely
those initiatives that laid the foundation establishing
UNAMSIL.

We therefore pay tribute to the leadership of
ECOWAS for its vision and perseverance, even in the
face of daunting difficulties. Particular commendation also
goes to the troop-contributing countries of ECOMOG.
Ghana and Guinea deserve particular mention as principal
players in ECOMOG, contributing troops and material
resources as well as providing crucial logistic support. We
would appreciate their continued participation in the
process.

The commitment of Nigeria to international peace
and security is not in doubt. In our subregion, we have
deployed enormous human and material resources in the
search for enduring solutions to conflicts. Our efforts in
Liberia and, later, in Sierra Leone bear testimony to our
devotion to the cherished principles of good-
neighbourliness and international responsibility, in the
conviction that no meaningful development can take place
in the absence of peace and stability. In this vein, Nigeria
stands ready to play its part in UNAMSIL to facilitate the
implementation of the Lome Agreement.

UNAMSIL represents a rare but desirable form of
cooperation between the United Nations and a subregional
organization, in fulfilment of Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter. We support and commend this
development, and hope that the United Nations

 

Organization will continue to employ a similar approach
with other regional and subregional organizations in the
pursuit of international peace and security.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the contributions of donor countries in
meeting the material and logistic requirements of
ECOMOG and the Government of Sierra Leone. We urge
the United Nations and the entire international community
to commit themselves to the faithful implementation of the
draft resolution in order that the people of Sierra Leone
may derive the maximum benefit from this gesture of
international goodwill.

In conclusion, it is our hope that the successful
implementation of the draft resolution will lead to a
post-conflict peace-building that ensures lasting peace,
stability and socio-economic development, not only for
Sierra Leone but for the entire subregion.

