The Secretary-General: I thank New Zealand
and His Excellency Mr. Murray McCully, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of New Zealand, for taking this very
important and timely initiative to highlight the peace
and security challenges facing small island developing
States. I welcome the high level of participation in
this debate, and thank Their Excellencies the Prime
Minister of Jamaica, the Prime Minister of Samoa
and the Minister of Finance of the Seychelles for their
participation. I also take this opportunity to express my
deepest thanks to the many ministers who have taken
time to participate in this debate, and thank President
Anote Tong of Kiribati for his participation.

I hope that today's debate of the Security Council
will have a very big impact on and make a great
contribution to the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (COP 21), to be held in Paris in December.

Last year's Third International Conference on
Small Island Developing States, held in Samoa,
increased global attention not only to their
contributions to sustainable development, but also to
their unique vulnerabilities. The issues facing small
island developing States (SIDS) are global challenges.
They are our collective responsibility. Our first priority
must be to support SIDS in achieving the Millennium
Development Goals. In spite of considerable efforts,
progress has been uneven.

Secondly, we need a post-2015 development agenda
and sustainable development goals that address the
needs of SIDS. At the recent International Conference
on Financing for Development, held in Addis Ababa,
it was encouraging to see the concerns of SIDS
reflected, including in such critical areas as debt, trade,
technology and official development assistance. Earlier
this month, I participated in a summit meeting of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) held in Barbados.
The leaders of CARICOM, whose countries are also
SIDS, all expressed these concerns and described these
vulnerabilities. I hope that our debate will really make
a great contribution to addressing the challenges and
vulnerabilities of SIDS.

Thirdly, we need to achieve a meaningful and
universal global climate agreement in Paris in December.
SIDS are on the front lines of climate change. Cyclone
Pam in Vanuatu was only the latest in a long string of
devastating events that SIDS have endured and will
continue to endure as long as climate change is not
adequately addressed. Caribbean countries sometimes
experience as many as five hurricanes in a season.

The Security Council has rightly highlighted the
threat of climate change to international peace and
security. Rising sea levels, dying coral reefs and the
increasing frequency and severity of natural disasters
exacerbate the conditions leading to community
displacement and migration. They threaten to increase
tensions over resources and affect domestic and regional
stability.

Over the years, SIDS leaders have consistently
called for global climate action. And they have been
leading by example. Many SIDS have been accelerating
their own transition to renewable energy to secure a
sustainable energy future. We must support SIDS in
their actions to combat climate change and adapt to
its impacts. To that end, we need a politically credible
trajectory for mobilizing the pledged $100 billion per
year by 2020. The Green Climate Fund will need to be
up and running before COP 21 in Paris in December,
with projects and funding ready to go, especially for
the most vulnerable. And, finally, we will need to
ensure that a meaningful, universal climate agreement
is adopted.

Climate change is not the only peace and security
challenge facing the peoples and Governments of
SIDS. SIDS are also focusing as never before on the
menace of transnational organized crime. The threats
include drug trafficking, human trafficking, piracy
and wildlife crime. Caribbean SIDS are vulnerable
to drug-trafficking and gang-related violence, which
affect security and development. And with exclusive
economic zones often larger than their land areas,
SIDS also face the challenge of managing fisheries
and preventing illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing, which undermines economies and contribute
to insecurity.

The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
through its Maritime Crime Programme, is focusing on
heroin trafficking, human trafficking, wildlife crime
and fisheries crime. The programme works with States
to introduce legislation, in line with international
conventions, that will help to improve investigations
and strengthen criminal justice responses against
maritime crime. On piracy, Mauritius and Seychelles
have been at the forefront of international cooperation
in the Indian Ocean to apprehend and prosecute Somali
pirates.

CARICOM. and the Pacific Islands Forum
have helped focus the attention of the international
community on the heightened vulnerabilities that SIDS
face and demand that the international community be
attuned to these issues. But small island developing
States do not have the resources to combat such threats
by themselves. We can only secure their sustainable
and peaceful future through global partnership.

Some 20 years ago, in Barbados, Governments made
a global commitment to the sustainable development of
SIDS (see A/CONF.l67/9). That bond was strengthened
in Mauritius in 2005 (see A/CONF.207/ll, Annex II). Now we have the Small Island Developing States
Accelerated Modalities of Action (General Assembly resolution 69/15, Annex) to guide us. Combatting
climate change, promoting sustainable development
and addressing the vulnerabilities of SIDS will demand
partnership, capacity and leadership. Today, let us
commit the resources of the United Nations system as a
reliable partner to small island developing States as we
work together for sustainable development and a life of
dignity for all.
