Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): | would like to very sincerely thank all the briefers: the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the African Union Special Representative and the Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations. I also want to thank the Ambassador of Morocco, who has just given an excellent briefing on the Central African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. It is my honour to deliver this statement on behalf of South Africa, Tunisia, the Niger and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. Today's meeting takes place only a few weeks after the Council's adoption, on 31 January, of resolution 2507 (2020), renewing the sanctions regime imposed on the Central African Republic, followed by the presentation, on the same day, of the final report of the Panel of Experts on the Central African Republic (see S/2019/930), in the context of a briefing by the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African Republic, which I have the honour of chairing. The situation in the Central African Republic continues to improve, as reflected by the various briefings that we have just heard. We therefore warmly welcome the observance, on 6 February, of the first anniversary of the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, as well as all the progress made by the Government in implementing the Agreement, which has led to a reduction in violence and human rights violations. We continue to encourage the Government and the people of the Central African Republic to fully implement the Political Agreement in order to bring the country out of the cycle of conflict. We are convinced that dialogue among Central Africans is the key to ending the crisis over any other support that the countries of the region and the international community can provide. We therefore welcome the fact that the Central African authorities have taken significant steps to promote peace and reconciliation at the local and national level. The recent finalization of the procedures to establish the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation is also commendable. Once set up, that mechanism will undoubtedly help the Central African people to deliver justice so as to be able to maintain peace. We note the return to Bangui of former Presidents Francois Bozize and Michel Djotodia, and we hope that their presence in the country will contribute and give impetus to the ongoing national reconciliation process, in particular regarding the effective implementation of the peace agreement. We commend President Touadera for having convened a meeting with the former Presidents with a view to promoting peace and reconciliation. On behalf of the three African members of the Council and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, I wish to express our support for the Government in its ongoing efforts to restore State authority throughout the territory. Those efforts focus on the effective restoration of national institutions throughout the country, including the defence and security forces,the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of armed groups and the consolidation of democracy. In that context, we wish to stress the importance of providing the Central African defence and security forces with adequate capacity to carry out their constitutional mandate. It is crucial for the country to make significant progress in the context of the benchmarks set by the Security Council in April 2019 with a view to completely lifting the arms embargo ultimately, as desired by the Central African authorities. We commend the Government, the National Electoral Authority, MINUSCA and donors for having begun preparations for the presidential, legislative and local elections scheduled for 2020 and 2021 in order to strengthen peace and democracy in the country. We call on the international community to provide the necessary support to the Government to ensure the holding of peaceful and credible elections within the constitutional time frame. We also welcome the strong and ongoing commitment of the African Union and the Economic Community of Central African States, as guarantors of the Political Agreement, to ensuring the effective implementation of the Agreement by all parties. We reaffirm our support for the leading role of MINUSCA in promoting peace, security and development, particularly through the implementation of the peace agreement. The importance of that role was jointly reiterated by the African Union, the Economic Community of Central African States and the United Nations in the joint communique issued on 6 February at the commemoration of the first anniversary of the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation. At that event, the three organizations reiterated the need for dialogue among all the actors concerned, stressing in particular the following points: stopping all attacks against civilians, United Nations staff and humanitarian workers and establishing a judicial framework for the prosecution of all those who commit violations of the Political Agreement or human rights, as well as criminal acts. In that regard, we call on the armed groups to exercise restraint and to use the dispute settlement mechanisms provided for in the Political Agreement to resolve their differences. We urge non-signatory armed groups to engage in all political processes, in particular with regard to the cessation of hostilities and all acts of violence and intimidation throughout the country. At the same time, we welcome the progress made in prosecuting those involved in the killing of civilians and peacekeepers so that they are held accountable for their acts before the court. In conclusion, the three African members of the Council and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, in line with the approach of the African Union, will continue to support the aspirations of the Central AfricanGovernment and people to achieve peace, stability and the foundations for sustainable development in the country.
