Mr. Kolby (Norway): Mr. President, first of all I
would like to welcome you here to New York where
you are presiding over this very important meeting.
Like others, I would also like to congratulate the
Democratic Republic of East Timor on its
independence. It has been a long and difficult struggle
and, at the dawn of a new millennium, we are pleased
to welcome the birth of a new nation and, soon, a new
member of this Organization.

Today we witness the results of the political
maturity shown by the East Timorese people in
choosing to support democracy and reconciliation as a
basis for their nation. We also witness the results of the
impressive leadership of the East Timorese interim
authorities and of the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative, Sergio Vieira de Mello. I
would like in particular to express Norway's
appreciation for the outstanding manner in which
Mr. Vieira de Mello has headed the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
since 1999 and to commend the Mission for the
excellent work it has undertaken. I would also like to
wish Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma success in his
assignment as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for East Timor. Allow me also to
express our appreciation to the Government of
Indonesia and the Government of Portugal for their
cooperation with the United Nations and their support
for the process towards independence for East Timor.

Over the last years, Norway has developed a
special and close relationship with the East Timorese
people, and we have great admiration for the courage,
commitment and energy of President Gusmao and
Nobel Prize laureates Ramos-Horta and Bishop Belo.
For many years, they were a beacon of hope for the
East Timorese people in their struggle for peace and
independence.
Norway will do its utmost to foster and further
develop our excellent relations. We welcome the
adoption of resolution 1410 (2002), establishing the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), and affirm the generous commitment of
the donor community at the Consultative Group
meeting in Dili last week.

As the structures and institutions of the new State
develop, and as UNMISET gradually phases out, the
framework for long-term development assistance must
be put in place.

My Government is a firm supporter of East
Timor. As stated at the donors' meeting in Oslo last
December and repeated last week in Dili, Norway
remains committed to supporting East Timor
financially and politically, also after independence. The
Norwegian Minister for International Development,
Ms. Hilde Johnson, attended the events in Dili of the
past few days. During her stay she signed a
memorandum of understanding with the East Timorese
on future cooperation, which, in accordance with East
Timor's own national development strategy, will focus
mainly on health, education, good governance and
sustainability in the management of natural resources.
This year, our assistance to East Timor will amount to
approximately $5.9 million.

Let me once again congratulate East Timor on its
independence. Norway wishes the new nation success
in its aspirations towards building a democratic, stable
and prosperous State.

