Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): I would
like at the outset to thank the Security Council for
inviting the Government of Haiti to participate in
this meeting and to share its response to the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2015/667) of 31 August
concerning the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH). Allow me also to express the
gratitude of the Haitian Government to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his leadership and for the
commitment that he has constantly shown throughout
the implementation of MINUSTAH's mandate. The
report he has just submitted to the Council bears ample
witness to that.

The report is all the more important, coming as it
does at a crucial moment. Indeed, Haiti currently faces
two major challenges. On the one hand, the country
must successfully hold free, inclusive and transparent
general elections that will ensure an uneventful
political transition in 2016, allow for the consolidation
of democracy and securely set the country on the
path to modernization and lasting development. On
the other hand, it must ensure that the gains achieved
through MINUSTAH's presence in the country over
the past 11 years, in particular in the realm of security,
are sustained, and it must effectively take the reins as
the gradual drawdown and departure of the Mission
approaches.
The Haitian Government has reviewed the
Secretary-General's observations with the greatest
possible interest and has given its close attention to his
recommendations. The report paints a fair and balanced
picture of the political situation in Haiti, as well as of
recent developments concerning the electoral process
currently underway, along with the establishment of
the rule of law, security, the human rights situation,
development activities and the humanitarian situation.
The report rightly emphasizes the holding of the long-
awaited elections, which are widely regarded as a test,
not only for Haiti's institutions but also for MINUSTAH.

The holding of free, transparent, inclusive and
secure elections is clearly essential in order to ensure the
continuity of Parliament and to consolidate democracy,
stability and the rule of law, which are all critical
factors for the modernization of the country. With that
firm conviction and based on their commitment to
the Haitian people, the Head of State, His Excellency
Michel Joseph Martelly, and the Government, with
the precious help of the international community, in
particular the United Nations, have worked tirelessly to
create the conditions necessary for holding democratic
elections, as the report makes clear.

In that regard, the Government welcomes the
Secretary-General's assessment, namely, that the
Electoral Council has shown its capacity not only
"to manage a highly complex electoral process
notwithstanding the logistical and financial challenges",
but to do so "inclusively and transparently" (S/2015/667, para. 2). Haitian institutions, as a whole, have fully
played their role and have demonstrated their ability to
take ownership of and steer the process. The positive
role played by the Haitian National Police, among
others, in maintaining the climate of security was also
mentioned in the report.

Haiti has made important progress in the renewal of
its democratic institutions, with the holding of the first
round of legislative elections, as stated in the report.
However, the process is not over yet. Ifthe realization of
the first round marks a key step in the political transition
process and in the strengthening of democracy, the
fact remains that the election on 9 August was only
the first step in an electoral cycle that will continue
in the coming months. The presidential campaign was
officially launched on 9 September. On 25 October,
we will have the second round of legislative elections,
concomitantly with the first round of the presidential
elections, which will be followed by a second round in
late December at the same time as the municipal and
local elections.
From the outset, everything has been done to
bolster overall confidence in the integrity of the
process. Attaching great respect to the independence
and prerogatives of the Provisional Electoral Council,
the Government remains convinced that the Provisional
Electoral Council, aware of its responsibilities and the
importance of what is at stake, will make every effort
to meet the expectations of the population, adopting
all necessary measures to address the shortcomings
noted in the first round by national and international
observers, so as to resolve the problems identified. The
credibility of the elections is at stake, and their success
is critical for the success of the political transition in
2016 and for stability.

The Haitian Government takes this opportunity
to reiterate its deep gratitude to all friendly countries,
all cooperation partners of Haiti and United Nations
organizations, in particular the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and MINUSTAH,
for their involvement in the holding of the elections.
We are grateful for the quality of their support to the
Provisional Electoral Council, including additional
commitments announced at the donors' meeting in
July, which included the participation of the Prime
Minister of Haiti, His Excellency Mr. Evans Paul. We
are confident that they will continue to stand by the
Haitian people at this critical juncture by helping the
Electoral Council to remedy the existing gaps in the
financial, technical and logistical resources that are
needed to prepare the next phase of the elections, which
will be decisive in nature.

Allow me to express the gratitude of the Haitian
Government to the Government of Trinidad and
Tobago, which has just announced on 18 September a
contribution of $1 million to the UNDP trust fund for
the holding of the elections of 25 October.

The Secretary-General's report mentions several
other positive developments since the last visit to Haiti
by the members of the Security Council in January.
You, Mr. President, were there. These advances include,
inter alia, the significant improvement in security,
the promotion and defence of human rights, the
establishment of the rule of law and the strengthening
of institutions, which are the guarantors of, among
others, the Superior Council of the Judiciary and the
National Police, whose numbers continue to increase,
with a target of 16,000 members by 2016, in accordance
with the objectives established by the Organization's
development plan. While progress may seem slow,
prison reform is also under way. The implementation
of the new Penal Code should help to contribute to the
overall progress.

Alongside those various capacity-building initiatives,
the Haitian Government welcomes MINUSTAH's
participation in a wide range of projects focused on the
reduction and prevention of violence, the fight against
poverty, meeting the needs of vulnerable groups and
young people and communities at risk, the establishment
of legal aid offices, and the labour-intensive activities
focused on the development of infrastructure or on
environmental protection, not to mention the support
given to electoral awareness campaigns.

Furthermore, the Government takes notes of what
the report describes as a significant deterioration in the
humanitarian situation, while condemning the reduction
of the funding of such activities, which has had the effect
of limiting the ability of the United Nations system
and its partners to respond satisfactorily to all kinds
of challenges. Two of those challenges are a source of
major concern: the upsurge in cholera cases, on the one
hand, and, on the other hand, the tensions that have
arisen in Haitian-Dominican relations, following the
repatriation to Haiti of migrants and the descendants of
Haitian migrants. The Government supports the call of
the Secretary-General for revitalizing an action plan to
eradicate cholera. With respect to the relations between
Haiti and the Dominican Republic, the Government
fully supports a resumption of dialogue between the
two parties, as the Secretary-General has suggested, in
order to find a solution that guarantees that all migrants
will enjoy respect for their human dignity and the
protection of their human rights, while promoting the
resumption of cooperation in all areas between the two
countries.

After overcoming a host of obstacles that have
threatened to derail the electoral process, the Haitian
Government welcomes the prospect of the upcoming
installation of the fiftieth legislature and a peaceful
and calm political transition in a climate of restored
security.

The primary objective of MINUSTAH, which
is to foster sustainable stability, as outlined in the
mandate established by resolution 1542 (2004) and
confirmed by subsequent Security Council resolutions,
is in the process of being achieved. A new order is
emerging in Haiti. The country is calm, with stronger
institutions. We are focusing on the fundamental issues:
modernizing economic and social structures, reducing
poverty, substantially reducing unemployment,
promoting education and human rights, protecting the
environment and increasing investment with a view
to ensuring stronger and more sustained growth and
sustainable development.

In his address on 1 October to the General
Assembly, the President of the Republic, His Excellency
Mr. Michel Joseph Martelly, said the following (see A/70/PV.22):

"The progress achieved in recent years in
Haiti has been made possible thanks in part to the
support of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti. Those achievements represent a notable
contribution to the country's stability without
which no prospect of economic modernization
or sustainable development can be seriously
considered. MINUSTAH is in the process of
adapting to a new context, different from the one in
which it was established. The Haitian Government
is opting for a reconfiguration plan that takes into
account the evolving situation on the ground. I
reiterate our hope to see the progressive and ordered
withdrawal of troops continue. The withdrawal
and transfer of military, police and development
responsibilities to Haitian institutions will be made
in accordance with an agreed calendar. This will
prevent any damaging vacuum in the internal and
external security of the country."

At the time of the forthcoming political transition
and the installation of a new Government in 2016, the
Haitian Government is supporting a reconfiguration of
the mandate, together with the transfer at an appropriate
pace of the responsibilities of MINUSTAH to the
national authorities. This transfer should take into
account at each stage the progress made and also the
existing vulnerabilities, so as to avoid any premature
withdrawal that could create a vacuum in the security
situation, as the Secretary General has constantly
reminded us. The key is to ensure maximum flexibility
in terms of the withdrawal and the implementation of
the reconfiguration plan.

The Haitian Government has specifically noted in
the Secretary-General's report the following passage:

"1 recommend that the Security Council extend
the mandate of MINUSTAH for an additional and
possibly final year, until 15 October 2016, with
the current authorized uniformed strengths of
2,370 troops and 2,601 police officers. Following
the completion of the electoral process and the
installation of a new President, I propose to carry
out a strategic assessment of the situation in Haiti,
including the degree of stability throughout the
country and the professionalism and strength
of the national police, with a View to presenting
the Council with recommendations on the future
presence and role of the United Nations in Haiti
ahead of the expiration of the Mission's mandate
in 2016. Without prejudice to the outcome of the
strategic assessment, I anticipate that, if the recent
positive trends continue, the nature of the United
Nations presence in Haiti will evolve significantly,
including its security posture" (S/2015/667, para. 65).

The people and the Government of Haiti attach
particular value to the prominent role the United Nations
has played in Haiti in recent years, particularly within
the framework of MINUSTAH. This is an opportunity
for me to commend, in this regard, the quality and
scope of the work done by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra Honore. In
exceptionally difficult circumstances, Ms. Honore has
always shown composure, poise and intelligence where
others would probably have yielded to the temptation
of alarmism and trepidation. I appreciate Ms. Honore's
steadfastness and her understanding of the complexities
of my country.

I would like to salute once again the efforts of the
Secretary-General, whose report will certainly be a
valuable contribution to the deliberations and decisions
of the Council concerning the composition and
future of MINUSTAH, I wish to reiterate the Haitian
Government's determination to continue to work closely
with the Security Council and the Secretariat for the
full realization of the MINUSTAH mandate, which is
to assist the Haitian people and their Government in
their quest for lasting stability based on the rule of law
and democratic institutions.

