Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): My delegation
takes note of the tenth report of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) to the Security
Council pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). And I
thank Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo for his briefing to the
Council.

Viet Nam has always maintained that the
perpetrators of the most serious crimes - such as
genocide, war crimes, crimes of aggression and crimes
against humanity - must be brought to justice. In the
fight against such heinous crimes, we recognize and
support the role and contributions of the international
criminal tribunals. At the same time, we consider that,
as those tribunals are courts of last resort, it is essential
to respect the primary role of national jurisdictions and
to render capacity-building assistance to national
judiciaries, as necessary, in order to enable them to
take up their judicial responsibilities.

Viet Nam is concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian conditions in Darfur and the alleged
commission of serious crimes against civilians. We
support the efforts of the African Union (AU) to
engage with the Sudanese Government in deploying
the seven-track solution package to achieve peace,
security and reconciliation in Darfur. We welcome the
creation of the African Union High-Level Panel on
Darfur, composed of independent African individuals,
whose mandate is to address the interlinked issues of
combating impunity and promoting peace and
reconciliation. The High-Level Panel's report
(S/2009/599, annex I), adopted by the AU Peace and
Security Council, stresses the need to strengthen the
Sudan's national legal system, to deal appropriately
with the perpetrators of crimes, and to make
reparations to the victims inside the Sudan. We note the
ICC Prosecutor's efforts to cooperate with the AU
High-Level Panel, and we encourage his further

09-6333]
cooperation with the AU high-level implementation
panel aimed at achieving the above-mentioned
objective.

While we reaffirm the need for all parties to the
armed conflict in Darfur to implement Security
Council resolution 1593 (2005), Viet Nam supports
responsible actions by the Council that take into
account the concern and positions of its very important
regional peace and security partners.

