Ms. Coleman (United States of America): My
delegation welcomes Foreign Minister Dacie and
Ambassador Citaku. I also thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Tanin for his briefing.

We welcome the positive tone of the Secretary-
General's most recent report (S/2016/901) and its
acknowledgement of the overall economic and political
progress in Kosovo. We applaud the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
for its commitment over the years in assisting Kosovo to
develop multiethnic, democratic institutions that uphold
the rule of law and respect human rights. Through its
continued and diligent commitment to a peaceful and
stable Kosovo, UNMIK has fulfilled its mandate. The
situation in Kosovo is drastically different from what it
was when the Security Council adopted resolution 1244
(1999), and much has changed even since the Mission
was restructured in 2008. It is time to streamline
and rationalize UNMIK even further with respect to
structure, size, personnel and tasks, as several Member
States have already noted. We continue our call for
increased efficiency and downscaling of the Mission
in line with its mandate and realities on the ground in
Kosovo and ask that the Secretariat present proposals
for restructuring the Mission in its next regular report.

A number of us just returned from the Security
Council's trip to the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where United Nations
peacekeepers are called upon to protect civilians from
armed groups and where upwards of 700 civilians
were killed in the past two years. While Kosovo
faces challenges that would be expected of any young
country, the Security Council does not have the luxury
of deploying United Nations resources in Kosovo
when they are so desperately needed to address active
conflicts elsewhere, such as in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Given the continued progress and overall
stability in Kosovo, we also believe it is high time for
the Council to adjust the reporting and briefing cycles.
A three-month reporting cycle is simply not necessary,
as several Member States have already noted. Kosovo
has reached a point in its development where deliberate
and methodical reform is required to further increase
political and security stability, normalize relations with
its neighbours and strengthen human rights and rule-of-
law institutions. Those efforts take time. Of course, we
should continue to track Kosovo's trajectory; but such
close oversight by the Security Council is unwarranted.
We once again urge fellow Council members to work
with us to adjust the reporting period to six months.

We have seen positive signs of economic
development in Kosovo. While it is true that according
to the World Bank, gross domestic product gross
ticked down slightly to 3.6 per cent, the Secretary-
General's report also notes that that is a favourable rate
as compared with neighbouring countries. We would
also like to point out that it is a higher rate of growth
than that experienced by over two thirds of Security
Council members. As we have already heard from my
Japanese colleague, that rate of growth is the envy of
some. Therefore, the accompanying level of 33 per cent
unemployment must be urgently addressed. We still
believe that further economic reform can help improve
governance, combat corruption, increase transparency
and bolster the rule of law.

In that vein, we welcome efforts by the Government
of Kosovo to put the Trepca mining enterprise on
a path to successful restructuring. We recognize
that that will be a difficult and contentious process
that must be done openly and transparently with the
inclusive representation of stakeholders. Trepca must
be restructured in such a way as to provide maximum
economic viability and with the benefit of the affected
workers and communities in mind. UNMIK wrote
regulations in 2002, which have since been incorporatee
in Kosovo's laws and institutions, that form the legal
basis for restructuring Trepca and other publicly or
socially owned enterprises. It also established a special
privatization court to adjudicate claims.

We also welcome the extension of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX),
which is helping to strengthen justice and fight
corruption in Kosovo. Expanded joint training and foot
patrols are clear signs of the established coordination
that EULEX has achieved. Given Kosovo's accession
to the International Federation of Association Football
and the Union of European Football Associations, we
also appreciate the guidelines produced by EULEX
regarding the policing of international soccer matches.
Sport is an opportunity to normalize relations and
should be used to bring communities together, although
bad behaviour by fans can quickly spiral out ofcontrol.
Progress on justice and the rule of law will serve to
combat corruption, help attract foreign investment and
contribute to Kosovo's overall development.

It is unfortunate that political violence has delayed
agreement on territorial delineation with Montenegro.
That issue must be resolved. Tear gas, petrol bombs
and rocket-propelled grenades have no place in civil
political discourse.

We encourage the important work Kosovo is
undertaking to address the serious problem of foreign
fighters, and we applaud the recent arrest of individuals
in Kosovo likely affiliated with the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant in Syria. Foreign fighters present a
threat to all countries and require a collective response.

The entire region, including Kosovo, needs
an inclusive and integrated approach that includes
international institutions, such as INTERPOL, to
ensure cooperation and coordination on issues vital to
the national security of all States Members of the United
Nations. Kosovo's membership and participation in
international organizations is not only good for Kosovo,
but for the international community.

Finally, we believe all Member States should
recognize Kosovo as an independent State. When
Kosovo succeeds, the entire region will benefit. A
democratic, stable and independent Kosovo is a force
for regional stability, and to that end we welcome
Kosovo and Serbia's efforts to pursue the normalization
of relations through the European Union-facilitated
dialogue. We commend the leaders in both Belgrade
and Pristina for their willingness to make difficult
decisions, and we continue to appreciate the High
Representative Mogherini's facilitation of the talks.
The United States reaffirms its support for Kosovo
as it continues to develop a prosperous and peaceful
multi-ethnic democracy, fully integrated into the
international community.

