Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the Secretary-General and the three
briefers for their presentations.

It is more important than ever before to step up
our investment in conflict prevention. The authors of
the Charter of the United Nations gave the Security
Council a clear mandate in that regard. Yet it must be
said that we tend to focus on existing crises instead
of trying to prevent those of tomorrow, although
investing in pre-empting conflicts is much less costly
in terms of human lives and suffering, of course, but
also financially.

Significant efforts have been made in recent
years. In that connection, I would like to commend the
initiative of the Secretary-General in stepping up peace
diplomacy and the reforms that have been undertaken
to make the United Nations system more effective in
that area, including the strengthening of mediation
capacities and the early-warning role of United Nations
country teams. I would also like to acknowledge the
work of the office of Adama Dieng, Special Adviser
on the Prevention of Genocide. That new momentum in
favour of conflict prevention has enjoyed a remarkable
success in recent years. For example, this past year
in Madagascar, the mediation led by the Secretary-
General's Special Adviser, Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily,
in close coordination with the African Union and the
Southern African Development Community, helped to
avert a serious political crisis.

Yet we can do more - the Security Council should
more often be seized of situations that present a risk
of conflict. Bearing that in mind, we are continuing to
keeping a close eye on the situation in Burundi, since
the destabilization of that country would have tragic
consequences for peace and security throughout the
entire region.

The Peacebuilding Commission should also
focus more on situations that present a risk and make
recommendations to the Council. The Commission's
recent meeting on Burkina Faso demonstrated the
extent to which that forum can establish a constructive
dialogue with countries in fragile situations.

One of the great contemporary challenges for
better conflict prevention is to take climate risks into
account. The United Nations system must be able to
take a comprehensive view of the risks of the impact of
climate change on international security. We therefore
recommend that a report of the Secretary-General be
prepared with a view to providing a regular assessment
of those risks, as well as concrete recommendations.

Finally, we must promote the meaningful
participation of women, young people and civil society
in mediation and conflict prevention processes.
In that regard, I welcome the contribution of the
FemWise-Africa Network, which makes it possible to
deploy women mediators on the ground.

We must also work even more closely with
African regional and subregional organizations. The
strengthening of the partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations under the auspices of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
enhances the effectiveness of our preventive diplomacy.
That partnership is of strategic importance to us, and
we are therefore determined to support it.

In Burkina Faso in 2015 and in the Gambia in 2016,
the coordinated and united action of the United Nations,
the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States ensured a successful outcome.
Earlier this year, in the Central African Republic,
the United Nations and the African Union facilitated
together the negotiation of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, thanks in particular to the strong and
perfectly coordinated commitment of Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix and Mr. Sma'i'l Chergui.

It is essential that we better coordinate our efforts.
In the Sudan, for example, it was the African Union and
Ethiopia that had the highest chance of bringing about a
successful agreement. The United Nations and all those
friendly to the Sudan supported that mediation, while
at the same time taking care not to create interference.
African subregional organizations also play a leading
role in such situations. I wish to refer here to the efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in
particular, which led to the signing of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan one year ago.

Preventive diplomacy in Africa requires us to take
advantage of all the tools at our disposal in a spirit of
partnership and effectiveness. France is working in that
spirit with its African partners, and the members of the
Council can rest assured that we will continue to do so.
