Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to join previous speakers in
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I am certain
that your wisdom and experience will ensure the
success of the Council's work. I should like also to
thank your predecessor for the outstanding manner in
which he led the work of the Council last month.

The suffering of the Palestinian people is the
tragic result of the failure to implement the relevant
United Nations resolutions on the question of
Palestine. The occupation by Israel of Palestinian
territories as well as the Syrian Golan and the Shaba'a
Farms represents a flagrant violation of international
law and a clear challenge to the principle of the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force
and to the peace process begun in Madrid in 1991.

Resort to violence and extremism has resulted in
the marginalization of other parties that are attempting
to deal with the situation. The bloodshed and violence
between the two parties is driven by the Israelis'
obsession with security and by Palestinian despair, so
that for both parties the cycle of violence has become a
fatal, infernal spiral.

The continued Israeli occupation and the fact that
the Israeli Government is evading its responsibilities
and using excessive force is what is compelling
Palestinians to commit suicide. Indeed, all other ways
have been refused them, their dignity has been violated
and their rights flouted.

Israel has always relied on its military
superiority, because it is convinced that it is force and
not justice that will resolve problems with Arabs and
Palestinians in its favour. The paralysis of the
international community with respect to putting an end
to the Israeli occupation has enabled Israel to continue
to hinder the peace process and to sidestep all of its
commitments under fallacious pretexts. Thus Israel
continues to annex territory and to change the latter's
demographic character. It continues to flout the
relevant Security Council resolutions and to perpetrate
acts of aggression without regard for the repercussions
of such violence, taking steps that give the impression
that it believes itself above any criticism or
condemnation.

Israel is also trying to circumvent any party that
might try to find a solution to the problem. It rejects all
solutions and persists in finding pretexts to continue its
occupation of Palestinian territories and to deny the
Palestinian people their rights. The question has never
been whether Israel is trying to find a peace partner or
not. On the contrary, it destroys its partner - morally,
politically and economically.

Israel is clearly trying to put an end to the
Palestinian question and unilaterally to establish a road
map for the Jewish State, so as to drive the Palestinians
to despair, provoking them to carry out acts of violence
and then calling them terrorists.

Blood and despair can never serve as the basis for
good relations among peoples. Pictures of blood-
soaked bodies and mutilated limbs among the rubble
and bombed-out cars are testimony to the violence
resulting from arrogance and the use of force. Israel
has committed a great many injustices, forgetting that
force belongs only to him who possesses it, that is to
say, to God.

Israel is strong because of the assistance it
obtains and because of the use of double standards. No
one could deny that injustice has been done and that
justice will finally triumph. Israel must understand that
it will pay the price if it refuses the opportunity of
peace offered by the Arabs.

Saudi Arabia calls on the international
community and on regional and international players,
especially the Quartet, to find a way of bringing about
peace and security in the Middle East region, while
implementing the peace process whereby the Arab
States would guarantee Israel a full peace. Israel, for its
part, must withdraw from all Arab territories occupied
since June 1967; a Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as
its capital, must be established; and a just solution to
the problem of Palestinian refugees must be found. In
that way, the interests of the States of the region and of
the world as a whole could be met through the
implementation of the road map, in the framework of
the Madrid Conference, the principle of land for peace
and internally binding resolutions.

