Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, the Chinese delegation wishes to
congratulate Burkina Faso on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December. We also congratulate Austria on its
successful presidency last month. I thank President
Robinson, Prosecutor Brammertz, President Byron and
Prosecutor J allow for their briefings this morning.

We note that since the Security Council
established the completion strategies for the two
Tribunals, both have worked diligently to implement
the strategies and made sustained progress, which we
appreciate and commend. There is only one year left
before the deadline established for the completion
strategies, but trial work is still proceeding within the
Tribunals. It is unlikely that all the work will be
completed on schedule. In that regard, the anticipated
date for the completion of all appeal cases by the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) has been pushed back to 2014, while the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
will complete most of its trial work in 2010, although
the date for the completion of appeal cases has been
pushed back to 2013.

We note the many reasons for such delays and
that certain factors therein were unanticipated by the
Tribunals. However, the completion strategies
established as an overall goal by the Security Council
must always be followed by all actors. We hope that,
based on their past efforts, the Tribunals will explore
further effective working methods to accelerate the
task of fulfilling the completion strategies.

We note that, according to the ICTY's report
(S/2009/589), between 2005 and 2007 eight cases were
referred to the relevant national judicial organs and that
no cases now remain eligible for referral. The report of
the ICTR (S/2009/587) fully recognizes that the effort
to refer relevant cases to national jurisdictions is a
critical element of the completion strategy and
reaffirms the Tribunal's commitment to ongoing efforts
in that regard. We reiterate that strenuous efforts to
refer cases and transfer fugitives to willing and capable
countries are key tasks of the completion strategies. We
hope that the two Tribunals will continue to adopt
measures to that end, and call on the countries
concerned to cooperate fully with them.

We are pleased to note that, at the request of the
Security Council, the reports of the two Tribunals refer
to the implementation of the recommendations
contained in paragraph 259 of the report of the
Secretary-General on the administrative and budgetary
aspects of the options for possible locations for the
archives of the ICTY and the ICTR and the seat of the
residual mechanism or mechanisms for the Tribunals
(S/2009/258). That implementation will help the two
Tribunals to transition successfully to the residual
mechanism or mechanisms in the future. We hope that
the Tribunals' efforts to that end will enjoy early and
substantive success.
The Security Council's Informal Working Group
on international tribunals is discussing the issue of a
residual mechanism for the two Tribunals and will hold
consultations on a relevant draft resolution. We thank
the Informal Working Group for its efforts. We
appreciate the contributions of the Austrian delegation
in that respect and the comments and suggestions of
the Tribunals to the Working Group in this process. We
hope that the Working Group's efforts will help to
promote the implementation of the completion
strategies.

