Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I would
like to say that we, as a country with a strong stance on
achieving a world free of terrorism and on promoting
dialogue among civilizations and religions, are deeply
shocked by the tragic shooting in a sacred place of
worship, the Tree of Life Synagogue in Pittsburgh,
and on the holy day of the Sabbath. We offer heartfelt
condolences to the families of the 11 victims and wish
the injured a speedy recovery. Our hearts and solidarity
are with the Jewish community of the United States
and worldwide. My delegation strongly condemns such
acts of anti-Semitism, hatred and bigotry, which should
have no place in the twenty-first century, and therefore
calls for greater action to ensure peace, harmony and
mutual respect.

We also offer our condolences to the Government
and the people of Indonesia for the tragedy that cost
the lives of 189 passengers aboard Lion Air. We grieve
their loss with our deepest sympathies and solidarity.

We thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
for his comprehensive and informative briefing.
Kazakhstan welcomes the positive changes in Idlib
following the creation of a demilitarized buffer zone,
in particular, with the restoration of transport and
communications. We believe that the Sochi agreement
should be promptly implemented in full compliance
with the norms and principles of international
humanitarian law. This agreement will consolidate the
progress achieved and provide an opportunity to begin
political negotiations. At the same time, we condemn the
provocative actions of terrorist organizations, including
in Aleppo, that do not recognize the agreement. The
international community should not allow terrorist
groups to undermine these agreements.

Kazakhstan expresses its concern over the safety
and protection of civilians in Syria's rural Deir ez-
Zor governorate, where fighting has displaced more
than 30,000 people since July. We have been informed
that the internally displaced persons have settled in
makeshift camps in the governorate and are in urgent
need of humanitarian assistance. We commend the
United Nations for its efforts aimed at ensuring that
there is sufficient food and nutrition and water, as well
as sanitation and hygiene assistance, to satisfy the
needs of the internally displaced people in the area.

Over the past month, many scores of civilians
have reportedly been killed and injured, while up to
10,000 civilians remain trapped inside the Hajin area.
Kazakhstan continues to urge all parties to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
to take constant care to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure, including humanitarian personnel
and assets.

We also express our concern over a large number of
explosive devices left by Da'esh militants, and call for
support of the United Nations initiative to undertake
mine clearance in these territories. This will allow to
eliminate unexploded ordnance, launch humanitarian
operations and give refugees the opportunity to
return to their homes. The international community
should strengthen its efforts aimed at restoring
Raqqa's infrastructure and at clearing the mines
in its neighbourhoods since such efforts will allow
hundreds of thousands of displaced people to come
home. International humanitarian organizations should
work more actively with local community structures
to ensure that the refugees returns are voluntary and
carried out safely and with dignity.

Kazakhstan calls upon the international community
to support all parties to the inter-Syrian negotiation
process aimed at achieving a peaceful solution to the
crisis, and to use the previously mentioned positive
progress to improve the humanitarian situation.
Moreover, all interested parties should cooperate with
the United Nations and its specialized agencies, and
give equal attention to the humanitarian situation in
all regions of the country. However, the humanitarian
crisis requires a holistic and comprehensive approach,
going beyond the simple delivery of aid.

Kazakhstan therefore offers its full support to
Mr. Lowcock and Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura.
We highly esteem the contributions of the Special
Envoy in attempting to get the constitutional committee
established and in promoting dialogue between the
different formats on Syria.

Kazakhstan warmly welcomes the recent Istanbul
summit attended by the leaders of France, Germany,
Russia and Turkey. As the first summit on Syria to bring
together the representatives of the small group and the
Astana process, it demonstrated that we may be close
to finding a solution to the crisis. As we noted earlier,
Kazakhstan strongly supports the dialogue of the
Astana format with other forums. This dialogue augurs
well for new approaches to addressing both political
and humanitarian issues. In this context, we encourage
the outcomes of the summit, including those relating
to the soon-to-be-created the Syrian constitutional
committee. Moreover, given that the situation in Syria
is gradually stabilizing, we hope that humanitarian
assistance will reach the population in need through
direct routes as quickly as possible.

