Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We wish first to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Haysom,
for his briefing on the situation in Afghanistan and, of
course, Ambassador Tanin for his substantive briefing.

We agree with the assessment we heard today. A
difficult situation continues to prevail in Afghanistan,
and we are concerned about the increasing activities
of fighters, of which civilians are the primary victims.
This negative trend is reflected in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/151), which
states that in past year alone, the conflict has claimed
the lives of more than 10,000 civilians. This is a
regrettable scorecard for the contemporary history of
Afghanistan. This state of affairs clearly suggests that
the International Security Assistance Force, which has
left the country, did not fulfil the mandated handed
down by the Security Council, just as it has not provided
us with a comprehensive report on the work it did over
the 13 years of its presence in the country.

We hope that the NATO-led Resolute Support
Mission will be more conscientious, and we urge the
Security Council, in line with resolution 2189 (2014),
to closely monitor its activities. There is no doubt
that extremists will continue to put the new Afghan
Government to the test, in an attempt to use the
withdrawal of the international presence in Afghanistan
to tilt the balance of power in their favour.

Spring is on the horizon, a time during which it is
traditional for fighters to escalate their activities. The
Afghan National Security Forces will be put to a serious
test regarding their ability to independently counter the
terrorist threat.

We take note with satisfaction of the efforts of
President Ghani to achieve national reconciliation. This
is the only way to achieve lasting peace in Afghanistan.
We are pleased to note that the resolution just adopted
reflects the desire of the Afghan people to play a
leading role in governing the country in the context of
the process of national reconciliation, with the support
of the United Nations Mission.

Also of the utmost relevance is the principle of
national reconciliation and related principles such as
the laying down of weapons, recognition of the Afghan
Constitution, cutting ties with Al-Qaida and other
terrorist organizations, and, ofcourse, commitment to a
stable Afghanistan. Imperative here is strict compliance
with the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime. We
would once again call attention to the obstinate disregard
reflected in the report of the Secretary-General with
respect to any reference to these terrorist organizations.
What does this mean? That this organization no longer
exists in Afghanistan and that the Al-Qaida issue has
been taken off the agenda? All the evidence, including
that which we heard today in the Security Council
Chamber, seems to bear witness to the contrary. We
note with concern the increased terrorist threat in
Afghanistan and the broadening geographical reach
of the activities and influence of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham, which is spreading a radical, hostile
version ofIslam. We call on the members ofthe Security
Council to develop a programme of joint activities at
the United Nations so as to halt the spreading influence
of that terrorist group.

We are alarmed by the increasingly frequent
reports of deterioration in the situation in northern
Afghanistan in areas bordering our friends and
allies in the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO) and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
Extremists there are actively engaging in propaganda
and recruitment, entrenching their physical presence.
The States of Central Asia have legitimate concerns
regarding those developments, since it was not long ago
that the north was a nearly calm region, distinguishing
itself clearly from other parts of the country. Its
becoming yet another safe haven for militants and
extremists is categorically unacceptable.

The increase in the drug threat emanating from
the territory of Afghanistan is a cause of particular
concern, not only to neighbouring States but to the
world over. The volume of drug production, according
to the report of the Secretary-General, is the equivalent
of 15 per cent of the country's gross national product.
That is a striking figure. The drug business remains one
of the sources of financing for extremist and terrorist
organizations. The refusal by some in the international
community to take decisive action in that area and draw
up effective approaches for eradicating the problem of
drug-trafficking from Afghanistan exacerbates the
terrorist threat.

The Russian Federation continues to counter the
flow of Afghan opiates, working with our partners from
the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, as well as within
the framework of the Russian-Afghan cooperation.
We must once again express our regret regarding the
position of NATO, which has repeatedly drawn on
trumped up excuses to turn down multiple proposals
for mutually beneficial cooperation with the CSTO in
combatting Afghan drug production.

We listened with interest to President Ghani's
proposals to adjust UNAMA's mandate. We support the
proactive intention of the Afghan Government to take
the country's future into its own hands and strengthen
its sovereignty and independence in all spheres.
The Russian Federation supports the United Nations
Mission in coordinating international civilian efforts
with a view to stabilizing Afghanistan by actively
assisting its Government.

