Mr. Dangue Rewaka (Gabon) (interpretation from French): In resolution 1154 (1998) of 2 March 1998, which
endorsed the Memorandum of Understanding signed on 23
February 1998 in Baghdad by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq, the
Security Council reaffirmed its intention to comply with the
provisions of resolution 687 (1991) concerning the duration
of the prohibitions contained in that resolution, provided
Iraq placed no more obstacles in the way of the activities
of the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).

The assurances that we received from the Iraqi
authorities indicated that nothing would be done to impede
the process of dismantling the weapons of mass destruction
that might still be on Iraqi soil.

However, contrary to every expectation, on 5 August
1998, Iraq decided to suspend and, on 31 October to halt,
its cooperation with those two bodies, running the risk of
postponement, sine die, of the comprehensive review that
the Security Council was preparing to conduct.

Whatever the reasons for Iraq's decision, we can only
condemn them. Indeed, we believe that that attitude can
only increase our suspicions regarding Iraq's goodwill to
comply with the provisions of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. That attitude also has the effect of delaying the
moment when the Security Council must take a decision
under the provisions of paragraphs 21 and 22 of resolution
687 (1991), thereby prolonging the suffering of the Iraqi
people.
It is for all these reasons that, once again, we wish to
encourage Iraq to resume full cooperation with the Special
Commission and the IAEA, because only a resumption of
dialogue - and, particularly, the technical dialogue
between Iraqi experts and the experts from UNSCOM. and
the IAEA - will help to provide answers to the Iraqi
Government's questions regarding the possibility of a
lifting, even a partial lifting, of sanctions by the Security
Council.

Therefore we will support the draft resolution before
us, since it is in keeping with that idea.

We believe that the unreserved support expressed by
members of the Council for the efforts that the Secretary-
General has been making to implement the Memorandum
of Understanding of 23 February 1998, and their
reaffirmation to conform to the relevant provisions of
resolution 687 (1991), should inspire greater confidence in
Iraq regarding the real desire of Council members to
conduct a review of actions undertaken since the
imposition of the embargo.

