Mr. Theron (Namibia): I wish to thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Annabi, for his comprehensive briefing
today on the situation in East Timor. Despite reports of
steady progress in the work of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET),
that body is now faced with an increasingly difficult
security situation.

When the people of East Timor celebrate the first
anniversary of the popular consultation, tomorrow, they
will no doubt do so with a mixture ofjoy and sadness:
joy because at that time they were able to make a
decision that would determine their own future, the
results of which are well under way today, and sadness
because of the violence and killings they had to endure
before and after that vote. The East Timorese will,
however, also realize that they are on a road of no
return, with full independence to be attained next year.

If I can now turn to other issues, my delegation is
satisfied with the current progress in the selection of
representatives to the National Council. As we have
stated before, that expanded body will better facilitate
consultations with the East Timorese. Similarly, other
positive developments, such as the completion of the
first diplomatic course and the work of the Civil
Service Academy, are welcome.

The infiltration of armed militias from West
Timor remains a concern for my delegation, and the
recent killing or wounding of United Nations
peacekeepers is deeply regretted. The response of
UNTAET in suppressing this now well coordinated
threat is welcome. We agree that the situation should
be closely monitored. We also call on the responsible
authorities in Indonesia to take effective measures to
prevent further incursions.
We are similarly concerned about the plight of the
refugees in camps in West Timor, which is a result of
militia violence and intimidation. My delegation is
particularly disturbed at the fact that militia activities
have increased and that the militias are now operating
openly. In this regard, we welcome the undertaking by
the Government of Indonesia to address the situation in
the camps in order to stop militia activities. This
should, however, be done in strict coordination with
UNTAET. The Indonesian Government should also
take measures to assist with voluntary repatriation to
East Timor and with resettling refugees who do not
wish to return to East Timor, a ask in which the
international community should assist Indonesia.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to express its
appreciation to Mr. De Mello and his staff for a job
well done. However, we also think it is appropriate to
take a moment to pay tribute to their predecessors,
namely Mr. Ian Martin and the staff of the United
Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET), and the
International Force in East Timor (INTERFET), for
their courageous work last year during the difficult
period before and after the popular consultation.

