Mr. Kim (Republic of Korea): I join previous
speakers in thanking you, Sir, for convening this open
debate on peacekeeping operations.

The Republic of Korea attaches the utmost
importance to peacekeeping operations as a vital
instrument for the United Nations in discharging its
primary responsibilities in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Our strong and
sustained commitment to the United Nations and its
role in maintaining peace around the globe is
evidenced by our active participation in various
peacekeeping operations, from Somalia and Angola to
the Western Sahara and Timor-Leste. While the United
Nations mandate spans nearly every aspect of
international life, peacekeeping remains the most
visible and prominent responsibility of the
Organization and the activity to which the bulk of the
Organization's resources are devoted. As such, the
performance of peacekeeping operations serves as the
primary yardstick by which the United Nations
relevance and credibility are judged by the global
community.

The Republic of Korea commends the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations for its
relentless efforts to strengthen its operational and
managerial capacities. Despite the important progress
and many valuable lessons learned from past setbacks
and achievements in the field of peacekeeping, United
Nations peacekeeping operations today face multiple
challenges. As the demand for and complexity of
United Nations peacekeeping operations increase, the
Organization's resources are becoming overstretched
and overstrained. Moreover, the concurrent increase in
multilateral peacekeeping by coalitions of the willing
in the Balkans, Afghanistan and Iraq further restricts
the availability of the most capable troops for United
Nations peacekeeping operations. At the same time,
inhospitable and dangerous operational environments
have raised serious concerns about the safety and
security of peacekeepers.

In light of these challenges, the Republic of
Korea would like to make the following observations.

First, the daunting challenges facing United
Nations peacekeeping require enhanced operational
effectiveness and efficiency through constant
improvements in the planning, organization, training,
logistics and management of its peacekeeping
operations.

Secondly, we emphasize the importance of
empowering regional organizations and the need to
establish an optimal division of responsibilities and
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations. Given the ongoing dire need for United
Nations peacekeeping in Africa, we attach particular
importance to empowering African regional and
subregional organizations in order to tap their unique
and complementary capacities. In this regard, we
strongly support the creation of new types of
partnerships and cooperation arrangements between the
United Nations and regional organizations. We also
welcome and support efforts of the African nations to
strengthen and intensify conflict-prevention,
peacekeeping and peace-building activities.

Thirdly, given the severe resource constraints
currently plaguing the United Nations, the
Organization is not in a position to resolve each and
every conflict arising around the world. Instead, the
Organization must concentrate its efforts on situations
where it enjoys comparative strength over other actors
and where it has a reasonable chance of making a
difference on the ground. Those conflicts requiring a
robust or rapid response that exceeds the United
Nations capabilities may be farmed out to coalitions of
the willing or regional organizations.

Finally, in the light of the dramatically surging
demand for United Nations peacekeeping expected in
the coming months and years, one task for the
Organization is to recruit properly-trained, well-
equipped and disciplined forces. Another challenge
will be to secure the financial resources to meet the
resulting increase in peacekeeping costs. In this
connection, we underline the importance of the
Security Council's consulting with major financial
contributors before it makes decisions with significant
financial implications. Such a courtesy would be
helpful to these financial contributors in galvanizing
their domestic constituencies in support of timely
budgetary appropriations.

In closing, the Republic of Korea would like to
pay tribute to the courage and dedication of all
personnel who have served or are serving in United
Nations peacekeeping missions around the world, in
particular those who have made the supreme sacrifice
of their lives for the noble cause of peace.

