Mr. Link (Germany): I would like first to thank
His Excellency Sheikh Hamad bin J assim bin Jabr
Al-Thani and His Excellency Mr. Nabil Elaraby for
their briefings. I commend the efforts of the League of
Arab States towards resolving the crisis in Syria. It was
important for the Council to listen to them today.

The Arab Spring has demonstrated that the people
of the region want to shape their future peacefully
through negotiations and discussions, not at gunpoint
and not in an atmosphere of fear and violence.

More than 10 months have passed since events in
Deraa and Damascus sparked peaceful protests in Syria
against the Assad regime. The regime reacted with a
brutal crackdown on its own people that has left
thousands dead and is still ongoing. That violence must
stop immediately. The Syrian people have been calling
for freedom of expression, association and peaceful
assembly and the ability to freely choose their leaders.
President Al-Assad has been responding by sending his
tanks.

The Arab League has heeded the calls of the
people of the region. Three months ago, it elaborated a
working plan to resolve the crisis, to which the Syrian
Government committed. However, the Al-Assad
regime did not substantially comply with the
agreement. There was no cessation of violence, not all
of those arrested were released, and there was no
withdrawal of the military from the cities and
residential areas. On the contrary, there has been a
notable increase in the regime's violence over the past
few days. That has forced the observer mission to
suspend its activities. The country stands at the brink
of civil war, with implications for peace and stability in
the region. The Council has been silent too long. It has
to step up to its responsibilities.

We must not forget that the majority of the
demonstrations in Syria have been overwhelmingly
peaceful, whereas the reaction of the authorities has
been excessive. Those facts have been recorded by the
international commission of inquiry established by the
Human Rights Council. That is why we also advocate a
Security Council commission of inquiry.

As the report of the commission of inquiry
(A/HRC/S-17/2/Add.1) concludes, the systematic human
rights violations perpetrated by the Syrian regime have
been conducted pursuant to deliberate State policy.
Members of the Syrian military and security forces
may have committed crimes against humanity.

On 22 January, the Arab League set out a political
framework for the way forward that includes the
formation of a transitional Government. The Arab
League has turned to this Council to ask for support.
We hereby lend our voice to its demands, and we fully
support its plan and all its previous efforts. We must
seize this opportunity. Now is the time for the Security
Council to act. The draft resolution endorsing the
demands made by the Arab League is on the table. The
text is the product of fruitful cooperation between
members of this Council and Arab countries, and was
introduced to the Council by Morocco. It has
Germany's full support.

We have to work for a political solution with
regional ownership. We owe it to the Syrian people not
to close our eyes in the face of the ongoing repression.
It is our responsibility as members of the Security
Council. Countries all over the world, especially those
of the region, have expressed their support. Let us act.
Above all, let us act without further delay.

