Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation would like to congratulate the
Swedish presidency of the Council for having convened
this timely debate on the complex, multidimensional
situation in the Lake Chad basin. It really is an urgent
issue of concern, as was described very eloquently this
afternoon by our briefers, Mr. Zerihoun, Mr. O'Brien
and Ms. Askira, whom we all thank for their respective
statements and for the updated and detailed information
that they provided us.
Without referring back to the origins of the crisis,
I think it fair to say that the physical constraints facing
the area, including drought, desertification and climate
change, compounded by the overexploitation of natural
resources, are at the root of the structural vulnerability
ofthe countries and the peoples ofthe Lake Chad basin.
The situation exacerbates the effects and consequences
of social conflicts relating to access to and the use and
allocation of the basin's natural resources.

All of these factors taken together, as well as their
negative impact on the social and economic fronts,
have made this area fertile ground for the deadly
activities of the Boko Haram terrorist group. In that
respect, we welcome the fact, as has been mentioned
that during the past year its spread was stemmed
thanks to the concerted efforts of the countries of the
region, supported in particular by the African Union,
subregional organizations and other organizations and
countries throughout the world.

But despite Boko Haram having been militarily
weakened by the regional, coordinated response against
it through, inter alia, the Multinational Joint Task
Force, we must point out that it is by no means defeated
and retains the capacity to wreak havoc, as it continues
to demonstrate through various asymmetrical attacks
and other acts of savagery. These residual activities
unfortunately continue to have devastating effects
on the political, social, economic, humanitarian and
human rights situation in the areas where the group
continues to carry out its attacks. Thus in addition to
military action, an urgent and adequate humanitarian
response must be provided so as to meet the numerous
challenges on the ground, which include the massive
displacement of people, the specific protection needs
of refugees and displaced persons, food insecurity, and
taking responsibility for the victims as well as for ex-
Boko Haram fighters and their families, with a view
to reintegrating them into their already crisis-affected
societies of origin.

The report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Central Africa and the activities of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (S/2016/996), issued
in late November 2016, indicates that there were
approximately 1,500 Boko Haram defectors in recent
months. In this respect, the international call issued with
a view to enabling the reintegration of such defectors
and members of their families should be heeded.

We commend the efforts undertaken by partners,
including members of the Council, of course, and those
deployed by humanitarian organizations, including the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
Me'decins sans frontieres and other agencies. However,
my delegation calls on the international community to
increase its support for the region in the fight against
Boko Haram by continuing to provide humanitarian
assistance and support for early recovery, which the
region urgently needs.

Here we would underline the crucial importance
of funding. As Mr. O'Brien noted, $1.5 billion is
being requested by humanitarian organizations to
respond to the most urgent needs for 2017. It would
also be desirable for the international community to
provide political, logistical and financial support to the
regional initiatives and structures that were created to
overcome the challenges facing the region, including
the Multinational Joint Task Force and the Lake Chad
Basin Commission.

Nevertheless, the mobilization of the region at
the national and subregional levels remains a priority.
In that connection, it is important, as the Secretary-
General has noted, for the Economic Community of
West African States and the Economic Community of
Central African States finally to be able to hold the
planned summit of Heads of State and Government on
Boko Haram in order to devise a interregional strategy
to address the crisis caused by that group, but also to
specifically address the root causes that contributed to
its emergence and resilience.

In addition to the military and humanitarian
dimensions of our response, we must also consider the
equally important elements of education, information
and communication - with particular emphasis on
raising awareness among the population, especially
women and young people, and on engaging in dialogue
with religious and other leaders, who have a key role
to play in countering the violent extremist narrative.
Similarly, in order to secure the tenuous progress made
in our response to the crisis, our strategy must bolster
the resilience of the States and communities of the Lake
Chad basin region through urgent interventions within
a broader long-term development framework.

In conclusion, the Security Council must actively
consider the issue and show proactive solidarity to
the States, organizations and humanitarian groups of
the region that provide emergency aid to individuals
and communities in need. Given the urgency of the
situation, an imminent Security Council visit to the
Lake Chad basin countries, as some delegations have
suggested, would be a clear show of the support that
we would like to see, as it could give new life to efforts
under way to resolve the crisis.

