Mr. Mutaboba (Rwanda): My delegation wishes to
commend the President, and his predecessors, for the work
he is doing and for presiding over this body. We hope he
will bring its deliberations to wise conclusions.

We also wish to express support for the mission of the
Committee on sanctions and for its Chairman's commitment
to gather information and recommendations for the Council
to work on.

The Government of Rwanda has, like other Members
of the United Nations, just learned of the contents of the
report of the Panel of Experts on Angola sanctions. I wish
to recall that when the Panel of Experts was constituted, it
was given the following mandate: to collect information and
investigate reports relating to the violation of sanctions
imposed against UNITA with respect to arms and related
material, mercenaries and other forms of military assistance
to UNITA; to collect information and investigate reports
relating to the violation of sanctions imposed against
UNITA with respect to petroleum and petroleum products,
diamonds, and the movement of UNITA funds; to identify
parties aiding and abetting the violation of Security Council
sanctions against UNITA; and to recommend measures to
end such violations and improve implementation of the
sanctions imposed by the Council against UNITA.

While reserving its right to express its views on the
entirety of the report of the Panel of Experts in writing,
there are some sections of it to which the Government of
Rwanda wishes to react to immediately, today. These are
contained in paragraphs 25, 26, 50, 67, 82, 83, 107, 148,
155 and 156. In those paragraphs, the Panel of Experts is
making very wild allegations about Rwanda's cooperation
with UNITA. Those allegations could be summed up as
having to do with military cooperation, arranging diamond
sales and facilitating meetings with weapons brokers.

The Rwanda Government wishes to state categorically
that these allegations have no foundation and are merely
hearsay from quarters that distort facts for reasons known
only to themselves. What is also very clear is that contrary
to its mandate to investigate reports, even where the Panel
was given clarifications, those were not taken aboard, as is
evidenced throughout the report. When the Panel visited
Rwanda, it was given information and explanations -
which are not even mentioned as having taken place - and
we wonder how and why the Panel has decided to leave
them out of the report.

Generally speaking, the report is misleading. It has
a lot of confusion and contradictions due to poor sources
of information and useless details. There are many
examples to illustrate this lack of consistency, but because
of the constraints of time we will detail them to the
Security Council in writing.

For the record, the Rwandan Government wishes to
make it clear that there is no military cooperation with
UNITA. The fact that Rwandan troops used Angolan
territory to evacuate Rwandan troops did not necessarily
mean a pact with Savimbi. Angola knows how we
evacuated our troops in a successful military rescue
operation. I insist on this. Nobody ever had contact with
Savimbi, or with any UNITA officials for that matter. It
could have been the first one, and thank God it never
happened. To suggest, as the report does, especially in
paragraph 26, that some Rwandan troops stayed together
with UNITA forces is simply a blatant lie with no logic
at all.
There is absolutely no truth to the allegation in
paragraph 26 of the report that Rwandans "have allowed
UNITA to operate more or less freely in Kigali for the
purposes of arranging diamond sales". Also, individuals
mentioned in paragraphs 26 and 148 had no business
contacts with Rwandan authorities. I insist on that. This
allegation is another result of rather vague, non-specific,
unresearched and unverified information. This raises
serious questions.

The Panel of Experts owes the Security Council
better investigations, instead of a simplistic "Mobutu
versus Kabila" factor, as to why Rwanda is allegedly
dealing with UNITA today. This is wrong and an
intellectually lazy way of thinking and of patching stories
together to discredit someone and a country that, as
rightly expressed by the report, had never had any
contacts with Savimbi or his movement before. History
should take them somewhere else - not to Rwanda, the
ever-surviving poor victim of all United Nations failures.

Rwanda formally challenges the Panel to produce
concrete evidence of the unfounded and uncalled-for
allegations, and wishes to reiterate its commitment to the
resolutions of this body and of the United Nations as a
whole. The burden of proof falls on the Panel to give
evidence to the Security Council, and to the countries
mentioned in the report, in order to substantiate these

 

allegations, and Rwanda should be allowed, like any other
Member of the United Nations, to work on its continued
support for sanctions against UNITA.

Rwanda still believes that the Angolan people have
suffered enough and wishes to reiterate its support for
whatever needs to be done to bring peace and security to
Angola and the region.

