Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the holding of this meeting and are grateful
to Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his
comprehensive briefing. We also welcome Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga in his new role as Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa and wish
him every success in discharging his duties.

We would like to begin by highlighting the
stabilizing role of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA) in Abyei and along the
border between the Sudan and South Sudan. Its
presence in strategic trouble spots and its proactive role
as a mediator among the communities has enabled it
to respond effectively to violence in those areas. We
attach equal importance to the mission's support for
capacity-building in key areas such as the maintenance
of law and order, the rule of law and gender equality. In
that regard, we highly value the inclusion of women in
community protection committees.

With regard to law and order, we reiterate the
urgent need to establish a police force in Abyei. We call
on the Government of South Sudan to continue its joint
planning efforts for the establishment of that force,
and on the Government of the Sudan to expedite the
issuance of visas for UNISFA police personnel so that
they can contribute to the full establishment of the rule
of law in Abyei as soon as possible.

We also note with concern that inflation and the
economic crisis in both the Sudan and South Sudan
have aggravated the humanitarian situation in Abyei.
We welcome the efforts of humanitarian personnel
to address this situation through food assistance,
health services, capacity-building and educational
activities, among other things. We hope that
international cooperation can continue to provide the
necessary resources for development projects and the
establishment of adequate basic services.

We welcome the progress made by both
Governments on the border demarcation. However, we
are concerned that no progress has yet been made on
key issues such as the completion of the withdrawal of
forces from the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone and the
full establishment of border crossing corridors, as well
as customs and migration offices.

We trust that the Governments of the Sudan and
South Sudan will capitalize on recent developments
in the region to move forward with concrete measures
leading to the resolution of the issue of the status of Abyei
and the full determination of the common border. In
that context, we reiterate our support for the Secretary-
General's recommendations on improving the civilian
component of the mission, with a view to smoother
cooperation with the African Union Commission and its
High-level Implementation Panel. We believe that the
Abyei issue cannot be postponed indefinitely. Building
sustainable peace requires progress on the political
process through the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee
and the Joint Political and Security Mechanism.

I will conclude by expressing our hope that, despite
the difficult conditions, the Governments of the Sudan
and South Sudan will be able to make joint progress that
will lead to the resolution of the issue of the status of
Abyei and the determination of the common border. The
Council must continue to support the parties. UNISFA
must remain in the Abyei Area, adapt its mandates to
the situation on the ground and create the necessary
space for a viable political solution to the conflict.

