Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank our briefers, Presidents
Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors Brammertz and
J allow, for their informative briefings.

Nigeria commends the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for the steady process
it has made towards completing its work. We note
that that Tribunal has concluded proceedings against
147 out of 161 persons indicted. We also note that
there are no ICTY fugitives. We acknowledge the
constraints faced by the ICTY, which made it difficult
to complete some trials and appeals by the target date
of 31 December 2014. We encourage the Tribunal to
continue to work efficiently to complete outstanding
judicial proceedings.

We note that the ICTY has been experiencing
difficulties with the recruitment and retention of staff.
It is a matter of concern to us that this situation is
impeding the work of the Tribunal. We commend the
Tribunal for its efforts to improve the retention and
recruitment of staff in its challenging circumstances
and hope that those efforts will yield positive outcomes.
In terms of communications and outreach, we commend
the ICTY Media Office for facilitating the work of
journalists covering the activities of the Tribunal.
This has indeed helped to promote transparency in the
work of the Tribunal. We acknowledge the significant
contributions of the ICTY outreach programme to the
debate on transitional justice and post-conflict recovery
in the former Yugoslavia.

Concerning the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), Nigeria welcomes the progress made
in implementing its completion strategy. The successful
handover of most judicial and prosecutoral functions
to the Residual Mechanism is an important indication
of that progress. In terms of best practices and lessons
learned, we commend the ICTR for its cooperation with
other tribunals and the International Criminal Court in
sharing perspectives. We also commend the prosecutor
ofthe ICTR for producing a manual on best practices for
the referral of international criminal cases to national
jurisdictions for trial.

We note the staffing problems that the ICTR is
experiencing, which are similar to those faced by the
ICTY. We hope that sustainable solutions will be found
in an expedient manner in order to facilitate the work
of the Tribunal. We encourage all States to cooperate
with the Residual Mechanism to ensure that the nine
people indicted by the ICTR who remain at large are
apprehended. They are fugitives from the law and must
face justice for their participation in the genocide in
Rwanda.

Finally, we commend Judge Meron and Judge
Joensen for their astute leadership and assure them of
our continued support.

