Mr. Aguilar Zinser (spoke in Spanish): As this is
the first time I have taken the floor since Spain
assumed the presidency of the Security Council, I want
to congratulate you, Sir, on the way in which you have
organized the work of the Council this month. I should
also like to thank the delegation of the Russian
Federation and Ambassador Sergio Lavrov on the way
in which he led the work of the Council, even in the
absence of many of its members, who were travelling
for much of the time during the Russian Federation's
presidency. I also want to thank Ambassador Jeremy
Greenstock and the other members of the mission to
West Africa for the confidence and the support given to
the delegation of Mexico so that we could lead the
work of the Security Council on the mission to Guinea-
Bissau.

The mission to Guinea-Bissau had a distinctive
characteristic: it was a joint or concomitant mission
between the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council, particularly the Economic and Social
Council's Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau.
That provided us, as members of the Security Council
and representatives of the Economic and Social
Council, the opportunity to observe from a common
perspective the very distressing problems and
circumstances that Guinea-Bissau is experiencing, to
exchange points of View and to strengthen our
mechanisms of cooperation, coordination and
complementarity. In the case of Guinea-Bissau, that
built up a true strategic partnership between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council.

This was also a first opportunity to work together
on the ground for both bodies, each with its own
perspective and mandate. In doing so, we found a very
broad horizon for complementary work between the
Economic and Social Council and the Security Council,
particularly in dealing with problems in the areas of
economic development, security and peace in Africa.

We found a country in the midst of a grave social
crisis with distressing indices, which tell of a setback
that affects the majority of Guinea-Bissau's population
with regard to the provision of basic services and
access to minimal conditions of life with dignity. We
encountered that distressing socio-economic reality as
a human factor, but also as a security factor. The
security of the country and of the region will depend on
the ability to resolve the population's socio-economic
problems and on the international cooperation that
materializes for that task.

But that is closely linked to the fact that there is
also a critical political situation. There is a process of
post-conflict political reconstruction in Guinea-Bissau
that is moving forward in a fragile and even uncertain
way. That requires that there be a clear commitment
from the country's authorities and clear support from
the international community with regard to the political
process. That must, in an initial stage, lead to the
election of parliamentary legislative representatives
who will make possible the reconfiguration of political
arrangements and the full re-establishment of the rule
of law.

We also found that, owing to the combination of
socio-economic problems and political factors, there
are risks of instability and violence that could be
imminent if they are not addressed adequately. Those
risks could lead to the breakdown of institutions.

We found armed forces that have demonstrated
and reaffirmed their commitment to the democratic
process and their respect for institutions and
constitutional order, but also armed forces in
conditions of extreme indigence, which makes the
situation volatile. It is an army that is poorly supplied
and badly equipped and even lacks regular payment of
salaries, all of which contributes to a situation of
uncertainty.

We believe that conditions for peace and security
are closely linked to the political process and to
economic and social development, and that they
represent a reality that is part of a larger regional
context. What happens in Guinea-Bissau have will
have a major impact on the already uncertain and
fragile conditions for peace in the region of West
Africa. Events in West Africa will have to be very
seriously borne in mind in order to assess the future of
stability in Guinea-Bissau.

The complementary visions of the Economic and
Social Council and the Security Council have made
clear the decisive role that is played by international
cooperation in development. We are convinced that it is
necessary to strengthen the partnership between
Guinea-Bissau and the international community on the
basis of the criteria established by the Economic and
Social Council Working Group, which implies an
active commitment on the part of the International
Monetary Fund, the World Bank and donor countries.

However, we are aware that this active
commitment cannot lead to an improvement in
conditions in, or to a greater flow of resources for,
Guinea-Bissau if there are no clear signs or
unambiguous signals on the part of the authorities and
of society as a whole that they are moving towards
strengthening political processes, freedoms and the rule
of law. We reached that conclusion and conducted our
assessment after the mission had spoken with the
country's authorities, including its armed forces. We
spoke with United Nations personnel, and we met there
a very solid team with a clear vision of what is
happening in Guinea-Bissau, under the leadership of
the very capable, competent, cautious and clear-sighted
leadership of the Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. David Stephen, who enjoys great prestige
and credibility vis-a-vis all sectors of society and the
authorities.

We spoke also with all of the political parties, and
we took note of the deep divisions that exist within
those political organizations, which were urged to work
jointly so that the political electoral process could be
carried out in the best possible conditions. Of course,
we worked also with civil society.
Indeed, we saw a society eager to overcome its
setbacks and to organize itself politically - a society
that is ready and willing to use its freedoms and to
build, through them, understanding and harmony, so
that power struggles can be resolved through political
means, using democratic channels and within a
constitutional framework.

Thus the mission aimed first of all to ensure that
dialogue with the authorities would be very clear with
respect to the fact that the political process must move
forward and that elections must take place in the near
future. When we arrived in Guinea-Bissau, no date had
been set for the holding of the elections - something
that we pointed out and stressed to the authorities,
hoping that before our departure we would be able to
obtain a commitment as to the holding of elections. We
emphasized also the need to ensure the participatory
nature of the political process in conditions of freedom,
providing full opportunities to all of the political forces
of the country in the exercise of their rights and
freedoms. We are awaiting a credible political process
that would be the starting point for a new political
settlement in that country.

Secondly, we stressed the need to give full
validity to the legal order, primarily with respect to the
fundamental rights of persons and human rights, civil
rights and freedom of expression, but also with respect
to the rule of law in the context of the functioning of
institutions. We stress the fact that specific
commitments must be made with respect to restoring
the legitimacy of the judiciary and to the proper
promulgation of the Constitution.

We believe that, within the framework of the
concerns expressed by the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council, there is a concomitant
factor: clear commitments must be made by the
international community and by donor countries in
order effectively to accompany the process, especially
the political process, providing technical capabilities
- through the United Nations - and resources -
through the donor countries - in order for the
electoral process to proceed.

These are the messages, the commitments and the
perspectives of which we spoke. The outcome of the
mission was encouraging, but we did leave with a few
concerns and some doubts. First, in our dialogue with
the authorities, we were able to ensure that they would
make a commitment to the citizenry and to the political
forces that the elections would be held - as President
Kumba Yala had anticipated - in October, but now we
had a specific date. It was announced shortly after our
departure that the authorities were prepared to hold the
elections on 12 October.

There were also clear signs on the part of the
authorities that they would fully respect the outcome of
the election process, whatever it may be, and that they
would work under the conditions and the political
settlements stemming from that electoral outcome.

We were also assured by the authorities that they
would respect the commitment that, once the Assembly
is constituted, they would work with it to promulgate
the Constitution in the terms decided on by popular
representation, and to resolve the question of the
composition of the Supreme Court of Justice and the
question of its authorities, the President and the Vice-
President.

As I said earlier, Guinea-Bissau is at a crossroads.
If there is to be reconciliation and a political
understanding to respect the rights and freedoms to
which all citizens aspire, that country will have to
embark on the path towards stability and peace, and,
from there, towards economic and social
development - the only way to achieve harmony and
understanding.

But if this does not happen in the next few
months, the risk is political confrontation, a breakdown
of order, institutional destabilization and, regrettably,
violence, with repercussions for the entire region.

The international community therefore must
make its presence felt and comply with its commitment
to cooperate in the months preceding the electoral
process. This will be vital in order to avert a
catastrophe. As our report states, the Security Council
and the action of the United Nations and of the
Economic and Social Council will play a decisive role
in averting the conflict that could erupt if we do not
take the proper measures.

The Council must be vigilant. It cannot lose sight
of the situation or remain passive in the coming weeks
and months. Hence the mission recommended that,
from now until the elections, and on the basis of an
upcoming report of the Secretary-General, the Council
and the Secretariat remain in ongoing communication
in order to be present and to support the society and the
authorities of Guinea-Bissau in the upcoming political
process.
I would like to conclude by stressing once again
the urgent call being made by the Security Council
mission in its report for donor countries to support
these processes.

Allow me to conclude by thanking all members of
the mission, the Secretariat and, in particular, the
United Kingdom Mission and Vanessa Howe-Jones and
Ambassador Greenstock for the support that they gave
us so that we could carry out the mission entrusted to
us in Guinea-Bissau. Without the support of
Ambassador Greenstock and without the planning and
the preparatory work for the mission's meetings, we
would not have been able to fulfil our mandate with
success. I also express my thanks for the cooperation,
the spirit of participation and the statements, proposals
and advice given by the members of the Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau of the Economic
and Social Council who took part in this mission, led
by Ambassador Kumalo of South Africa.

