Mr. Heusgen (Germany): In his very sober opening
statement, Mr. Khiari quoted the Secretary-General,
who described the situation on the Korean peninsula
as "the most tense and dangerous peace and security
issue in the world" (S/PV.8137, p. 2). I therefore
welcome the fact that the President put this matter on
the agenda. Many of us reminded one another of the
fact that, in 2006, the Security Council decided that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea must abandon
its weapons of mass destruction and its ballistic missile
programme. The Democratic People's Republic of
Korea has consistently disregarded its obligations.
I would once again applaud the United States for the
diplomatic efforts that it has undertaken to achieve
what the Security Council demanded of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, and we support all efforts
to resume meaningful negotiations.

Despite all the recent efforts, the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea resumed its ballistic missile
launches on 19 May. I need not repeat all the different
activities that were cited earlier by many. I found that
perhaps the most worrying aspect of the situation was
the recent public announcement by the regime of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea that more
provocations can be expected. We as the Council need
to be prepared for that, and, as many said earlier, we
have to preserve the unity of the Council.

Germany chairs the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006). For us, it is
clear - and I repeat what the French Ambassador
said earlier - that the sanctions are not a goal in and
of themselves. As I listened to my Russian colleague
earlier, I had the impression that the sanctions were at
the origin of the miserable situation that the country
is in and the tensions we are seeing. Once again, we
should not confuse cause with effect. The sanctions can
and should be lifted only when the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea implements the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

As Chair of the 1718 Committee, I would like to
remind all United Nations Members that they are under
obligation to repatriate to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea any of that country's nationals
earning income within their States' jurisdiction. As
I said, all Democratic People's Republic of Korea
Government safety oversight attaches monitoring that
country's workers abroad should be repatriated no later
than 22 December, in line with resolution 2397 (2017).

Let me turn to the human rights situation.
Yesterday we commemorated Human Rights Day. It
was a very sad day for the North Koreans. They are
being deprived by the regime of their basic civil and
political rights - freedom of information, freedom
of the press, freedom of expression and freedom of
assembly. Those are all things that the people in North
Korea can only dream of. The regime is also depriving
its people of their basic economic and social rights.

Only by torturing and arbitrarily locking up of millions

of people in a Gulag system can the regime quell the

aspirations of its people. Those gross human rights

violations, in our view, have an impact on peace and

security and warrant the attention of this organ.

With regard to human rights issues, I would also
like to raise the issue of foreign nationals abducted
by, or on behalf of, the Government of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. That remains an unresolved
international problem. I urge the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to finally return to the families their
loved ones.

My last point concerning the humanitarian situation
is the fact that it is a myth that the sanctions regime
is at the root of the dire humanitarian situation. First
of all, we swiftly process and approve all legitimate
requests for humanitarian deliveries in the Sanctions
Committee. But, as with the human rights situation,
the same also holds true for the humanitarian situation.
The North Korean regime is depriving its population of
the essentials. Ten million people are undernourished.
Just imagine what would happen if the regime stopped
building missiles, equipping the military and giving
money to the political elite, and, with that money,
bought thousands of tons of rice, built medical facilities
and schools and provided clean water to its population.

