Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): Let me congulate
Lithuania on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February and for
organizing this debate. We appreciate the briefings
by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, and the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

We would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his latest report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2013/689), which is the basis of our
discussions today.

Botswana attaches greatimportance to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. Our contribution to
the discussions on that thematic area, including
peacekeeping, and on how best to assist Governments
in protecting their own populations remains a key
priority for my delegation. We remain committed to the
promotion of and respect for humanitarian principles
in accordance with international humanitarian law
and human rights law. We believe that this is the best
way to achieve an effective delivery of humanitarian
assistance and the necessary space to access vulnerable
populations in conflict situations.To that end, we
reiterate our long-held belief, which is shared by many,
that States have the primary responsibility to protect
their own populations from genocide, ethnic cleansing,
war crimes and crimes against humanity.

The promotion of accountability for human rights
violations and access to justice also remains a key issue
for my delegation. Botswana joins the international
community in deploring the continuing human rights
violations in battlefields around the world where
innocent civilians have become casualties of merciless
killings by warring factions. We are disheartened by
the fact that perpetrators of those crimes continue to
undermine international humanitarian law and human
rights law through their acts and deeds.

As a friend and supporter of the International
Criminal Court, we have a commitment to upholding
the rule of law, and we have strong faith in the
institution as an international court of last resort.
We remain concerned that hundreds of human rights
abusers remain at large, frustrating the course ofjustice
and endangering innocent women and children. We
call for collaboration and coordination between the
International Criminal Court and the United Nations,
through its peacekeeping missions ,to hunt down, arrest
and investigate perpetrators of human rights abuse.
We believe that this synergy will go a long way in
strengthening the international criminal justice system
and putting a human face on the victim. We believe that
the international community, as a peace-loving world,
has a moral obligation and responsibility to intensify
efforts to protect innocent civilians, especially women
and children, who are often victims of torture and rape
and other sexual abuse.

Turning to the report of the Secretary-General,
my delegation takes note of the five core challenges
to enhancing the protection of civilians. We note that
several initiatives are being pursued in that regard.
We also recognize the attention drawn to the concerns
expressed by an increasing number of States about the
emergence and use of explosive weapons in populated
areas. We share the Secretary-General's View on the
need to strengthen the protection of civilians from the
use of those weapons and that parties to any conflict
should refrain from their use.

With regard to the role of peacekeeping and
other missions, we take note of the deployment of
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
in many countries around the world as the most
significant action taken by the Security Council. The
proliferation of such missions illustrates just how
instrumental they are in the maintenance of international
peace and security. We recognize the complex and
violent environments in which peacekeeping personnel
operate. We also share the View that care and attention
should be given to strengthening missions' capabilities.
To achieve that, we believe that constant training and
capacity-building of personnel before deployment is an
absolute necessity.

Botswana believes that timely and unimpeded
humanitarian access is a fundamental prerequisite
for humanitarian action to save the lives of civilians.
However, we note with regret the challenges that
continue to constrain humanitarian response in a
number of situations, as stated in the report, including
restrictions on movement and violence against
humanitarian workers.

Regarding accountability for war crimes and
violations of human rights and humanitarian law, we
note the important measures that some States continue
to be take, but we believe that more needs to be done
to support the Secretary-General's recommendations in
that regard.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Botswana's support
for the international community's efforts to protect
innocent civilians. I wish to stress the importance of
consolidating and ensuring the implementation of the
existing normative frameworks on the protection of
civilians in country-specific situations.

Finally, we support efforts for better coordination
andcooperationwithintheUnitedNationspeacebuilding
architecture, as well as with other peacebuilding actors,
for promoting engagement in fragile and conflict-
affected countries.

