Mr. Ruiz Massieu (spoke in Spanish): I am very
pleased to have this opportunity to address the Security
Council, for the first time, upon its consideration of the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia (8/2018/1159).
I welcome the participation in this meeting of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Mr. Carlos
Holmes Trujillo Garcia, and of the High Counsellor
for Post-Conflict, Mr. Emilio Jose Archila. I also take
this opportunity to express my gratitude for the warm
welcome I received in their country.

(spoke in English)

The tragic events of late last week in Bogota remind
us once again of the urgent need to end violence and
persevere in efforts to ensure a more peaceful future
for all Colombians. Both the Council and the Secretary-
General delivered a strong and clear condemnation
of the car bombing at the General Santander Police
Academy on 17 January, which left 21 dead and dozens
injured. On 21 January, the National Liberation Army
(ELN) acknowledged responsibility for this attack.
In the swift rejection of the attack from across the
political spectrum in Colombia and in the marches
held around the country this past Sunday, Colombians
demonstrated their ever-broader consensus around the
rejection of violence, which is highlighted in the report
of the Secretary-General as one of the fruits of peace.
This consensus must continue to be nurtured.

Since taking up my duties on 7 January, I have met
with key interlocutors for the Mission, including from
the Colombian Government, the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Comun (FARC), civil society
and the international community. I held productive
initial meetings with President Duque, Foreign
Minister Trujillo, High Counsellor Archila and High
Commissioner for Peace Miguel Ceballos. I also met
with FARC leaders in Bogota and visited two of the
territorial areas for training and reintegration in the
departments of Antioquia and Caqueta. These visits
confirmed both the strong desire of former combatants
to work and find their place in society, as well as the
uncertainty many still feel regarding their security,
including their legal security and economic future. I held
discussions with civil society representatives, including
women's organizations, and with the Presidents of both
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and the Commission
on Truth, Coexistence and Non-Repetition, all of whom
stressed their commitment to the peace process and
their appreciation for the work of the Mission.

In my meetings with the Resident Coordinator
and members of the United Nations country team, we
discussed the importance of their partnership with
the Mission on reintegration and legal and security
guarantees, as well as their complementary support for
the implementation of agreements on rural development,
political participation, transitional justice and the
voluntary substitution of illicit crops. Discussions
also touched on ongoing cooperation on cross-cutting
dimensions of gender, ethnic affairs, child protection
and youth.

I am pleased to report that the Government's high-
level forum on gender, which was responsible for the
implementation of the gender provisions of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace, met for the first time on
16 January.
The inauguration of the Truth Commission, which
now embarks on a three-year mandate to foster truth and
reconciliation, represents an important milestone. On
16 January, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, entrusted
with one of the most sensitive dimensions of any peace
process - that of transitional justice - completed its
first year of operation. As a measure of what is at stake,
the five cases initiated in the first year of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace will examine responsibility for
violent actions impacting no fewer than 32,000 Victims.

Progress on the cases before the Special Jurisdiction
continues. The Jurisdiction has taken testimony from
46 members of the armed forces in the context of
extrajudicial killings. Two days ago, it announced that
31 members ofthe FARC leadership will also be required
to appear in person to provide their testimony on
individual and collective responsibility for kidnappings.
As the Security Council has itself insisted, it remains
vitally important that the independence and autonomy
of the Special Jurisdiction be respected and that it
receive the support required to operate effectively.

Turning to the economic reintegration of former
members of the Fuerza Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP), I welcome
the approval of additional productive projects by
the National Reintegration Council and advances in
the disbursements for these projects. The challenge
ahead, as noted in the report and confirmed in my first
discussions and field visits, is to further accelerate
such efforts and to ensure their sustainability in order
to advance on the acquisition of land and to work on
the development of markets for goods and services
produced, including with the participation of local
Governments and the private sector.

I welcome the Government's decision in December
to extend food distribution to former combatants in
the territorial areas for training and reintegration for
an additional eight months. This assistance, as well as
current health and education services and the provision
of basic monthly payments to all former FARC-EP
members, are set to expire in August.

A near-term challenge is to define the status of
the 24 territorial areas, whose current authorization,
due to expire on 15 August, is a matter of concern
and uncertainty for the thousands of former FARC-
EP members inhabiting those spaces. I welcome
Mr. Archila's recent public remarks reassuring those
in the reintegration process that a solution will be
found, building on a current census of those living
and working in these areas. It will require, however,
a concerted effort to work through the legal, financial
and other implications and to arrive at an agreed set of
proposals. Therefore, time is of the essence to arrive at
an agreed way forward.

Regarding political reintegration, on 27 October
the FARC party will participate, for the first time, in
regional and local elections, marking another advance
in its political participation. To ensure the security
of the FARC in undertaking political activities at the
local level during the coming elections, the Technical
Committee on Security and Protection has begun work
on a protection plan. Colombia's presidential elections in
2018 were the most peaceful in decades. To ensure that
similar conditions prevail in this year's elections and
given specific concerns with regard to the FARC party,
comprehensive prevention and protection measures
will be needed to ensure the safety of candidates of all
parties, as well as communities and their leaders.

A wave of killings of social leaders in the very
first days of the new year reinforced the deep concerns
about these killings expressed by the Secretary-
General in his report and which the Council has also
expressed repeatedly. Seven leaders, six men and one
woman, were killed in the first seven days of January
and a total of 31 attacks in 10 departments have been
reported since the publication of the report. According
to investigations by the Office of the Attorney General,
three-quarters of these killings are being committed
by criminal and illegal armed groups. Leaders being
targeted include members of local election boards,
leaders involved in land-reclamation processes, leaders
active in the voluntary crop substitution programme
and leaders of indigenous communities.

President Duque has expressed his personal
commitment to addressing this issue. The Government
has indicated that it has activated its Action Plan for
the Protection of Social and Community Leaders,
Human Rights Defenders and Journalists in specific
departments. The Ministers of Defence and the Interior
and the High Commissioner for Peace have been
charged with identifying additional actions required.
The Inspector General has called for implementation
of a series of commitments in the national pact for
life and for the protection of social leaders and human
rights defenders endorsed by the Government and civil
society representatives in August.
I urge the swift implementation of these measures
and that they be coupled with broader efforts to ensure
an effective State presence in these areas. I welcome
President Duque's decision to convene the National
Commission on Security Guarantees on 30 January,
as it is entrusted with defining a strategy to dismantle
criminal and illegal armed groups with the participation
of civil society.

In addition to the 14 FARC-EP members killed
during the period covered by the report of the Secretary-
General report, 2 more have been killed this year. A total
of 87 have been killed since the Peace Agreement was
signed. This underscores the importance of provisions
of effective security for new settlements outside the
territorial areas for training and reintegration, which
are where the vast majority of these killings have
taken place.

The security of communities, leaders and FARC-EP
members is ultimately tied to the ability of the State to
establish an integrated security and civilian presence in
conflict-affected areas. The Government's "Peace with
legality" plan provides a road map for achieving this
important objective. It builds on the 16 development
programmes with a territorial focus agreed under
the peace agreement and links them more clearly to
assisting nearly 100,000 families under the voluntary
crop-substitution programme and to the reintegration of
former FARC-EP members. As stated by the Secretary-
General, what is now urgently required is a translation
of this and other plans into effective actions that change
the realities on the ground.

Before concluding, I would like to pay tribute to
the important contributions made over the past three
and a half years by my predecessor, Jean Arnault. I
add my words of appreciation to those I have heard
from so many Colombians for the important role he
has played in the peace process. I would like to stress
that one of the messages I have heard consistently from
Colombians during my first weeks on the ground is how
strongly they both welcome and expect the support and
assistance of the international community as they seek
to overcome the many challenges to consolidating peace.
The continued engagement and support of the Security
Council will remain a vital pillar of Colombia's peace
process. I assure Council members of the commitment
of the Mission to carrying forward the task the Security
Council has entrusted to it.

