Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the report of the Secretary-General
on the work of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) over the past seven
months. We are also grateful for the information
provided by the Special Representative and head of
Mission, Mr. Jacques Klein.

The achievements of the mission presented in
both reports are quite positive, and they demonstrate
the commitment of the international community and of
the population of Bosnia and Herzegovina to comply
with the provisions of the Dayton Peace Accords.

We would like to highlight the comprehensive
strategic framework that the Mission has set itself in
order to fulfil its mandate within the established dates.
This programme of work allows for ongoing self-
assessment of the work that is being carried out,
making it easier to identify potential problems so as to
be able to find timely solutions to them. It also useful
to the international community for assessing the
Mission's effectiveness step by step. We hope that this
will serve as a model for the implementation of the
mandates of other United Nations missions.

We also highlight the achievements of the
Mission with regard to the reform and restructuring of
the police. We are, however, concerned by the
problems that have been pointed out, particularly the
low salaries paid to members of the police force and
their housing problems, because these clearly have an
impact on the development of the general programme
that the Mission has set itself. We would like to know
what the response of the High Representative was
when this problem was presented to him and if there
are any additional measures that UNMIBH can take to
make sure that these problems do not impair the
performance of the police force.

One of the greatest challenges of the international
presence today is establishing an effective and
transparent judicial system. Without that, it would be
impossible to consolidate the rule of law, which is a
Vital prerequisite for sustainable peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We hope that all efforts undertaken in
this direction will produce better results in the future.
In this judicial matter, we must insist on the need to
increase cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

In the Secretary-General's recent reports on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, a recurrent problem has been
flagged: the lack of cooperation on the part of the
political class in the implementation of the reforms
proposed by UNMIBH and the Office of the High
Representative. We must again appeal to the political
leadership to cooperate in the work of the international
community, because without such cooperation it will be
very difficult to establish mechanisms and institutions
that are viable in the long term.

This topic is mentioned repeatedly in relation to
the plan to further professionalize the police force, as
the report points out. In any case, it must be
depoliticized. This is why we should note that, in our
opinion, one of the indicators of success in the activity
of the international community in Bosnia and
Herzegovina must be the emergence of a political class
with new or transformed players whose attitude and
behaviour contribute positively to the development of
society.

In conclusion, I would like to express our support
for the proposed renewal of the Mission's mandate for
another 12 months.

