Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to thank the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Joachim
Rucker, for his briefing. I should like also welcome the
presence among us of Ms. Raskovic-Ivic, President of
the Coordination Centre of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo and Metohija, and of Mr. Ceku, Prime Minister
of Kosovo, as part of the delegation led by Mr. Riicker.

The representative of Finland will make a
statement later on behalf of the presidency of the
European Union, with which I fully align myself.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2006/906)
stresses the sustained progress that has been made in
standards implementation, in line with the calls of
Council members. This is the case, in particular, with
regard to the priorities identified by the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the Contact Group with respect to the protection of
minorities and the rule of law.

We note with satisfaction the adoption of a
number of laws intended to ensure the protection of
minorities. This is necessary to affirm Kosovo's multi-
ethnic character. This is a positive development, but it
needs to be built upon. All the standards must be
implemented tangibly and rapidly, in particular with
respect to property rights and the rule of law, and
especially regarding the judicial sector.

We also note the drop in ethnic-based crimes.
Nevertheless, such acts continue to be unacceptable;
beyond the necessary condemnation in words, they
must also be dealt with appropriately through the legal
system.

The report of the Secretary-General stresses the
efforts being made by the provisional authorities to
establish contacts with minority communities; it is thus
all the more disappointing that Serb leaders in Kosovo
continue to remain outside the political process, which
is to the detriment of their community. The Belgrade
authorities should remove all obstacles preventing
Kosovo Serbs from participating in the Provisional
Institutions.

My delegation reiterates its full support for the
negotiating process being led by Mr. Ahtisaari. We note
with regret that the positions of the parties, as the
Secretary-General's report observes, remain far apart.
We have taken note of the Special Envoy's
announcement that his recommendations will be
submitted after the parliamentary elections in Serbia.
The Security Council should then take decisions on the
basis of those recommendations, including on adopting
the international presence in Kosovo.

It is important not to delay the resolution of an
issue that weighs on regional stability and impedes the
implementation of the reforms that we all wish to see.
The ultimate solution, which must be acceptable to the

majority of the population in Kosovo, should also
respect the guidelines that were established by the
Contact Group and endorsed by the Security Council.

