Mr. Norstrom (Sweden): I should like first of all to
thank Canada for convening this open meeting. Sweden
also fully subscribes to the statement made earlier by
Portugal on behalf of the European Union. We would like
to elaborate briefly on three specific aspects: first, the
targeting of sanctions; secondly, ways to ensure better
compliance with Security Council sanctions; and thirdly,
the use of arms embargoes.

First, sanctions constitute an important tool for
pressure by the United Nations and must as such be made
to achieve their aim. There is today wide agreement that
better targeting of sanctions is crucial for making them
work. Sanctions should hit only those that are responsible
for wrongdoing and should be designed and applied in a
way that minimizes both negative humanitarian effects in
the target country and consequences for third States. The
Security Council must take on a clear responsibility to
ensure that sanctions imposed do not adversely affect
innocent civilians.

Assessments of the humanitarian effects of sanctions
should be made to the largest possible extent before
sanctions are imposed, and explicit provisions should be
drawn up for humanitarian exemptions. After sanctions
have come into effect, humanitarian assessments should
be conducted on a regular basis. The Security Council
should be prepared to modify both exemptions and
sanctions if negative humanitarian effects are reported.
This is not only a humanitarian concern, but also a way

 

of maintaining support for the sanctions themselves and
thus for the implementation of decisions taken by the
Council.

To this end, it is important that the sanctions
committees maintain a high level of knowledge about the
humanitarian conditions and the effects of the sanctions in
the areas with which they deal. Gathering information from
non-govemmental actors and undertaking missions to the
field are some ways for the committees to keep themselves
informed.

Sweden welcomes the establishment today of an
informal working group of the Council to look at ways of
improving the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions and
is particularly pleased that it will, among other things, look
at the unintended impacts of sanctions and humanitarian
exemptions.

It is a regrettable but well-known fact that
implementation of and compliance with sanctions imposed
by the Security Council are often faulty. This can be
explained in part by weak monitoring facilities and
insufficient legal and administrative capacities in some
Member States. Such weaknesses should be addressed
through increased support for capacity-building by countries
and institutions with relevant knowledge and resources. But
we also know that the effectiveness of sanctions falters due
to lax enforcement by Member States. We are all bound by
the Charter to carry out the decisions of the Security
Council, yet violations of sanctions systematically occur. In
Sweden's View, the price for such violations must be higher.
Regrettably, the United Nations currently has few means at
its disposal for raising that price, but we do have the option
of publicly identifying violations against sanctions, whether
committed by States or private parties. Naming and
shaming as a way to counteract violations can be a forceful
tool.

When it comes to providing information to the
Security Council, there is also room for considerable
improvement. The intelligence available to the sanctions
committees must be enhanced if monitoring of
implementation of sanctions is to be effective. To
complement often lacking information from Member States,
the committees should consider drawing more often on the
knowledge of non-governmental actors and enlisting
expertise to provide a better informed basis for their
activities. We believe that the commendable initiative taken
by the sanctions Committee on Angola under the
chairmanship of Ambassador Fowler to investigate
violations of the UNITA sanctions provides a useful model
for how intelligence can be gathered and implementation
of sanctions thus improved. Sweden welcomes the debate
that will be held tomorrow on the issue of Angola
sanctions and hopes for further follow-up by the Council
of this important work.

Finally, a comment on arms embargoes. Measures to
prevent the flow of weapons into areas of conflict are of
crucial importance. However, such measures have so far
been neither applied nor implemented in a satisfactory
way. I would like to raise three specific aspects.

First, countries should show restraint in allowing
arms sales to groups or Governments in regions where the
conflict level is high. Sweden believes that it is the moral
obligation of all countries in the position to export arms
to refrain from doing so in the face of conflict.

Secondly, the Security Council should consider more
often imposing arms embargoes on groups or
Governments involved in armed conflicts. There are a
number of devastating conflicts going on as we speak
where arms embargoes should have been imposed as a
preventive or restraining tool.

Thirdly, implementation of arms embargoes must be
more effective. Concrete measures must be taken to
improve monitoring, reporting and implementation on the
ground. The Security Council should look at ways of
ensuring such improvements, through, for example, closer
cooperation with regional organizations and more frequent
use of special investigative commissions.

