Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011) of 26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security Council
on the work of the Committee established by the same
resolution. The report covers the period from 15 March
to 18 June 2013, during which time the members of the
Committee met once in informal consultations.

In my last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.6934),
I reported on the final report of the Panel of Experts
(S/2012/163, annex) and that the Committee had agreed
to take follow-up action on five recommendations
of the Panel. This follow-up action consisted of the
following. On 20 March, the Committee updated the
entry concerning Mr. Abdullah Al-Senussi on its list of
individuals and entities subject to the travel ban and/or
asset freeze. This corresponded to recommendation 7
of the final report of the Panel.

On 1 April, the Committee sent a note verbale
to all Member States encouraging them to give due
consideration to the submission ofdesignation proposals
to the Committee relating to entities or individuals who
are found to have been assisting in any way with the
finances of entities or individuals already designated
under the assets freeze measures. This corresponded to
recommendation 8 of the final report of the Panel.
On 3 April, the Committee wrote a letter to the
Libyan Government requesting confirmation of the
possible establishment ofa focal point structure through
which all security assistance procurement should be
channelled, as well as concerning additional procedures
in relation to storing, recording and distributing
arms and related materiel. This corresponded to
recommendations 1 and 2 of the final report of the
Panel.

On 6 June, the Charge d'affaires of the Permanent
Mission of Libya to the United Nations informed the
Committee that the Libyan Government had decided
to designate the Military Procurement Department
in the Libyan Ministry of Defence, in addition to the
Permanent Mission of Libya to the United Nations in
New York, as an authorized focal point.

Also during the reporting period, the Committee
took steps towards concluding an agreement with
INTERPOL concerning INTERPOL-United Nations
Security Council Special Notices, which is expected to
enter into force in the coming weeks. This corresponded
to recommendation 5 of the final report of the Panel.

In informal consultations on 6 May, the Committee
received an update from the reappointed members of
the Panel of Experts. The Panel reported on a visit to
Libya, during which the Panel had noted a positive
attitude towards the modified sanctions regime. The
Panel had also met the Chief of General Staff of the
Libyan Army, who confirmed that a focal point for
security assistance had been established in the Ministry
of Defence. The Panel further reported on a visit to
northern Mali, during which the Panel inspected arms
and ammunition seized from armed groups in the areas
of Gao and Adrar des Ifoghas, some of which clearly
originated from Libya.

In informal consultations on 6 May, the Committee
noted the reported relocation of two individuals subject
to a travel ban, Mohammed Muammar Al-Qadhafi
and Aisha Muammar Al-Qadhafi, together with other
family members, from Algeria to the Sultanate of
Oman. The Committee noted that the relocations had
not taken place in accordance with the exemption
procedures established in resolutions 1970 (2011)
and 1973 (2011) and directed the Panel of Experts to
investigate the matter.

Subsequent correspondence between the Panel of
Experts and the Sultanate of Oman and, on 5 June, a letter
to the Committee from the Permanent Representative
of Algeria to the United Nations confirmed that two
listed individuals, Mohammed Muammar Al-Qadhafi
and Aisha Muammar Al-Qadhafi, together with other
family members, had relocated to the Sultanate of
Oman.

Lastly, let me provide some updated statistics on
the issues dealt with by the Committee since the last
periodic report to the Council. In relation to the arms
embargo, the Committee approved six exemption
requests and received two notifications on which no
negative decision was taken. With respect to the assets
freeze, the Committee received five notifications on
which no negative decision was taken. Also during the
reporting period, the Committee received an inspection
report from a Member State pursuant to paragraph 13
ofresolution 1970 (2011) and paragraph 15 ofresolution
1973 (2011), relating to the arms embargo measure.

