Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): I
would like to begin by congratulating you, Mr.
President, on your assumption of the Council
presidency for the month of February. The subject of
today's debate is both relevant and timely, especially
considering the convening of the fourth United Nations
regional organizations high-level meeting tomorrow to
once again take up this important issue as a part of its
own agenda. In this regard, we appreciate Tunisia's
initiative in requesting the Council to revisit the issue
of peace-building in a comprehensive manner.

Since the complexity of new security challenges
was properly pointed out by the Secretary-General in
his publication "An Agenda for Peace" (S/24111) in
1992 and its Supplement (S/1995/1) in 1995, much has
been discussed and many new strategies have been
conceived. Peacekeeping operations are adapting to the
complex and multidimensional aspects of the new
reality. We therefore welcome the recent tendency
whereby the mandates of peacekeeping operations
include post-conflict peace-building components.

During last month's open debate on strengthening
cooperation with troop-contributing countries, many
Member States pointed out that consultations among
the main parties concerned should start at the earliest
possible stage of decision-making of a peacekeeping
operation. We would like to reiterate that such early
arrangements would be crucial in establishing a well-
planned peace-building strategy in the peacekeeping
operation's mandate.

Taking this opportunity, we would like to
welcome the establishment of the working group of the
whole on United Nations peacekeeping operations. We
expect its work to lead to systematically enhanced
cooperation with the troop contributors and their
participation in the decision-making process.

It is now commonly acknowledged that conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-
building are interlinked and are more effective if
pursued simultaneously, rather than sequentially.
Accordingly, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants are prerequisites for
immediate post-conflict stability and prevention of a
conflict's recurrence. Peace, security and economic and
social development are also closely interlinked. The
protection of refugees and internally displaced persons
is also an essential part of today's peace-building
measures. Their safe return and rehabilitation are
among the most basic conditions for reintegration and
stability in the affected region.

Against this backdrop, I would like to make a few
comments on issues to which we attach particular
significance.

Above all, peacekeeping operation mandates
should always be realistic and cost-effective for the
success of the missions. A key factor to be taken into
consideration in order to make a peace-building
strategy successful is the availability of financial and
other resources for a long-term strategy. When
discussing the strategy for United Nations engagement
in post-conflict situations, a feasible scenario must be
drawn out at a very early stage to clarify the United
Nations role and function.

The most cost-effective strategy would be to
enhance the preventive capacity of the United Nations.
In our view, the direct involvement of this Council and
an enhanced role for the Secretary-General should be
further encouraged for the effective management of
conflicts at all levels. We believe that the Secretary-
General plays an instrumental role by continuously
monitoring the situation of regions with current, past
and potential conflicts and by updating the Council on
his findings and views. Since timeliness is a critical
element in intervention, the reports of the Secretary-
General must be prepared at a most pertinent juncture
and be given due consideration by the Council.

We expect that the various actors, such as the
United Nations funds, programmes and specialized
agencies, international financial institutions,
particularly the Bretton Woods institutions, and
regional organizations will further enhance their efforts
to systematically coordinate an integrated response.
Moreover, a strengthened partnership with non-
governmental organizations will contribute positively
to aggregating necessary support by widening the pool
of volunteer workers. However, in a situation where a
variety of players from different entities get involved,
due caution is necessary to avoid the duplication of
work and competition for limited resources.

In this regard, we take note that the Security
Council has underlined in past reports the need to
clearly define tasks and divide responsibilities among
all actors involved. My delegation concurs with the
observation in the Brahimi report that it is necessary to
establish a focal point for peace-building. In this
regard, the suggestion in the report that the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, as the Convener
of the Executive Committee on Peace and Security
(ECPS) be the focal point, merits further consideration.
The strengthening of the function of ECPS will
contribute to upgrading the capacity of the United
Nations to forge a comprehensive strategy and to better
coordinate with other actors. My delegation also
supports the ongoing efforts of the Department of
Political Affairs and the United Nations Development
Programme to jointly strengthen United Nations
capacity in the area of peace-building.

In closing, let me underscore the role of regional
organizations and the countries of the region
concerned. The success of any peace-building
operation may become elusive without strong political
will and the support of the Member States. In
particular, we believe that a more proactive
engagement on the part of the countries and
organizations of the affected region is crucial. Given
the complexity of coordination among different players
and the difficulty of mobilizing a full-scale
intervention by the international community, the
regional entities and countries should be encouraged to
take the initiative.

We have already witnessed some cases where the
courageous involvement of regional organizations and
countries in peacekeeping operations facilitated the
peace-building process in the affected region. These
examples demonstrate the need for countries to share
an enhanced sense of responsibility and cooperation in
preventing conflicts and in keeping and building peace
in their own regions. We hope that the upcoming high-
level meeting between the United Nations and regional
organizations will yield a productive discourse on this
important subject.

It is our firm belief that the assistance of the
international community will be genuinely meaningful
when the parties directly concerned demonstrate their
commitments at a matching level.

