Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful for today's briefings, which
painted a disturbing picture of the ongoing events and
suffering of the people of eastern Ukraine.

What has basically been happening is quite obvious.
Kyiv is attempting to use clashes it has itself provoked
as a pretext for a complete refusal to implement the
Minsk agreements, signed on 12 February 2015 and
endorsed in resolution 2202 (2015). However hard
the Ukrainian side tries to portray things differently,
including by convening this meeting of the Council and
making statements that turn the facts upside down, there
is a massive amount of information, including open
admissions by Ukrainian officials right up to the level
of the country's President, that is too overwhelming to
permit denial of the destructive policies of Kyiv and its
armed forces.

On 3 January, Ukraine's Defence Minister Poltorak
confirmed that the Ukrainian armed forces had seized
new positions in the grey zone, with the demagogic claim
that that did not violate the Minsk agreements because
the occupied territories thereby belonged to Ukraine.
On 17 January, Interior Minister Avakov, speaking to
Ukrainian border guards, urged them to prepare to
seize the State borders in 2017. On 22 January, President
Poroshenko declared publicly that Ukraine would not be
doing anything about political reform until it regained
full control of its border with Russia, in an approach that
completely perverts the content of the Minsk package
of measures and deliberately renders them unrealizable,
practically speaking. Lastly, yesterday Deputy Defence
Minister Pavlovsky completed the picture by bragging
to the press that his heroic lads were moving forward
where they could, metre by metre, step by step.

That overtly militaristic rhetoric has had very real
consequences, as is clearly apparent from the latest
reports of the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). Observers have confirmed that the
escalation was provoked by Ukrainian security forces.
On the night of 27 and 28 January, the Mission's camera
at the Oktyabrskaya mine recorded intense crossfire
between the Ukrainian armed forces and militias, which
was preceded by firing from the north-west to the south-
east, that is, from the security forces' positions. At the
same time, another Special Monitoring Mission camera
captured an intense artillery exchange in Avdiivka that
began with five shots fired from north to south, which
also meant from Ukrainian forces' positions. The next
night, 28 and 29 January, a Mission camera in Avdiivka
recorded 15 shots fired from a north-westerly direction
towards the south-east, also from the Kyiv security
forces' side, bombarding the militias' positions. That
was followed by hours of fighting in the Avdiivka
industrial zone. The picture on the southern flank
was the same. According to the Mission camera in
Shyrokyne, intense crossfire on the night of 28 January
was preceded by 20 shots fired from west to cast, that
is, again from the Ukrainian forces' positions towards
the rebels' territory, after which another battle ensued.

According to Mission data for 26 to 29 January,
indiscriminate shelling of residential areas under
rebel control, coming from areas where Ukrainian
security forces were deployed, injured civilians in
Brianka and destroyed more than a dozen houses in
Brianka, Donetskyi, Olenivka, Zaichenko, Kalynove,
Novooleksandrivka and Pervomaiske. The Mission
continued to observe Ukrainian forces' military
equipment in the security zone. Between 26 and
29 January observers discovered four tanks in Avdiivka
and three howitzers in Mykolaivka, as well as the
disappearance from the security forces' storage of
76 tanks, 10 mortars and 18 field guns. Only about 6 per
cent of the stored military hardware was actually there.

Thus began a new spiral of tensions that since
then has only been ratcheted up further. According
to yesterday's Special Monitoring Mission report, the
number of violations has risen daily, reaching 10,300
shell explosions in a span of24 hours. At the same time,
the statistics on restrictions to the Mission's access
speak for themselves - in seven of nine cases it was
the Ukrainian forces that put obstacles in its way. The
numbers testify to the fact that, rather than attempting
to normalize the situation in the Donbas region and
arrive at reasonable compromises within the Normandy
format and the framework of the Trilateral Contact
Group, the Ukrainian authorities are desperately trying
to achieve a military solution to the conflict.

Another attention-grabbing feature is the fact that
any serious deterioration of the situation in the Donbas
region, amazingly, coincides with foreign visits on the
part of Ukraine's leadership. Evidently that is how Kyiv
hopes to keep its self-created crisis on the international
agenda while at the same time roping in newly elected
Heads of Government with its reckless, confrontational

policies. But, of course, the Ukrainian leadership needs
money, which it hopes to extract from the European
Union, various European countries, the United States
and the international financial institutions by setting
itself up as a victim of aggression.

Kyiv seems not to worry very much about the
humanitarian cost of such a policy. It is actively using
heavy types of armaments around village residential
areas, schools and hospitals, including heavy artillery
and multiple-launch rocket systems, which according
to the Minsk package of measures of 12 February 2015
should have been withdrawn from the contact line long
ago. Civilians are among those killed and wounded.
Thanks to Ukrainian security forces' attacks, the
Donetsk filtration station and the Avdiivka coke plant
have been damaged and mineworkers' lives threatened.

In order to prevent a humanitarian disaster and get
the situation back on a political track, the international
community must be firm and consistent. In that regard,
the Security Council sent an important message on
31 January (SC/12700) when it united in calling for an
immediate ceasefire and strict respect for the Minsk
package. Yesterday the Trilateral Contact Group made
an announcement in the same spirit when it called
for full compliance with the ceasefire regime and the
withdrawal of the heavy weaponry that comes under
the Minsk agreements. We expect to see effective
action from the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
aimed at de-escalating the situation as soon as possible.
The Normandy format participants, and those who can
exert the most influence on Kyiv, have a particular
responsibility in that regard. We hope that the forces of
common sense in Ukraine itself, as well as those who
are interested in resolving such situations by political
means, will not allow the situation in south-eastern
Ukraine to turn into a worst-case scenario, but will
instead focus their attention and efforts on ensuring
that the Minsk agreements are fulfilled.

Today President Poroshenko said that he had
personally ordered the Ukrainian delegation to
convene today's Council meeting. When he called to
order today's meeting, the Permanent Representative
of Ukraine proposed drafting a Security Council
document building on the statement we issued on
31 January. Sadly, the unbridled, odious statement we
heard today from Ukraine shows that the Ukrainian
delegation here in New York is continuing on the path
of war, which is deeply regrettable.

