Mr. Jinga (Romania): Iwould first like to commend
the Republic of Indonesia for holding this open debate,
and I am confident that, under your presidency, Sir,
the Security Council will continue to build on this
important topic.

Romania associates itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I will now make a few remarks in my
national capacity.

Given the many challenges that our world is facing
today, peacekeeping remains one of the most effective
tools available to the United Nations, representing
an important mandate of multilateralism and a
symbol of international solidarity in the promotion
and maintenance of international peace and security.
Romania has a long-term commitment to the values and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and to
the peace, development andjustice nexus, which is also
my country's motto as a candidate for a non-permanent
seat in the Security Council for the term 2020-2021. As
a security provider, Romania attaches great importance
to the effectiveness of the United Nations in the pursuit
of peace and stability. Since 1991, when the first
Romanian military peacekeepers were deployed in
the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission,
more than 12.500 Romanian military, police and
close-protection personnel have served under the blue
flag all over the world in 25 United Nations missions.

Before deployment in United Nations missions,
Romanian peacekeepers follow a special training
course aimed at developing three main competencies:
the ability to communicate in a professional context
in either English or French, the ability to perform
mission-related tasks depending on the mandate of the
mission, and the ability to apply first-aid techniques.

Romania has taken concrete measures in the
training of foreign officers as well. One example is
the international superior course performed at the
Application School for Officers of the Romanian
Gendarmerie, delivered in French, consistent with
United Nations standards and incorporating the most
recent version of the predeployment training materials.
That course has trained more than 240 francophone
officers from 28 countries from Europe, Africa and
Asia.

Also, the Romanian Protection and Guard Service
is the only service in the world that provides close
protection units, which ensure the protection of United
Nations high-level officials. The officers follow, before
deployment, the close protection course, provided
under the cooperation between the Service and the
United Nations Department of Safety and Security.
Since its inception 10 years ago, more than 300 United
Nations security officers from different countries have
been trained at the centre's premises in Romania.

Romania contributes to the United Nations light
coordination mechanism by creating a mobile training
team with a focus on gender mainstreaming in security
and defence. Furthermore, we highly appreciate the
efforts carried out by the Secretary-General through
his Action for Peacekeeping initiative, as it sets
complementarity, synergy and coherence for the
improved safety and security of peacekeepers, as well
as better performance.

Romania's contribution has been emphasized in the
development of the Strategic Guidance Framework for
International Police Peacekeeping by providing national
experts in doctrinal development to participate in online
working groups in order to advance guidance materials
on topics identified by United Nations field missions
as priorities. In that respect, Romanian United Nations
certified assessment instructors currently deployed in
missions to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
South Sudan stand ready to participate in the selection
of police officers from Member States to better match
specific mission needs with adequate skills.

Moreover, Romania also provides military experts
in aviation and engineer units to participate in online
working groups coordinated by the Office of Military
Affairs in order to improve and update the specific
United Nations military units' manuals and guidelines
issued by the Department of Peace Operations and
the Department of Operational Support, in support of
peacekeeping capabilities readiness and predeployment
training.

My country is fully committed to resolution 2436
(2018), as we believe that the pursuit of improved
performance must continue to guide our common
efforts, which requires more training and education.
We believe that whereas troop- and police-contributing
countries remain responsible for the delivery of
predeployment training according to United Nations
standards, ensuring the safety and performance of
military and police personnel in the field is a collective
responsibility of Member States and the Secretariat.

