Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to thank Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for presenting
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan (8/2018/824). We would also like to thank
the Ambassador ofAfghanistan and Mr. Ramiz Bhaktiar,
representing Afghan youth, for their excellent briefings.

With one month to go until the legislative and
district elections, my delegation welcomes the progress
made by the Independent Election Commission in the
implementation of the electoral process, specifically by
appointing a new Chief Electoral Officer; finalizing the
electoral lists and beginning to digitize them; concluding
the receipt candidatures; gender mainstreaming in
order to increase women's participation in the elections
and adopting measures that will allow the media, civil
society and political parties to observe and monitor the
elections. Cote d'Ivoire also notes the commitment and
efforts of the Independent Electoral Commission and
UNAMA to organize the elections in a timely manner.
Lastly, we also welcome the financial assistance
provided by certain countries to those bodies to ensure
the proper implementation of the electoral calendar.

Despite those few major advances, my delegation
remains concerned about the sociopolitical and security
situation in Afghanistan, which could jeopardize the
holding of elections in conditions that would guarantee
its smooth functioning and credibility.

With regrd to the sociopolitical situation, as the
Independent Electoral Commission is preparing to
finalize the digitization of voter lists - an important
step for the transparency of the electoral process - its
headquarters in Kabul and local commissions in eight
other provinces were closed due to events organized
by individuals whose candidatures were rejected.
Amid those tensions, my country urges the Afghan
authorities, political actors and all stakeholders to work
together to seek the necessary compromises to hold
fair, transparent and credible elections on 20 October
in a peaceful environment.

In addition, Cote d'Ivoire notes with regret the
limited progress made in the implementation of the
peace agreement between the Government and the
Hezb-e Islami political party. We are concerned about
the negative effects that those delays could have on the
start of negotiations for a peace agreement with armed
groups in the country.

The deteriorating security situation resulting from
the Taliban attacks on the Afghan security forces and
those by the local branch of Islamic State against the
civilian population could jeopardize the participation
of many Afghans in the upcoming polls. It is therefore
important to strengthen support for the efforts of
the Afghan security forces from the international
community and the countries contributing to the NATO
Resolute Support Mission in order to address the threats
posed by armed groups and curb the level of violence
in the country. In that regard, my delegation notes
with satisfaction the commitment of the contributing
countries to the Resolute Support Mission to maintain
their presence in the country - if need be - as well
as their funding pledges for the Afghan security forces
up until 2024. We encourage all forces engaged in
Afghanistan to further strengthen joint operations
with the country's defence and security forces in the
provinces most affected by insecurity, where the
conduct of elections is at risk of being undermined.

Some recent positive developments are helping to
maintain hope for the restoration of peace and stability
in Afghanistan. They include the cessation of hostilities
between the Afghan armed forces and the Taliban during
Eid al-Fitr festivities; meetings between Taliban leaders
and Afghan political authorities during that period;
the meeting of 3,000 religious leaders in Kabul to call
the Taliban to the negotiating table with the Afghan
political authorities; the increased involvement of civil
society in the search for peace through demonstrations
and marches and the pooling of initiatives within the
framework of regional cooperation to promote the quest
for solutions to the Afghan crisis.

Cote d'Ivoire also welcomes the adoption of the
Afghan national peace and reconciliation strategy
presented by the High Peace Council, as well as the
measures taken by the Government of Afghanistan to
implement the national action plan on peace, security
and women's empowerment.

My country welcomes the progress made by the
Afghan Government in its fight against corruption and
its quest to reduce the dependence of its economy on
foreign aid. We also encourage it to continue its efforts
to combat drug trafficking, which serves as a source of
financing for terrorism.

My delegation also calls for enhanced cooperation
between the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the relevant
regional organizations in order to strengthen regional
capacities for peace and development.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reaffirms the central
role of the Kabul process, which remains to this day the
benchmark for achieving lasting peace in Afghanistan.

