Mr. O'Brien: Since my previous briefing (see S/PV.7797), the humanitarian situation in Yemen
has further deteriorated, while the armed conflict
has continued to intensify, with daily air strikes and
armed clashes. In the past week, we received reports
of at least 365 conflict-related security incidents,
up from 231 in the previous week, and at least 100
airstrikes in Taiz governorate alone. During the
last quarter of 2016, approximately 2,400 incidents
consisting of air strikes, armed clashes and shelling
were reported throughout Yemen. This is a 12 per cent
increase from the previous three months. Today I am
particularly concerned about civilians caught up in the
crossfire in Mokha, Taiz governorate's coastal region.
I have received reports that more than 5,000 families
are fleeing.

It is clear that in this fight the most affected are
the ordinary Yemeni people, who continue to suffer.
Overall, more than two thirds of the population - an
alarming 18.8 million, as we have heard - is in need
of humanitarian and protection assistance, including
an astounding 10.3 million Yemenis who require
immediate assistance to save or sustain their lives. This
is about the size of the entire population of Sweden,
and the numbers are rising. More than 2 million people
are internally displaced. By 31 December, 7,469
Yemenis had been killed and 40,483 injured owing to
the conflict. The true number is likely to be higher, as
we report only cases by health facilities that are still
functioning - a mere 45 per cent.

Overall, the plight of children remains grim, with
a child under the age of 5 dying every 10 minutes of
preventable causes. A grim illustration of the impact on
children is the air strikes two weeks ago near a petrol
station next to a school in Sana'a governorate's Nihm
district that resulted in the death of one schoolgirl and
injury to four others. A week earlier, on 3 January, a
school was completely destroyed in Sa'ada governorate's
Safra district, reportedly - and luckily - without any
child casualties. Since the hostilities began in March
2015, more than 1,400 children have been killed and
over 2,140 injured. Another 1,441 children, some as
young as 8, have been recruited by warring parties. The
actual numbers are likely to be much higher.

Beyond the direct casualties of the armed conflict,
there are also the so-called silent deaths of Yemenis
that go largely unnoticed and unrecorded. Girls, boys,
women and men are dying of hunger and diseases that
are easily preventable and treatable. Unfortunately,
vital food commodities and medicines cannot be
imported easily owing to access restrictions imposed
by all parties. People with chronic diseases, including
high blood pressure and diabetes, who are not receiving
life-sustaining treatment due to medical shortages are
slowly dying.

The conflict in Yemen is now the primary driver
of the largest food-security emergency in the world. If
there is no immediate action, famine is now a possible
scenario for 2017. There are currently 14 million
food-insecure people, of whom half are severely
food-insecure. This means that Yemenis are not able
to feed themselves adequately and are frequently
forced to miss meals or eat food with poor nutritional
value. At least 2 million people need emergency food
assistance to survive. Again, the situation for children
is especially grave, as 2.2 million babies, boys and girls
are acutely malnourished, and almost half a million
children are suffering from severe acute malnutrition.
This represents a 63 per cent increase since late 2015.
Children are going to bed hungry every night.

Shockingly, incidents of gender-based violence
have reportedly increased by more than 63 per cent
since before the conflict. As of this month, there have
been 10,806 reported cases. To be clear, this means
more rapes, more forced marriages, more child brides
and many more unspeakable acts of violence against
girls, boys and women compared with two years ago.

All parties to the conflict are failing to take
precautions to spare civilians and civilian infrastructure.
So far, the United Nations has verified more than 325
attacks on schools, health facilities, markets, roads,
bridges and even water points. More than two thirds
of the damage to public infrastructure is a result of
airstrikes. Violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law continue unabated and largely with
impunity. Attacks against hospitals, schools and other
protected civilian structures and facilities must stop
immediately. International norms must be respected.

Granting rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access
is a key obligation under international humanitarian
law. Yet people face major challenges in accessing
humanitarian aid, and humanitarian actors face
impediments to access people in need, including due
to active fighting, insecurity, bureaucratic hurdles and
a lack of funding.

The closure of Sana'a airport to commercial
flights since 9 August has had a disproportionate
impact on Yemen's civilians and further increases the
humanitarian caseload. The lack ofin- country specialist
medical care means that more than 20,000 Yemenis are
unable to seek treatment abroad. Similarly, life-saving
medicines cannot be flown in. Students are unable to
resume their studies abroad, and Yemenis outside the
country seeking to go home are unable to do so. In
addition, the suspension of commercial flights has also
meant thatjournalists can no longer travel to Sana'a and
report on Yemen's grave humanitarian situation.

We expect all parties to the conflict, including
the Government of Yemen, to do the utmost with the
Saudi-led coalition to reopen the airport and airspace
to commercial flights. This could include addressing
security concerns through previously established flight
routing through Bisha, Saudi Arabia, or other airports
within the Saudi-led coalition.

Humanitarians now fill in for collapsing public
institutions, which at this scale is beyond both our
capacity and our remit. The health-care system is in
decline. Public infrastructure such as bridges and
ports, as well as water and sanitation systems, is being
destroyed. The near-collapse of the country's social
security and economic institutions has a multiplier
effect on humanitarian needs. Yemen's poorest
families, widows, orphans, people with disabilities and
the elderly are no longer receiving a monthly allowance
of 2,500 rials - about $10 - per person. In addition,
1.25 million civil servants, including nurses, doctors
and teachers, do not receive salaries regularly. Yemen's
middle class is growing poorer, and many are no longer
able to provide for their families. While a batch ofmoney
arrived in Aden earlier this month, no information has
been received as to whether it will reach civil servants
in all governorates.

Yemen's contracting economy, the associated
liquidity crisis and the continued depreciation of the
local currency mean further hardship for Yemen's
people. Ninety percent of Yemen's food and fuel and
almost all medical supplies are imported. Only 40 per
cent of pre-crisis amounts of fuel are now entering
the country. Import restrictions are leading to price
increases. For instance, in December the price ofwheat
flour was 25 per cent higher than in the pre-crisis
period. Petroleum prices rose by more than 33 per cent.
Cooking gas is now 60 per cent more expensive.

The sharp decline in the Central Bank's foreign
reserves combined with its move to Aden and lack of
liquidity has had a ruinous socioeconomic impact.
Yemen could run out of wheat within months unless
traders can access lines of credit in the coming weeks.
Foreign banks no longer accept financial transactions
with many of Yemen's commercial banks. We must
mobilize to sustain the traders' ability to import,
replenish the country's stocks of staple food and
reverse the trend of growing food insecurity and
potential starvation. In addition, some humanitarian
organizations are struggling to find enough cash to
implement projects. The end result is a country in
economic distress, which is translating into acute
humanitarian need.
Let me provide the Council with an update on the
United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism
(UNVIM). As of 23 January, UNVIM. had cleared
324 vessels from 394 requests. Since the beginning of
operations, more than 5 million metric tons of cargo
have been discharged, including 2 million tons of food
and just over 1 million tons of fuel. During this period,
54 vessels were not cleared; 20 vessel clearances were
revoked, 28 cancelled and six declined. The Mechanism
has completed 21 inspections of suspicious cargo or
information presented. Delays in receiving clearances
are also due to restrictions imposed by the Saudi-led
coalition, such as the hampering of vessels' access to
Yemeni Red Sea ports and in the absence of clear lists
of prohibited items.

Once goods are offloaded, there are often
additional bureaucratic impediments that slow down
the transport of commodities to their final destinations.
All parties have to be held responsible for those
impediments. Moreover, ports have been damaged and
need to be repaired. Hudaydah port, Yemen's main
port - through which 80 per cent of imports arrive
and which was damaged in the conflict in 2015 - has
not been rehabilitated. A vessel carrying four mobile
cranes procured by the World Food Programme (WFP)
has arrived in the Red Sea, but has been ordered by
the Saudi authorities to leave Yemeni waters and is
now anchored 50 miles off Yemen's coast. The vessel
is awaiting the coalition's approval to berth at the port.
Those cranes will boost the port's capacity in handling
humanitarian cargo. Two of the cranes will be used
exclusively by the United Nations, by the WFP, and
help expedite the timely delivery of vital humanitarian
aid supplies.

In spite of the difficult conditions and tremendous
challenges, the humanitarian community delivers.
Together in 2016, we reached 5.6 million Yemenis
in need with direct assistance and via a coordinated
response in 22 governorates. There are five operational
hubs - in Aden, Hudaydah, Ibb, Sa'ada, and Sana'a.
More than 114 humanitarian organizations are
working in Yemen and are delivering life-saving and
life-sustaining assistance across the entire county.

In the darkness of conflict, there are some
glimpses of hope. Thanks to the swift intervention by
humanitarian partners, which established 26 cholera
treatment centres and launched a massive containment
campaign through water and sanitation interventions,
the cholera outbreak, which started in October, is now
in decline. We must remain vigilant, as there are still
more than 18,000 suspected cases.

In recent weeks, there have been some improvements
in overcoming bureaucratic impediments, especially
in terms of issuing visas to humanitarian workers.
Dialogue is also becoming more effective in leading to
a better understanding with parties to the conflict and
their responsibilities under international humanitarian
law. I welcome the efforts of the Saudi authorities
and other partners to strengthen the dialogue and
information-sharing with humanitarian partners to
overcome the challenges faced in the delivery of
humanitarian assistance in Yemen.

For 2017, approximately $2 billion is required
to support the humanitarian response, targeting
10 million of the most vulnerable people in Yemen. The
increase over 2016 is directly tied to the breakdown
of the socioeconomic order, increased suffering and
the absence of a cessation of hostilities and a political
settlement. The parties to the conflict are closing their
ears to the desperate pleas of the Yemeni people and
to those of the broader international community. I ask
Member States to pledge generously at the forthcoming
Yemen pledging conference, to be held late in March.

In conclusion, I request that Council members once
again call for an immediate ceasefire and cessation of
hostilities. The Yemeni people need a political solution
to the horrendous conflict they are caught up in. I also
request that Council members, first, use their influence
over the parties to the conflict to ensure that they
respect international humanitarian law and provide
timely, full and unimpeded humanitarian access;
secondly, hold parties to the conflict accountable for
breaching their obligation to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure; thirdly, facilitate an increase in
commercial imports of essential supplies, facilitate the
import of cranes to Hudaydah, support the rehabilitation
of the port and extend the mandate of the United
Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism for
Yemen beyond April; fourthly, demand the resumption
of commercial flights to Sana'a; and, fifthly, facilitate
lines of credit for the purchase of staple food, including
wheat, to traders and Yemeni banks, and urge the
Government of Yemen to use funds from the first batch
of newly printed Yemeni riyals optimally, equitably and
without political bias and ensure that civil servants are
paid throughout the country.

