Mr. Lancry (Israel): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency and your predecessor, the representative of
Ukraine, for his most able leadership.

I wish to further thank the Secretary-General for
his excellent report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Indeed, "protection" does not appear to
be the right word here, because, as the Secretary-
General himself points out, civilians have gone from
being the incidental victims of warfare, in need of
protection, to being the principal targets of armed
conflict. Israel welcomes this report and many of the
recommendations it makes for improving the situation
of civilians in areas of conflict.

Israel further supports the broader efforts to
update the political and legal instruments available for
the protection of civilians. The world has changed
dramatically in the last decade alone, and the ways in
which the international community addresses these
issues of prime humanitarian importance must be
brought into accord with the prevailing conditions of
our times. The State of Israel has a longstanding
interest in the development of international
humanitarian law. As a nation which lost one third of
its population in the Nazi genocide in Europe, in the
most heinous case of genocide in human history,
Israel's own birthright is engraved with a particular
responsibility to prevent this crime from occurring ever
again to the Jewish people or to any other people, as
well as with a universalist commitment to combat
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes
wherever they occur. We were reminded of this special
responsibility just last week on Holocaust Martyrs and
Heroes Remembrance Day, the day when the State of
Israel and Jews worldwide remember those who
perished at the hands of the Nazis.

We therefore share the belief of the Secretary-
General that international standards of protection
should be given the force of law. Israel has been
actively engaged in efforts aimed at establishing the
International Criminal Court. I had the honour this past
December of applying my signature to the Statute of
the Court, symbolizing Israel's identification with the
aims which underlie international efforts to prosecute
and punish those who commit genuinely heinous
crimes.

In our region, however, we see opposing forces at
work. In the territories of the Palestinian Authority,
convicted terrorists have been freed, released as part of
the Palestinian effort to stoke the flames of
confrontation and encourage violent terrorist activities.
Those terrorists who once sat in Palestinian prisons are
presently engaged in planning and implementing
terrorist operations aimed at Israeli civilians. Even
more distressing is the fact that official organs of the
Palestinian security apparatus are now also engaged in
the terrorist campaign against Israel, with no
significant effort expended by the Palestinian
leadership to bring such operations to a halt.

In Lebanon, similar freedoms are granted to
violent terrorist groups. The terrorist organization
Hezbollah has long operated with near-complete
impunity, launching Katyusha rockets from its bases in
South Lebanon at towns and cities in northern Israel.
Residents of communities that are within range of
Hezbollah's weaponry have learned to live with the
persistent threat of rocket attacks and the reality of
long days and nights in bomb shelters. Israel had hoped
that its withdrawal from Lebanon last May, in full and
confirmed compliance with resolution 425 (1978),
would have halted these attacks and moved the
Government of Lebanon to fulfil its obligations under
international law to seize control of the area and restore
its effective authority up to the line of withdrawal.
Unfortunately, one year later, this has yet to occur.

As recently as 14 April, Hezbollah carried out an
attack which killed an Israel soldier. This comes in
addition to the killing of two other Israeli soldiers and
the kidnapping of three others since the completion of
the Israeli withdrawal. The organization continues to
enjoy virtually complete freedom of movement and
action in South Lebanon. Not only have the Lebanese
and Syrian Governments granted Hezbollah free rein,
but they actively encourage and support their activities,
permitting arms transfers from Iran to Hezbollah to
pass through their territory and facilitating the growth
of an elaborate terrorist infrastructure. It is the
Governments of Lebanon and Syria which are
preventing the full implementation of resolution 425
(1978) and subsequent resolutions and whose actions
are directly endangering the lives and well-being of
civilians in northern Israel.

In light of the actions of these Member States,
which actively support terrorist operations against
Israeli citizens, we deeply regret that an issue of such
importance to all individuals of conscience, which
affects the lives and well-being of so many innocent
civilians around the world and which the international
community is morally obliged to address with resolve
and alacrity, has been appropriated by several Member
States to launch biased attacks on my country.

Though one would never know it to listen to
today's speakers, Israelis and Palestinians alike have
suffered from the current violence. And yet, many of
the statements today have simply ignored Israel
suffering. More significantly, they miss or perhaps
have deliberately ignored a critical distinction. The
Secretary-General's report refers to civilians who have
been harmed by either being targeted by or being
situated in close proximity to violent and armed
groups. This aptly describes the situation of Israeli
civilians, who have been killed while travelling to and
from work, riding public transportation or shopping for
groceries in the market. Conversely, when Israel is
compelled to respond to defend its own citizens from
violence and terror, in many cases it gives prior
warning to the Palestinian side so as to minimize any
harm that may come to civilians. And while we deeply
regret the suffering and casualties that have come to
the Palestinians, it must be stressed again and again
that they are suffering first and foremost as a result of
their own misguided decision to engage in violent
confrontation, rather than to continue with peaceful
negotiations.

Many of the characteristics of contemporary
conflicts described in the report apply directly to the
current situation in Israel. We are in what the
Secretary-General refers to as a "grey zone between
war and peace", with armed conflict erupting
sporadically, intensifying and then subsiding. Concerns
have also arisen regarding the use of children in armed
conflict, the proliferation of small arms, the targeting
of women and children, impunity for atrocities and the
direct targeting of civilians. All these are covered in
the Secretary-General's report and all characterize
aspects of the current hostilities. In light of the
relevance to Israel's particular situation, as well as of
the broader descriptions of modern warfare which
apply more generally, Israel endorses many of the
recommendations of the Secretary-General in this
regard.

In particular, Israel fully supports the Secretary-
General's focus on the misuse of information, the
proliferation of hate speech and hate media and its role
in fomenting conflict and igniting mass violence. Israel
has repeatedly drawn attention to the role of Palestinian
media incitement throughout the period of the current
violence, and its contribution to fostering a culture of
violence and hatred of Israel and Jews. The Egyptian
press has also been a major promoter of anti-Semitic
diatribes and cartoons that are disturbingly reminiscent
of the anti-Jewish propaganda once prevalent in Nazi
Germany. On 18 April, the day when Israel honoured
the memories of the innocent victims of the Nazi
Holocaust, Ahmed Rajib, a senior editor, wrote, in the
Egyptian newspaper Al-Akhbar:
"We thank the late Hitler for avenging the cause
of the Palestinians in advance against the most
contemptuous criminals on earth. Even more, we
rebuke Hitler for not taking revenge on them to a
sufficient degree."

In Syria and other Arab nations, anti-Semitism
and Holocaust denial, and calls for jihad and the
murder of Israelis and Jews, remain the order of the
day. President Bashar Al-Assad has no scruples about
equating Israelis with Nazis. Even his late father,
President Hafez Al-Assad, despite all the bitterness and
frustration generated by the Syrian-Israeli conflict,
never used such an unbearably heinous analogy.

We support the Secretary-General's assertion, in
paragraph 40 of his report, that the best antidote to hate
speech and incitement to violence is the development
of free and independent media serving and reflecting
the needs of all parts of society. We further support the
statement of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Mrs. Mary Robinson, who remarked
on the media's ability to promote diversity and respect
for others, and on how unfortunate it is that such
powerful technologies are used to stir up hatred and
violence instead. We join them, as well as members of
the Council, in condemning this shameful practice.

Unfortunately, in many neighbouring countries
the media remain the sole purview of Government
authorities, and as such are manipulated to dispense
propaganda which reflects the interests of the
authorities over the interests of the truth. In many
instances, journalists attempting to photograph events
are harassed and threatened, as was the case with
several journalists who were on the scene during the
lynching of two Israeli soldiers in Ramallah last
October.

I wish to conclude by enjoining my colleagues
and the Member States of the United Nations to look
closely at the current report of the Secretary-General
and to lend their full and unqualified support to
international efforts aimed at minimizing the adverse
effects of armed conflict on civilians, developing and
strengthening international legal instruments to
prosecute those who violate international law and basic
humanitarian norms and contributing to a culture of
protection, transparency and objectivity that will serve
the noble and timeless aims for which this Organization
was created.

