The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Security Council, to His Excellency Mr. Mansour
Alotaibi, Permanent Representative of Kuwait, and his
entire team, for their service in the presidency of the
Council for the month of June. I am sure I speak for
all the members of the Council in expressing our deep
appreciation to Ambassador Alotaibi and the whole
Kuwaiti team for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council's business last month.

Expression of welcome to the new Permanent
Representative of France

The President (spoke in Spanish): I would also like
to extend, on behalf of the Council, a warm welcome
to the new Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Nicolas de Riviere.
We very much look forward to working closely with
him in the coming months.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Threats to international peace and security

Linkages between international terrorism and
organized crime

Letter dated 27 June 2019 from the Permanent
Representative of Peru to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/537)


The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt,
Estonia, Guatemala, India, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein,
Maldives, Mexico, Morocco, Nigeria, Norway, the
Netherlands, Pakistan, Panama, the Philippines,
Slovenia, Spain, the Sudan, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, Uruguay
and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director, United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime; Ms. Michele Coninsx, Executive
Director, Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate; and Ms. Tamara Makarenko, International
Consultant, United Nations Interregional Crime and
Justice Research Institute.

Mr. Fedotov is joining today's meeting via video-
teleconference from Vienna.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules ofprocedure, I also invite the following
to participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Joao
Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, and Mr. Robert
Mardini, Permanent Observer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/537, which contains the text
of a letter dated 27 June 2019 from the Permanent
Representative of Peru to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.

I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.


