Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia has followed closely the
developments of the recent events in the Horn of
Africa. First and foremost, we would like to underscore
the fact that Bolivia supports the Monitoring Group
on Somalia and Eritrea and hails its efforts to work
with the parties and thereby contribute to improving
the security situation in the region. Nonetheless, our
abstention in the voting on resolution 2385 (2017) is
explained as follows.

First, with regards to the sanctions, we reiterate
once again that sanctions should not be an end in and
ofthemselves. They should be a tool of last resort in the
face of non-compliance with the provisional measures
established in the Charter of the United Nations.
Sanctions must be subjected to constant reviews as the
circumstances and situation on the ground evolves.

Secondly, with regard to Eritrea, we underscore
that the point that maintaining confidence-building
measures among States must be applied to the actions
of all States Members of the Organization. In that
connection, we have taken note ofthe most recent report
of the Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) and of the Monitoring
Group on Somalia and Eritrea (S/2017/925), which
finds no conclusive evidence of Eritrean support for the
terrorist group, Al-Shabaab.

Thirdly, with regard to transparency and upholding
the decisions of the Security Council, we believe that
a visit to Eritrea by the sanctions committee and the
Monitoring Group must also be carried out as quickly
as possible.

Finally, we call on Eritrea to work towards the
stability of the region and to set aside interests of any
kind that might undermine that overarching goal.

As far as Somalia is concerned, we reiterate our
concern about the ongoing depredations of Al-Shabaab
in Somalia and across the subregion. Its use of
sophisticated and asymmetric attacks reflects are a
testament to that, and the multiple attacks and hundreds
of lives lost as a result of the attacks in Mogadishu last
month are but one example thereof.

Bolivia calls on the international community as a
whole to continue to support the efforts and initiatives
of the African Union and the countries of the subregion
to bring peace and stability to Somalia and to counter
and defeat the terrorist threat. We would also like to
underscore the efforts of the Federal Government of
Somalia aimed at developing and strengthening the
appropriate political process ofpeace and reconciliation
for the country, taking into account its sovereignty
and territorial.

