Mr. Alfassam (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his informative
statement and his most recent report (S/2019/364, annex) on the implementation of the Peace Agreement
on Bosnia and Herzegovina. He can be assured that he
has our full support in carrying out his mandate and
efforts aimed at assisting the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to overcome the challenges they are facing.

We commend the efforts to maintain stability in

Bosnia and Herzegovina and the unity of the country with
all of its ethnic and cultural components. We recognize
and appreciate the important role of the Multinational
Stabilization Force led by the European Union. In
that regard, we welcome the positive developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the progress achieved
in the implementation of some obligations related to
the Euro-Atlantic integration processes, responses
provided by the national authorities with respect to the
European questionnaire and the adoption of a series
of tax laws, which allowed for the completion of the
review by the International Monetary Fund. All of those
achievements will undoubtedly have positive effect
on security and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the region, which will encourage the country to
implement the necessary reforms in order to integrate
into its European environment.

Two decades since it was signed, the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains the cornerstone of institutional
stability and the solid reference point for peace in the
country. We are therefore concerned about the escalation
of inflammatory rhetoric and divisive statements. We
call upon all political leaders to place the national
interests of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
above all other considerations and to move away from
narrow political and ethnic interests that undermine
prospects for stability and progress. We also call
upon them to constructively engage in implementing
the results of the elections held in October last year,
including the establishment as soon as possible of
a State council of ministers and a Federation entity
Government. Undoubtedly, that will have a positive
impact on the political process. In addition, efforts
must be intensified so that the Parliament can adopt
new laws to ensure that judicial authorities are not left
without the tools needed to address organized crime,
corruption, terrorism and extremism, which are a direct
threat to the rule of law and hinder efforts aimed at
achieving economic and social development, as well as
efforts aimed at integration with the European Union.

According to the report, such events are occurring
at a time when limited progress is being made
on the implementation of five objectives and two
conditions before the closure of the Office of the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that
regard, we reiterate our full support for the Office of
the High Representative as provided for in the Dayton
Peace Agreement and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. We call upon the High Representative to
step up his efforts to fully implement the plan.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait underscores
the importance of respecting the unity, stability and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
also underscore the need for all parties to respect the
national Constitution of the country, as well as all the
judgments issued by the judicial authorities so as to lay
the groundwork for stability in the country. We call
upon all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to make
the necessary efforts in order to implement the General
Framework Agreement for Peace and to respect the
mandate of the High Representative, as outlined by
annex X of the Agreement and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

