Mr. Muita (Kenya): I thank you, Sir, for giving
me this opportunity to address the Council on the
problem of piracy.

At the outset, my delegation wishes to condemn
in the strongest terms the terrorist attack that took
place in Mogadishu yesterday and left dozens dead,
including members of the Somali Transitional Federal
Government (TFG). This attack, in our view,
demonstrates the very grave situation in which that
country finds itself. The issue of piracy is but one
reason that the international community needs to
undertake a very broad, concerted effort to stabilize
Somalia.

Piracy has turned out to be a complex and
persistent problem that is rapidly mutating into a
many-headed monster, with implications in many
areas, including trade, the cost of doing business,
terrorism and money-laundering, to name but a few.
The incidents of piracy off the coast of Somalia have a
negative impact on the economies of the countries of
the region. The disruption of sea trade has driven up
insurance and shipping costs, thus affecting the
competitiveness of businesses. At the same time, the
tourism sector is affected, as the threat from pirate
hijacking scares away cruise line operators.

The Government of Kenya believes that the
problem of piracy requires a more coordinated and
holistic approach. This should be informed by the
principles of fairness and shared international
responsibility. In the fight against piracy, which is an
international problem, we should seek to encourage all
members of the global community to play their
respective roles in order to support the institutional
capacity of Somalia.

Although the international community has
exerted efforts in addressing the problem of piracy, we
believe that more attention needs to be focused on this
matter. In this regard, we welcome the recent adoption
of Security Council resolution 1918 (2010) and hope
that further efforts by the international community
towards the recognition of the problem in the direction
indicated in that resolutions will be intensified.

Kenya wishes to commend the work undertaken
by the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia. This is an important international contribution
to the fight against piracy. Of equal importance is the
newly established International Trust Fund to Support
Initiatives of States Countering Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia. The Trust Fund has an immense potential to
support the efforts of States engaged in the fight
against piracy.

Acts of piracy under customary international law
have always been treated as crimes of universal
jurisdiction, enabling any State to seize pirates
anywhere in international waters and to try them. In
this regard, the Security Council has adopted several
key resolutions aimed at addressing the issue of piracy,
including resolution 1846 (2008), which authorizes
naval ships deployed for anti-piracy patrols to enter the
territorial waters of Somalia and undertake all
necessary measures that are appropriate in Somalia,
and resolution 1851 (2008), which authorized action on
land. It would be prudent to focus the piracy efforts on
the Somali coastal areas so as to target the pirates
while they are breaking out to sea. That would limit the
sea area to be kept under surveillance.
Payment of ransom by ship-owners is one of the
major factors contributing to the increased incidence of
piracy. A strong United Nations anti-piracy policy
should include a uniform and deliberate response to
demands for ransom, in order to avoid the individual
panic-driven reaction by ship-owners that is seen
today.

The legal framework for efficient, credible and
timely trials ashore of arrested piracy suspects needs to
be worked out by the United Nations and enunciated.
Current arrangements, which have seen pirates handed
over and tried in Kenya and in neighbouring States,
place a heavy burden on those countries and are clearly
untenable in the long run. The issue of better processes
and mechanisms for ensuring prosecution of suspected
pirates and the imprisonment of convicted ones is
extremely important. We have taken note of the
recommendations of the Secretary-General on the
various options aimed at addressing the issue and look
forward to future engagement on the best option to
adopt.

Somali piracy will not be eradicated until
stability takes hold in the country itself. Somali piracy
is directly tied to the failure of the institutions of
governance of the Somali State. Any comprehensive
solutions to piracy, therefore, will have to involve
operations on the ground to stabilize the State itself, as
well as to unsettle pirate sanctuaries and destroy the
international pirate infrastructure. In seeking a
definitive solution to the piracy issue, it is thus
important that we aim at a durable solution to the
political situation in Somalia, including addressing the
socio-economic issues that have made piracy an
attractive means of livelihood for Somalia's youth. In
this regard, we would urge more robust engagement
from the international community to help Somalia
return to normalcy.

In conclusion, I wish to assure the Council of
Kenya's firm commitment to all regional and
international efforts that seek to address the problem of
piracy off the coast of Somalia and to find sustainable
peace and stability in that East African country.

