Mr. Annadif (spoke in French): At the outset,
on behalf of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, I would
like to thank the Council for giving me the unique
opportunity to update members on the situation in
Somalia. I agree with my colleague Ambassador Kay
that the evolution of the situation calls for optimism.
Nonetheless, like all optimism, it should be tempered
by the challenges that have to be met. Therefore, rather
than dwell on the positive aspects that he so widely and
brilliantly presented during his briefing, I would like
to focus on the challenges that the Government must
address and the challenges that face the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

Before continuing with my presentation, I
would like to convey the regrets and the apologies of
Commissioner Ramtane Lamamra, who is not able
to speak to the Council today. As members know, he
was just appointed Minister for Foreign Affairs of his
country, Algeria. He asks the Council to accept his
apologies.

With regard to the situation in Somalia, it is thanks
to the relevant resolutions adopted by the Security
Council that today AMISOM. is able to achieve its
mission with the support of three components that are
in place on the ground. The military component, as
the Council knows, is today made up of troops from
Uganda, Burundi, Kenya, Djibouti and Sierra Leone
amounting to approximately 17,000 troops. There is
a civilian component, with approximately 100 troops
from different African countries. Their work is often
complementary to the tasks of our friends in the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia on the ground.
There is also a police component, which is made up of
two units - one from Nigeria with 140 police officers
and the other from Uganda, also with 140 police officers.
They patrol on a daily basis and help the Somali police
with their mission. We also have instructors and trainers
from Ghana, Gambia and other African countries, all of
whom help our brothers in Somalia to ensure security.
For the time being they are in Mogadishu, but they will
soon move into other areas, including Kismayo, Baidoa
and Beledweyne.

Since its inception, AMISOM. has been undertaking
its mission through the military, police and civilian
components. Indeed, thanks to the Council's support
and the proactive mandate entrusted to AMISOM,
today we have achieved significant progress in the
security and political arenas. Ambassador Kay has
already ready briefed the Council on these, so I will
not go into them, but I would just like to say that while
we are currently seeing a positive dynamic unfolding
in Somalia, there are still a number of challenges to be
met.

On the political level, we are encouraged by the
Government's determination to implement its policies.
In that regard, Ambassador Kay also underscored a
number of positive developments, some of which have
been under way only since the beginning of the month.
Those events were recently crowned by the important
agreement of 28 August between the political leaders of
Jubaland, in particular Ahmed Madobe, and the Somali
Government. However, the entire positive dynamic is
undermined by a number of challenges that, as I said,
if not resolved, could lead to a reversal that would be
regrettable for the entire international community.
Indeed, contrary to the previous years of a failed State
and anarchy in Somalia, today there is a responsible
Government that, while beset by its own problems, is
evolving in the right direction.

The first challenge is related to security. Despite
the progress achieved against Al-Shabaab, especially
in 2012 and early 2013, AMISOM. wishes to stress
that Al-Shabaab still has the ability to destabilize the
country and to derail our efforts. Since the beginning
of the year, Al-Shabaab has deployed increasingly
sophisticated harassment tactics that are the outcome of
thorough preparation and training and enjoy financial
support from sources that we are very close to being
able to identify. The report of the Monitoring Group
on the issue (S/2013/413) contains a number of leads in
that respect.

We would draw attention to the suicide attack
carried out on 19 June against the United Nations
complex. More recently, an attack was perpetrated on
7 September against a very popular Village restaurant
frequented by civilians. Those are indications that
setbacks could occur if we are not vigilant.

Indeed, extremist groups move freely throughout
some 50 per cent of Somali territory, in particular the
rural areas, where they continue to organize and train
and where they have access to logistical support as well
as to weapons and ammunition. The endeavours of the
United Nations, though the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, which complement ours, must
be underscored, because numerous efforts are currently
under way to identify those sources and, ultimately, to
cut them off.

The second challenge is within the Somali
Government, namely, how to streamline the federal
structure as stipulated in the provisional Constitution.
Several regions are competing to be autonomous from
the central Government, and interpretations often
differ from one region to the other. But I think that
we can welcome the agreement of 28 August between
the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) and the
authorities of Jubaland, which is reassuring to all of
us and offers positive prospects for the relationship
between the FGS and the various regions that are
making such claims.

The third challenge also pertains to the Government
and is linkedto its insufficient capacity. When AMISOM
liberates areas, officials are appointed by the Somali
Government who sometimes are not accepted by the
local population and have no administrative structures
in place to support them. Thus internal coordination
among such structures remains a key challenge. That is
compounded by the lack of understanding resulting from
such contradictions among Government representatives
or officials.

In addition, the Somali Government continues to
face the humanitarian situation of which Ambassador
Kay spoke, which includes displaced persons, refugees,
unemployed youth and so on. The people are very keen
to see their problems solved, and if, despite the hopes
in that respect, there are no signs of improvement in
the near future, those difficulties, which have become
chronic, could lead to conflict. Indeed, the seeds of
conflict are already there.

As Ambassador Kay has said, we are preparing
for Brussels and the New Deal. We must ensure that
in the wake of that event, the country enjoys a level of
security adequate to ensure progress towards peace as
well as the political and, especially, economic stability
to which the Somali people aspire. Considerable efforts
at the military level remain necessary and must go
hand in hand with the political strategy. However, those
efforts and objectives require consultation and further
support on the part of all of Somalia's partners, because
the challenges involved could have a negative impact on
AMISOM's effectiveness.

As the Council is no doubt aware, the situation as
concerns military operations must remain a top priority.
Unfortunately, the strategic concept currently guiding
AMISOM's operations is out of date. It is important that
the Council be able to consider the issue of the number
of elements receiving support, as well as the support
provided to the Somali National Security forces, which
Ambassador Kay spoke about earlier.

Two strategic considerations continue to pose
real challenges. Despite the Council's vote for force
multipliers, to date AMISOM. has not really been able to
mobilize the necessary force multipliers. Furthermore,
the United Nations support mechanism, symbolized
by the United Nations Support Office for the African
Union Mission in Somalia (UNSOA), has procedures
that often lead to our having problems obtaining the
necessary support in a timely manner.

It is also extremely important from that standpoint
to provide strong support to UNSOA so that it can meet
the often difficult challenges on the ground, without
which it will be very difficult to achieve the significant
military objectives that we are aiming for. Furthermore,
UNSOA support mechanisms should, thanks to the
Council, be expanded to include training, which is
currently provided by AMISOM. to Somali forces.

We can therefore say that AMISOM. and the Somali

forces currently have a presence in the principal towns
and provide security on key routes. However, the more
territory we liberate, the more we become dispersed,
so we cannot at this time carry out many expansion
operations. High hopes remain for AMISOM. to provide
greater security. However, AMISOM's campaign is
experiencing difficulties, which it is important to
meet so that we can truly take the last few steps, even
though it is said that often the last few steps are the
most difficult.

Recently the Chairperson of the AU Commission
sent a letter to the Secretary-General, outlining
requirements that remain pertinent. We welcome in
advance the recommendations of the joint African
Union-United Nations Information Support Team, which
has just completed its mission in line with paragraph 19
of resolution 2093 (2013). We are convinced that with
support for AMISOM. and the Somali National Security
Forces that is focused on carefully-thought-out goals,
we will be able to achieve the decisive progress that is
expected in combating A1-Shabaab and improving the
security situation, as well as averting any setbacks in
Somalia, which is something that everyone fears. Such
support should include, as I said earlier, an increase in
the number of troops as well as logistical support for
and intensive training of the Somali National Security
Forces.

Before concluding, I would like to inform the
members of the Security Council that the latest
allegations of rape, made by a Somali woman against
the Somali national forces and AMISOM, proved
unfounded following several internal and external
investigations. We in AMISOM. have adopted a zero-
tolerance policy on such issues. We now have at our
disposal early-warning mechanisms and permanent
investigation structures. We are also carrying out
awareness-raising campaigns, both for AMISOM
military staff and Somali populations. It that context,
we have helped the Somali Government put in place a
gender policy that will soon be presented to Parliament
for a law to be adopted.

Finally, let me once again take this opportunity
to convey, on behalf of the Chairperson of the
Commission of the African Union, the gratitude of the
African Union and AMISOM, which represents the AU
on the ground, for the Council's unwavering support
and tireless efforts to find solutions to the situation
in Somalia. As my colleague has said, we remain
optimistic. With a little effort, we can achieve the same
thing that was accomplished recently in Mali so that the
2016 elections can take place throughout the whole of
Somalia's territory.

