Mr. Michel (Belgium) (spoke in French): I am very
happy to see you, Sir, presiding over this meeting, and I
would like to thank you for your efforts to lend new
momentum to the peace process in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and to make the international community
more aware of the gravity of this crisis. I encourage your
initiative and assure you of my country's support.

Belgium's position lies within the framework of the
efforts made by the European Union, and I associate myself
fully with the statement to be made by the Portuguese
presidency of the Union. My Government believes that
European involvement in the peace process and in the
stabilization of the region is an essential factor in ensuring
the success of our efforts.

During the fifty-fourth session of the General
Assembly, on 25 September 1999, I announced that
Belgium wished to devote special attention to central Africa
and to solving the crisis in the Congo. We wish to
contribute to pulling the region out of the quagmire of war
and insecurity, and thereby out of underdevelopment. My
presence here today is further confirmation of that
commitment.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is a country
the size of a continent, and its stability influences that of
the entire African continent and impacts directly on the
stability of its nine neighbours. The return to peace and
regional stability requires the re-establishment of respect
for the fundamental principles that were clearly reaffirmed
by the signatories to the Lusaka peace Agreement. First
and foremost among those is the territorial unity and
integrity of Congo and the inviolability of its borders. For
Belgium, this is the first prerequisite for the country's
recovery.

At the same time, Congo's neighbours have the right
to live in peace within secure borders, without
destabilizing action being undertaken from Congolese
territory.

The other essential factor to the stabilization of
Congo is of a domestic character, namely, national
reconciliation. The Lusaka Agreement explicitly sets out
the commitment of the Congolese signatories to undertake
an internal dialogue leading to national reconciliation
within the framework of freely accepted institutions,
including a national army truly at the service of the
Congolese people.

We have not gathered here today at such a high
level of political representation to negotiate a new treaty;
rather, we are gathered to create an unstoppable
momentum that will lead to full implementation of the
Lusaka Agreement. Although it entered into force almost
six months ago, today we are seeing a slow pace of
implementation and the risk that the peace process may
become more fragile. We cannot remain passive.

All parties involved - signatories to the Agreement
and the international community, both collectively and
individually - must shoulder their responsibilities. The
gravity of the situation and its catastrophic humanitarian
consequences require more than ever that everything be
done to relaunch the peace process by setting into motion
the mechanisms already envisaged in the Agreement.
Indeed, this is the only instrument that exists to end the
conflict.

Now, what do we think are the conditions for
resuming the peace process and ensuring its success?

First, of course, is the political will of the
signatories. The primary responsibility for implementing
the Lusaka Agreement lies with those who signed it. It is
up to them to respect their own signatures and to carry
out what they agreed to: respect for the ceasefire, the
withdrawal of troops and a halt to rearmament. A clear
demonstration of political will by the parties to implement
the peace Agreement in good faith and without creating

 

impediments is absolutely essential to enable the
international community to uphold and encourage their
actions.

This naturally brings me to my second point, namely,
the support of the international community. That support is
absolutely necessary to make the Agreement's mechanisms
work. Immediate financial and logistical assistance for the
Joint Military Commission (JMC) so that it may function
on a permanent basis is indispensable to its executing its
mission. In this respect, the financial contributions pledged
should be paid into the trust fund without delay. So far,
Belgium has contributed BF10 million and has actively
encouraged the European Union to pledge 1.2 million euros
without delay.

Better coordination between the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUC), the JMC and the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) is also needed. Here I welcome the
initiatives taken by the Secretary-General, particularly his
appointment of an especially experienced Special
Representative, Ambassador Morjane, who should be able
to count on the political and logistical support of the
international community, as well as the full cooperation of
the parties.

The third prerequisite is a peacekeeping operation to
help the signatories put the Agreement into practice and
allow it to achieve one of its principal objectives, namely,
the withdrawal of all foreign troops from Congo. In order
to succeed, such a mission will have to be adequately
equipped with a clear mandate and the necessary logistical
and financial resources. I urge the Security Council to seize
the opportunity offered by the Lusaka Agreement and
shoulder its responsibilities in this respect. Belgium will
contribute financially and logistically in its national capacity
and in conjunction with its partners in the European Union.

I would also urge the Security Council to provide
sufficient protection and means of transportation and
communications so that the observers to be deployed under
phase II can carry out their mission objectively and under
full security.

The issue of the disarmament and reintegration of
combatants of irregular armed groups is clearly of the
utmost importance, and it is also extremely difficult. This
will require political mechanisms and economic incentives,
rather than military solutions.

A fourth prerequisite is the inter-Congolese dialogue.
Its implementation is essential and urgent. President
Masire has now been appointed as facilitator and will
bring his prestige as a great statesman, as well as his long
political experience, to this indispensable dialogue.
Belgium welcomes his appointment and will support him
fully. I call on all Congolese parties to build a political
system involving all dynamic elements of the nation. The
international community should not remain on the
sidelines while the Congolese attempt to achieve this
objective.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the concept
of African ownership, which may recently have been a
reason for withdrawing from Africa and which has
now - through the Lusaka Agreement - demonstrated
its relevancy. The Agreement is an African response to an
African crisis. Insofar as the signatory countries truly
commit themselves, the international community is ready
to contribute to its implementation. African ownership can
be neither rejection nor withdrawal. The concept must
involve collaboration and partnership.

Our efforts should be seen in the framework of
partnership with countries in central Africa. That
partnership involves, first of all, the countries of the
region itself. It is only through regional stabilization and
cooperation beyond one' s own borders that peace, ensured
by the implementation of the Lusaka Agreement, will be
truly consolidated. On that basis, we are ready to rally our
partners - both within the European Union and
beyond - to a N orth-South partnership pact focusing on
reconstruction, democracy and development. That pact
would fall within the scope of a conference on stability
and cooperation in the Great Lakes region, which could
be organized once peace returns to the region.

Finally, I would hope that we would consider the
lessons of the Carlsson report. Not only should we help
Rwanda heal the wounds of the past, but we must also
ensure that the errors committed in Rwanda are not
repeated.

We want to break from the logic of war, a war
which cannot be won by anyone. We must show those
who think they can improve their lot only by taking up
arms that there exists a peaceful alternative based on
economic cooperation and development. My country
possesses the will and the means to participate in this
endeavour.

 

