Mr. Sumi (Japan): At the outset, Sir, I would like
to express my deep appreciation to you for convening
today's debate. I also wish to thank the Chairs of the
Council's three counter-terrorism committees for their
informative briefings.

Japan welcomes the consensual adoption of
General Assembly resolution 62/272 following the first
biennial review of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy on 4 and 5 September 2008. During
the meetings, Member States shared their experiences
in implementing the Strategy and reaffirmed their
strong determination to persevere in efforts against
terrorism. Terrorism continues to be one of the most
serious threats to the international community. Given
its increasingly international nature, the necessity for
collective action by the Member States cannot be
overemphasized.

In order for such collaborative efforts to succeed,
the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee to
monitor the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001) remains essential. In that
regard, I would like to commend the contribution made
by Croatia as Chair of the Committee, especially the
Chair's efforts to make the work of the Committee
more transparent to non-members. I would also like to
express our appreciation for the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
under the leadership of Executive Director Mr. Mike
Smith, in enhancing efficiency in the coordination of
counter-terrorism capacity-building assistance. We
appreciate in particular the role of CTED in identifying
specific needs in the area of counter-terrorism technical
assistance.

As Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Action Group
(CTAG), Japan has been making every effort to

promote effective coordination with CTED. The Group
of Eight (G8) leaders' statement on counter-terrorism
adopted at the G-8 Hokkaido Toyako Summit in July
this year emphasizes this cooperation. The G8
countries and the CTED are jointly striving to promote
consideration by CTAG members of their counter-
terrorism technical assistance by addressing the
specific needs identified by the CTED. In that
connection, a cooperation mechanism between CTAG
and CTED is being established. We intend to continue
such cooperation in the future.

Japan welcomes the extension of the mandate of
the Monitoring Team of the Al-Qaida and Taliban
Sanctions Committee, which was decided last June.
Security Council resolution 1267 (1999) and the other
relevant resolutions continue to constitute one of the
main pillars of United Nations counter-terrorism
activities, and the role of the 1267 Committee remains
crucial. It is true that various problems have been
identified with the administration of the consolidated
list under the 1267 Committee. Achieving the right
balance between security and due process requires
careful consideration. In order to ensure effective
implementation by Member States, it is necessary to
improve the procedures for listing and delisting. We
commend the tireless efforts made by the 1267
Committee under the Belgian Chair in improving both
the list and the procedures. We encourage the
Committee to continue its endeavours in that regard.

Japan welcomes the decision in Security Council
resolution 1810 (2008) to extend the mandate of the
1540 Committee, and appreciates the report of the
Chairperson of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008). We would also like to
commend the efforts exerted by Costa Rica as Chair of
the Committee. Japan attaches great importance to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) as a key
element in our global efforts to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Japan has
taken the initiative to promote the universalization of
the resolution. The Leaders Declaration of the G8
Hokkaido Toyako Summit stressed the importance of
the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
Japan, as the G8 Chair, has also conducted a fruitful
dialogue with the 1540 Committee to examine ways to
further promote the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).

Japan is both honoured and humbled to have the
opportunity to participate in the activities of the three
committees beginning in January 2009. We reiterate
our commitment to strengthen United Nations counter-
terrorism efforts, making full use of our experience in
that area.

