Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The Security Council is once again meeting on an
urgent basis to discuss yet another violent act by Israel,
a Member State of the United Nations, against citizens
of the territory it is occupying illegally and in violation
of a considerable number of resolutions of this very
body.

The recent escalation in attacks and military
operations by Israel, the occupying Power, against the
civilian population in occupied Palestinian territory
have resulted in a significant number of fatalities,
including children, and in a considerable number of
injured persons and a great deal of destruction of
infrastructure. The Cuban delegation energetically
condemns the carrying out of attacks against
Palestinian civilians, as well as the general destruction
being caused by Israeli occupation forces in the
northern Gaza Strip. We also call for an immediate end
to those attacks and for the urgent withdrawal of the
occupation forces.
The State terrorism being practised by Israel,
which knows no limits, must cease. This new hostile
act joins the extensive and growing list of Israeli acts
of aggression and violations of the most basic human
rights and of the moral and physical damage inflicted
on the Palestinian people. Those acts of aggression and
violations include illegal settlements, house
demolitions, arbitrary arrests, extra-judicial executions,
acts of torture, the building of a wall of separation on
Palestinian land and the asphyxiation of the Palestinian
economy. The crisis in Palestinian territories continues
to worsen, while the number of dead and wounded
grows apace, the great majority of those being innocent
civilians. In that regard, we reiterate the need for Israel
to respect international humanitarian law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention.

Cuba reiterates its full support for the cause of
Arab peoples. We especially support the cause of the
Palestinian people against Israel's occupation and
aggression, and we have a deep sense of solidarity with
its resistance and rebellion. At the same time, Cuba
condemns suicide bomb attacks and other acts against
Israeli civilians, who are innocent victims of the spiral
of violence provoked by their Government's policy. We
also object to the manipulation of such isolated acts in
order to question the Palestinian people's legitimate
exercise of self-defence and to justify activities,
whether large-scale or selective, against the Palestinian
population.

We hope that, faced with this clear threat to
international peace and security, the Security Council
will act without employing the double standard that has
characterized its past action on this matter, in order to
urgently and decisively adopt the draft resolution that
is being put forth by Algeria on behalf of the members
of the Arab Group.

If we are sincerely to move forward towards a
fair solution of the Palestinian problem, the United
States should avoid exercising its paralyzing and
complicit vetoes when the Security Council addresses
this matter. It should also immediately withdraw its
military financial support to Israel, including its
provision of weapons - the tanks, missiles,
helicopters and airplanes currently being used against
the civilian population today.

The Cuban delegation would also like to reiterate
that no fair and lasting peace can be achieved in the
Middle East without an end to the Israeli occupation. It
will also not be achieved until the Palestinian people
are able to exercise its legitimate right to establish its
own independent State, with its capital in East
Jerusalem; until all occupied Arab land is returned and
Israel withdraws from the Gaza Strip, the Syrian Golan
and the West Bank, to the 1967 lines; until there is an
end to Israeli provocation in southern Lebanon; until
the return of Palestinian refugees is guaranteed; and
until Israel's illegal settlements are withdrawn from all
occupied Palestinian territory.

