Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to thank Special Envoy
Huang Xia for his first briefing to the Security Council.

I would like to focus on three key points.

First, I will focus on economic development as a
key factor. As the Special Envoy rightly underscored,
development and economic cooperation are important
drivers of peace and development in the Great Lakes
region, as elsewhere, provided that they are based on
respect for human rights and the environment. That
priority, which we also fully support, has been reiterated
numerous times by the President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo himself. This also requires the
creation of a level playing field for investments and
economic opportunities in the region. The activities
and reforms undertaken to address corruption must be
sustained, and there must be increased transparency
in the financial and mining sectors, for instance,
which would make it possible, among other things,
to encourage international financial institutions to
re-engage.

Secondly, our most important message - important
because itunderpins success in all other areas-concerns
the security, political, humanitarian and human rights
situation in the Great Lakes region. We welcome
the new regional momentum, driven in large part by
Presidents Tshilombo Tshisekedi and Lourenco. Of
course, while the overall situation in the Great Lakes
region remains a subject of concern and deserves our
full attention, the latest regional initiatives have the
potential to substantially tip the balance in the fight
against the various armed groups.

On another track, we hope that future presidential,
legislative and local elections in Burundi will be
credible, transparent and inclusive, and place in a
peaceful atmosphere in which the rights and security of
all political actors are guaranteed.

Turning to humanitarian issues, the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2019/783) is particularly
worrying. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
we remain concerned by conflicts among communities
in Djugu, Mahagi and Irumu. Nor must we forget that
aside from the Ebola epidemic, which continues to
afflict the region, malaria and cholera are still claiming
many lives. We also continue to pay close attention to
the human rights situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. As President Tshilombo Tshisekedi
stated, respect for human rights and the restoration of
the rule of law are essential.

It is worrying to note that many incidents of sexual
violence - 41 per cent, according to the most recent
report - continue to be attributed to State actors. This
only strengthens our conviction that professionalizing
the security forces and combating impunity must
remain priorities. President Tshilombo Tshisekedi's
proactive approach is creating a better environment for
carrying out the reforms that have long been awaited by
the Congolese population in this particularly important
area. This proactive attitude, which has included
several preliminary measures, should be encouraged
and supported by the international community so that
the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
can continue their efforts with determination. The
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
as mandated by the Council, has a role to play here and
will remain crucial in this respect.

My third point concerns strategic thinking on the
Great Lakes region. Before the end of the year, we will
focus on the future of MONUSCO, while elections
in Burundi are planned for next year. It will be vital
to devise, as quickly as possible, a United Nations
approach to the Great Lakes region - a concerted
approach that provides even greater coherence and that
will be decidedly forward-looking.

