Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to thank
Ms. Minagano, Mr. Gilmour and Mr. Shearer for their
important briefings.

The period under consideration saw some
important developments in the process of implementing
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, which has
been characterized thus far by its slowness. In May, the
parties agreed by consensus to a six-month extension
to the pre-transitional period in order to facilitate the
resolution of critical aspects such as the delimitation
of state boundaries and military cantonment and
redeployment, inter alia. Progress in these areas has
been limited and lacking in coordination and order.

In this context of political uncertainty, we are
encouraged by the sustained ceasefire, ongoing
rapprochement between the Government and
the opposition, and the tireless initiatives of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and other international actors, such as the Vatican
which have enabled the revitalized peace agreement to
survive and created forums in which to discuss ways to
move forward and fulfil all pending tasks.

Unfortunately, this scenario has been plagued by
threats against the civilian population and by a serious
humanitarian crisis, including increasing acts of sexual
violence and intercommunal conflicts, as well as the
obstruction of access to United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) and humanitarian personnel. It
is therefore essential that the militias and Government
forces allow humanitarian personnel to move freely and

without restrictions on the ground.

We are particularly concerned that 57 per cent
of the population are suffering from severe or worse
levels of food insecurity, with 45,000 persons enduring
a potentially catastrophic situation. This reality is
exacerbated by the negative impact of the lack of rain
and the effects of climate change, in addition to the
latent threat posed by the incidences of Ebola reported
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Beyond this political and humanitarian crisis,
we are concerned about the vulnerability of the
civilian population and serious reports of human and
sexual rights violations. We are also concerned by
the limitations faced by UNMISS personnel in terms
of their capacity to address, monitor and investigate
these violations.

With regard to crimes of a sexual nature, we are
concerned that these cases of abuse are not being
investigated or prosecuted and that the Government's
actions to eradicate this scourge are inadequate.
Impunity should not be the norm. We urge the
Government to establish a process of accountability
against perpetrators and we call for the provision of
comprehensive services to survivors of sexual violence.

In this regard, we commend the Sudan People's
Liberation Army for launching an action plan for sexual
violence in conflict, focused on the accountability of
commandos for acts perpetrated by their subordinates.
We also welcome the initiative of UNMISS and the
United Nations Development Programme to hold
discussions with the authorities regarding the future
establishment of mobile courts and the deployment
of prosecutors in areas with insufficient or no
prosecutorial capacity. All avenues must be pursued
in order to establish accountability and put an end to
this outrageous culture of impunity, while investing
in mediation and peacebuilding efforts with the
participation of women and youth.

It is imperative that this political process not become
stagnant and that this new deadline be utilized in a wise
and steady manner in order to ensure a sustainable South
Sudanese-led peace process with enhanced regional
and international support. There are no shortcuts or
express routes to achieving peace in South Sudan. Now
is the time to take advantage of the momentum and
foster political will and diplomatic creativity to avoid
the failure of the revitalized agreement. This is the tool
we must use; there is no contingency plan.

