Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish at the outset to thank the Secretary-General for
his report and Assistant Secretary-General Tiirk for his
briefing.

Since our consideration of this item last
November, the Security Council, on the basis of
progress achieved in the peace process in Bougainville,
finally reached agreement on extending the mandate of
the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOB). This demonstrates the concern of the
Council members over the peace process in
Bougainville and the importance which they attach to
it.

At present, with the cooperation of the parties to
the Bougainville Peace Agreement, including the
Government of Papua New Guinea, the peace process
is, on the whole, continuing to register progress. China
is gratified by this development. We hope that the
parties will continue to display a positive and flexible
spirit so as to facilitate the final peaceful settlement of
the question of Bougainville.

For various reasons, weapons collection has not
been able to proceed on schedule. The members of the
Council expressed their concern over this issue at our
last briefing. Weapons collection is a determining
factor in the work on the Constitution and has an
important bearing on the peace process. China
therefore welcomes the Action Plan for the Completion
of Weapons Collection, adopted not long ago, and
urges the parties to take practical action to fulfil their
commitments under the Plan.

The Peace Monitoring Group has played an
important role in assisting UNPOB in its work.
Weapons collection has not yet been completed and the
peace process is also at a critical juncture. China, like
other members of the Council, is closely following the
development of the situation in Bougainville and is
willing to create conditions to allow UNPOB to
continue to play its due role in the peace process.
UNPOB has long carried out effective and fruitful
work. China should like to express its appreciation to
UNPOB and will always support it in its work.

