Mr. Richardson (United States of America): Liberia
has taken important steps forward in this mandate in the
political and security fields. Most importantly, there is a
real possibility of elections in an environment relatively free
of fighting and intimidation. Progress on disarmament has
taken place, and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) has
deployed in nearly every part of the country. Under
Operation Assured Lift, the United States Air Force
transported an additional 1,200 West African peacekeepers
to Liberia, which helped ECOMOG expand its presence as
election preparations get under way.

But risks to peace remain, and we must continue to be
vigilant. Large numbers of fighters have not disarmed, and
the factions, although formally non-existent after 31
January, have not fully disbanded their command and
control structures. ECOMOG continues to discover weapons
in various parts of the country, even in Monrovia. The
stakes in this election are high, and the threat of violence
has not disappeared. We appeal to the former faction
leaders and their fighters to complete disarmament by
turning in to ECOMOG all remaining weapons.

The Liberian people deserve the best election possible,
and the United States is concerned at the delays in
inaugurating the independent Elections Commission. As
each day passes, the 30 May deadline becomes more
challenging, given the considerable logistical work that free
and fair elections require. We hope that the Elections
Commission and the Supreme Court will be installed and
will start to function without further delay.

We are also very concerned that a level playing field
be created for all candidates to compete openly and for all
citizens to vote freely in the elections. We would like to see
equal access by the various political parties to the media,
particularly radio, to enable them to share their views
with as many people as possible. The Secretary-General's
report notes the importance of radio communication for
voter education, and we look forward to further details on
United Nations plans for radio programming.
The United States supports the fullest possible
voluntary participation by all Liberians in the election
process. The Liberian Government and electoral
authorities, and Member States in which Liberian refugees
are located, should make every effort to achieve that
objective.

In voting for today's draft resolution, the United
States supports the extension of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) through June to
enable UNOMIL to assist with preparations for and
observation of these elections. We welcome the
Secretariat's assurance to the Council that the new
electoral activities can be carried out within UNOMIL's
existing resources. We commend all those who have
offered financial contributions and other support to
Liberia's elections. The voluntary contributions for the
elections should be fully utilized before election activities
are funded out of the UNOMIL budget. Once the
elections have concluded, including a run-off if necessary,
the role for the military observers should be completed
and UNOMIL should begin the drawdown of its
operation. We would like to see some of UNOMIL's
activities, particularly the monitoring of human rights,
continue as programs under the appropriate United
Nations agencies after UN OMIL formally concludes as a
mission.

Liberia and the international community look
towards elections in the hope that the long, devastating
cycle of destruction has ended. UNOMIL, in conjunction
with ECOMOG, has contributed greatly to the peace
process as it has moved farther ahead than at any time in
the past. ECOMOG's role in providing security is of
primary importance and continues to be essential for the
final stretch in the difficult run-up to elections.

The people of Liberia will soon demonstrate that
they can peacefully elect new leaders for the future. We
wish them, in collaboration with ECOWAS, the
Organization of African Unity, the United Nations and
their international friends, the greatest possible success in
this democratic endeavour.

