Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
First and foremost, I would like to welcome the presence
this morning of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Her Excellency
Ms. Delcy Rodriguez Gomez, and thank Venezuela for
having convened today's debate on the maintenance
of peace and security and the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing on the topic.

There is no doubt that today, when we discuss the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) as
a relevant theme on our common agenda that seeks
to transform the world, we cannot ignore the fact
that progress will be possible only if we guarantee
a safe world without conflict. The maintenance
of international peace and security, which is the
Organization's main objective, is the Security Council's
primary responsibility. The scope of the responsibility
conferred to the Security Council by the 51 founder
Members in 1946, including Panama, is relevant, and
therefore the obligation to generate conditions for a
lasting peace is unavoidable.

The United Nations cannot allow that armed
conflicts continue taking human lives, that civilians,
mainly women and children, should continue to be
exposed to violent extremism and international terrorism
or that humanitarian crises and forced displacements
should persist. The current global situation, which is
significantly different to that of 70 years ago, demands
effective preventive action by the Security Council
as guarantor of peace. It cannot focus only on armed
intervention, the establishment of subsequent peace
operations or when a situation is at breaking point. The
purposes and principles of the Charter continue to be
relevant; we cannot regard them as a norm only. Rather,
we should regard them as a moral obligation that we
States and this Organization have to humankind.

The adoption of effective collective measures to
prevent and elimimate threats to peace, as well as the
resolution of conflicts through peaceful means, is an
obligation of the Security Council that demands actions,
carried out in full responsibility and that must be guided
without exception by those principles. A good example
is the request made by the Colombian Government and
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionaries de Colombia just
a few days ago for the United Nations, through a draft
resolution adopted by the Security Council, to establish
a political mission as an international component
following the signing of agreements between the
parties. We fully agree that it is very rare for a country
that seeks the support of the Security Council and
requests its help regarding a peace process.

Panama has been insisting on the need for a
paradigm change, an ethical overhaul that the entity
requires in order to humanize the agendas and the make
actions of all United Nations forums more transparent,
particularly the Security Council, where sadly the
themes in question have faces and numbers that today
are the populations of Syria, Palestine, Yemen and
Burundi, among many others. We must understand that
the need for just and appropriate action is not a matter
for the Organization or to favour specific positions;
rather it is a matter of favouring the 120 million people
who are in need, the 60 million displaced people who
right now, as we debate principles here in the Chamber,
continue to wait for resolute action from the United
Nations. As a current member of the Group of Friends
on the Responsibility to Protect, Panama supports
those who call for and demand the protection of human
beings to prevent them becoming victims of mass
atrocities. Such iniatives as Human Rights Up Front
operationalize that call.

Panama promotes greater transparency within the
working methods of the Security Council and greater
democratization of its decision-making process so
that it can respond to the founding principles of the
Organization, which, I reiterate, are and will continue
to be relevant. With a vision that human rights should
prompt nations to ensure the existence of regional
international peace and security, we are obliged to
adhere to the United Nations Charter because so long
ago, quite rightly, its founders correctly placed the
human being at the centre of the debate. However,
respecting the purposes and principles of the Charter
is to strengthen the inspiration of those who achieved
this purpose after a war, promoting respect for human
beings, the nucleus of all societies, to achieve the
desired firm and sustainable peace.

If it is true that, according to the classic concept
of a State as the main subject of international law, it
is intrinsically linked to the concept of sovereignty,
which for judicial effects rest on two fundamental
principles - the legal equality of States and
non-intervention in internal affairs - principles that
are enshrined in the United Nations Charter. Respect
for human rights is aligned with international law.
Human rights are the direct expression of human
dignity of the human being, and the obligation to
protect them derives from various internationally
agreed instruments, including the United Nations
Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and the American Declaration of the Rights and Duties
of Man. Not a single State can hide behind the principle
of non-intervention to justify failure to meet obligations
in the field of human rights, acquired pursuant to
international law, both customary and conventional.
Expressions of concern or disapproval with regard to
any violations of human rights are legitimate in all
circumstances and do not constitute intervention in the
internal affairs of any State.

We face a year of global challenges that coincides
with the selection of a new Secretary-General. We
look forward to a selection process that sets positive
precedents, not just because the particpation of women
was promoted for the first time, but also because of
the transparency of a process whose result will be the
reflection of the higher interests and representation of
the Organization as a whole.

I conclude by stressing the firm link that exists
between development and security. There cannot be
peace without development and, still less, development
without peace, which is why consistency of action by the
Organization in the light of the purposes and principles
that its creation promoted is increasinly pressing.

