Mr. Tarrago (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I am
pleased, Sir, to see you presiding over the Security
Council this month with your usual efficiency.

(spoke in English)

I thank you, Mr. President, for holding an open
debate on mediation and settlement of disputes, which
is rather appropriate and timely. After all, it seems that
we are entering a new era, in which renewed efforts are
being made to settle disputes by peaceful means rather
than by military intervention. This debate reminds us
of a fundamental role of the United Nations that has
not received the attention and support needed. The
debate is also consistent with the current emphasis on
strengthening preventive diplomacy at the United
Nations.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive and stimulating report
(S/2009/ 189) and Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for
his briefing.

There seems to be widespread agreement on the
merits of mediation and other means of pacific
settlement of disputes referred to in Article 33 of the
Charter. There is equally general support for making
broader use of mediation and for a strong role for the
United Nations in such a domain. That was made clear
at the 2005 World Summit. Our leaders emphasized the
existing obligation to settle disputes by peaceful
means, in accordance with Chapter VI of the Charter
and with the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. They also recognized the important
role of the good offices of the Secretary-General,
including in the mediation of disputes, and the need to
strengthen the Secretariat's capacity in that area.

Based on such solid political consensus, Member
States need to address a number of conceptual, political
and practical aspects related to mediation, such as
those addressed by the Secretary-General in his report.
I wish to share my delegation's perspectives on a few
of them.

Mediation can be a powerful tool to help reach a
solution in various stages of a dispute, but we believe
the sooner it is used, the better. An effective mediation
process can assist opponents to reach a settlement
before the dispute turns into an armed conflict. Once
violence flares, making peace becomes more
challenging and human costs start rising, often
dramatically.

Early mediation will be easier to provide if the
United Nations and other actors develop and keep the
expertise needed for immediate and/or rapid use. In
that regard, we welcome the establishment of the
Mediation Support Unit within the Department of
Political Affairs and its recent strengthening through
the addition of seven posts. Likewise, we support
efforts to help regional organizations to reinforce their
own mechanisms for dispute settlement, as well as to
assist national and local institutions in that respect.

Such cooperation is crucial, since actors other
than the United Nations can be very effective as
mediators and in some cases may stand higher chances
of success. Recent examples of successful regional or
subregional mediation come to mind. In the Americas,
the Organization of American States was able to assist
Colombia and Ecuador, and in Africa the Southern
African Development Community was key to bringing
about national unity in Zimbabwe. Even in cases where
others are better placed to mediate a dispute, the
Organization should still be ready to provide support,
both political and technical, to those taking the lead, if
needed.

The Security Council makes good use of
mediation when, for instance, it decides on the
mandate of some peacekeeping operations, but it could
resort more frequently and decisively to the peaceful
settlement of disputes. We know that the Council's firm
support to mediators strengthens their position and
encourages parties to seriously engage in negotiations.
Other measures could be explored.

Apart from assisting in the settlement of specific
disputes, further recourse to Chapter VI contributes to
the long-term sustainability of action under Chapter
VII. Early efforts to peacefully resolve disputes reduce
threats to peace and security and therefore help to
maintain the demand for peacekeeping operations at
levels that the United Nations and Member States can
manage adequately. From that perspective, greater use
of mediation can be a part of the Council's overall
response to the increased magnitude and complexity of
peacekeeping.

Therefore, my delegation agrees with the
recommendations submitted by the Secretary-General.
We attach particular importance to strengthening
conflict prevention and resolution through early
engagement, developing close partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations and promoting
national and local capacity in conflict prevention and
resolution.

In conclusion, I wish to stress my delegation's
continued interest in this debate. We are also willing to
explore how to further integrate innovative means of
peaceful settlement of disputes into the agenda of the
principal organs of the United Nations, including the
Security Council.

