Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My delegation would like to thank Mr. Michel
Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
for the quality of his briefing on the situation in
Burundi, and we commend his very hard work in that
country. We would also like to thank Ambassador
Jiirg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, for his briefing on the
evolving sociopolitical situation in Burundi.

cote d'Ivoire has taken note of the efforts that the
Burundian authorities and the international community
have made to stabilize the country in the past few
years. However, we are still concerned about the state
ofprogress in the political process, human rights issues
and the humanitarian situation. With regard to the
political process, we are concerned about the impasse
in the political dialogue, despite the international
community's mediation efforts. We regret the fact that
the Inter-Burundian Dialogue conducted under the
auspices of the East African Community, whose fourth
session was held in Uganda between 27 November and
8 December 2017, has made no significant progress at a
time when important deadlines such as the draft review
of the Constitution, scheduled for May of this year, and
the 2020 presidential election, are approaching.

However, we hope that the changes envisaged in
the area of constitutional reform will not undermine
the achievements of the historic Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi, which has
enabled the country to enjoy 10 years of peace and
stability and which, regardless of differences of
interpretation, remains central to reconciliation between
Burundi's political stakeholders. In that regard, we urge
the parties in Burundi to begin an inclusive political
dialogue and encourage the Government to work to
establish a peaceful sociopolitical atmosphere that will
enable all stakeholders to participate in the country's
peace and reconciliation process, on the basis of the
Arusha Agreement.

Cote d'Ivoire is concerned about the persistent
allegations of human rights violations in Burundi. We
urge the Burundian authorities to make every effort to
investigate them and, if they are confirmed, to take all
steps necessary to put an end to them and to identify
the perpetrators and bring them to justice. We are also
concerned about the massive displacement of people that
has been adding to the number of Burundian refugees in
neighbouring countries. We encourage the Government
of Burundi and the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights to resume negotiations with a view
to signing a memorandum of understanding on the
legal framework for their cooperation and its practical
aspects. We urge the Burundian authorities to engage
in a constructive dialogue with the Human Rights
Council-mandated Commission of Inquiry on Burundi
in order to shed light on the allegations of extrajudicial
executions, arrests and arbitrary detention, enforced
disappearance, torture and inhuman, cruel and
degrading treatment.

We remain concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Burundi. The fact is that
despite the possibility of voluntary returns, the number
of Burundian refugees living in neighbouring countries
is still significant, and the country's socioeconomic
situation does not seem conducive to their rapid return
and sustainable reintegration into Burundi's social
fabric. This is an opportunity, however, to welcome the
signing on 30 August 2017 of the tripartite agreement
between the Government of Burundi, the Government
of Tanzania and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, which has enabled
nearly 13,000 Burundian refugees to return. In that
regard, we encourage the Burundian authorities to
create conditions conducive to these refugees' return
and urge the United Nations and the country's bilateral
and humanitarian partners to provide support and
assistance. My delegation welcomes the launch by the
United Nations of a 2018 emergency plan for Burundi,
aimed at providing protection and lifesaving assistance
to those in need throughout the country.

In conclusion, we appeal to the international
community in general, and the United Nations in
particular, to further support the efforts of the East
African Community and the mediator and facilitator of
the Inter-Burundian Dialogue to restore stability and
national reconciliation in Burundi. Lastly, we urge the
Council to maintain its unity on the subject and give
sustained attention to the situation in Burundi.

