Mr. Toure (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), for her detailed briefing on developments
in that country. We also thank Ms. Josephine Mbela for
her enlightening briefing.

As the holding of the presidential, legislative and
provincial elections in the Democratic Republic of
Congo is five weeks away, my delegation commends
the Independent National Electoral Commission for its
successful preparation of the electoral process, which
will enter its crucial phase at the 22 November launch
of the electoral campaign. In that regard, cote d'Ivoire
calls on all Congolese political actors involved in the
electoral process to carry out a peaceful campaign
and create an environment conducive to the holding
on 23 December of free, transparent and credible
elections. We also encourage the Commission to
strengthen its efforts to raise awareness among voters
on how to use voting machines and to inform them that
they are secure.

On the eve of the launching of the electoral
campaign, the health situation in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, marked by the
continuing Ebola epidemic, remains a matter of concern
for my delegation. Indeed, the electoral campaign,
which will bring about large gatherings and movements
of the population, gives rise to fears of high risks of
the spread of the disease. My delegation therefore calls
on national and international health authorities to be
vigilant in strengthening preventive measures during
the electoral period. To that end, we welcome the joint
evaluation mission on the situation on the ground
carried out on 5 November in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo by Mr. Jean Pierre Lacroix, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Mr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Director-General
of the World Health Organization, a few days after
the adoption of resolution 2439 (2018), on the Ebola
epidemic in the Democratic Republic of Congo. We
also commend the work of the United Nations staff,
MONUSCO, the Ministry of Health of the Democratic
Republic of Congo and all the bilateral and multilateral
partners who are in a challenging environment leading
the fight against that epidemic.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire appreciates the efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
all the staff of MONUSCO and the United Nations
agencies, regional and international organizations and
all the partners that provide support to the Democratic
Republic of Congo. We encourage all of them to
maintain and increase their level of assistance to that
country with a view to restoring peace and stability.

