Mr. Feltman: At the outset, I would like to reiterate,
on behalf of the Secretary-General, my solidarity with
the people and the Governments of Iraq, Afghanistan,
the United Kingdom, the Philippines, Egypt and Iran
following the recent terrorist attacks on their cities.
I call on all Member States to redouble their efforts
to strengthen international cooperation to address
terrorism and violent extremism, and bring those
responsible for these despicable attacks to justice.

I am grateful for this opportunity to brief the
Security Council on the fifth report of the Secretary-
General on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) (Da'esh) to international peace
and security and the range of United Nations efforts
in support of Member States in countering the threat
(S/20l7/467).

The report was prepared with the input of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da'esh),
Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, and in close collaboration
with the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
(CTITF), the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre
and other relevant entities.

Since January 2016, the four previous reports to
the Security Council on the threat posed by ISIL have
focused on the global landscape; South-East Asia;
Yemen and East Africa; Libya and Afghanistan; and
Europe, North Africa and West Africa. This fifth
report has taken a global approach, with a focus on the
financing of terrorism.

The report stresses that ISIL, despite continuous
military pressure, continues to resist, particularly
in Mosul and Raqqa. At the same time, ISIL has
reorganized its military structure, giving more power
to local commanders, and is more focused than ever
before on enabling and inspiring attacks outside of
conflict zones.

The threat from ISIL has been intensified by its
use of the Internet and social media to disseminate
propaganda online to a wide international audience.
Although the volume of such messages has declined
over the past 16 months, the threat persists as supporters
outside Syria and Iraq collect and redistribute
that propaganda.

In Europe, ISIL has used its online presence to
encourage supporters to mount attacks in their countries
of residence. That has led to multiple attacks, including
in Belgium, France, Germany, the Russian Federation,
Sweden, Turkey and the United Kingdom. Some attacks
were carried out by foreign terrorist fighter returnees,
while others were conducted by individuals who had not
travelled to conflict zones. Investigations demonstrate
that the perpetrators, despite being sometimes labelled
as lone actors, often received support or resources from
facilitators and, in a number of cases, were in direct
contact with ISIL enablers.

The report notes a decrease in the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters and in the overall number of ISIL
fighters during the past 16 months. However, returnees
and the relocation of fighters from the conflict zones
to other regions now present a considerable threat to
international security.

Although ISIL's financial situation has steadily
declined over the past 16 months, it continues to rely
chiefly on the same two revenue streams, namely, sales
of hydrocarbons and extortion/taxation, which may
amount to tens of millions of dollars per month. ISIL
has also drawn income from antiquities smuggling,
agricultural products, the sale of electricity, exploitation
of mineral resources such as phosphates and sulfuric
acid, external donations, kidnapping for ransom
and human trafficking. As ISIL loses its control on
population centres and its forces continue to dwindle,
it will also have substantially lower costs. Despite
growing liquidity shortages, ISIL may be able to stretch
further its existing resources.

ISIL continues to fund affiliates, while urging
them to become more self-sufficient and proactive in
developing internal revenue streams. Money services,
including exchange houses and money couriers, continue
to be a preferred method for ISIL and its supporters to
move funds across borders. As Member States consider
efforts to counter ISIL financing, a key concern is
how to allow reconstruction and stabilization funds to
flow into liberated areas, including by reconnecting
international financial structures, without also enabling
ISIL remnants to abuse those structures and exploit that
new liquidity.

With regard to ISIL's evolving threat outside
of Syria and Iraq, ISIL-affiliated groups in North
Africa have shown considerable resilience and pose a
serious danger. For example, while ISIL in Libya has
been weakened after losing a significant portion of
the territory it controlled, its threat persists in Libya
and in neighbouring countries. In West Africa, ISIL
is challenging established Al-Qaida affiliates. In East
Africa, emerging ISIL affiliates operating in Puntland
and parts of southern Somalia compound the threat
posed by Al-Qaida's affiliates. Al-Shabaab, ISIL in
Somalia and ISIL in Yemen represent an increasing
menace. ISIL in Afghanistan is shifting its focus to the
north of the country. The threat level has intensified
in South-East Asia, with ISIL directing more of its
attention, including its propaganda, at the region.

I welcome the efforts of the Council over the past
months to adopt resolutions on countering terrorist
narratives; protecting critical infrastructure from
terrorist attacks; stemming the destruction, looting
and smuggling of cultural heritage sites and artefacts,
as well as their illicit trade and trafficking carried out
by terrorist groups or in a context of armed conflict;
and addressing the terrorist threat in the Lake Chad
basin region.

Member States, the UnitedNations and international,
regional and subregional organizations continue to
strengthen existing tools while also developing new
ones to address the rapidly evolving threat posed by
ISIL, including the threat posed by returning foreign
terrorist fighters. In that context, the report highlights
some points that deserve attention.

First, since the adoption of resolution 2253 (2015),
11 associated individuals have been listed in the ISIL
and Al-Qaida sanctions list. Among them, eight are
listed as financiers or financial facilitators.

Secondly, Member States are making substantial
progress on adapting their legal and operational
frameworks to the requirements of Security Council
resolutions in order to address the terrorist financing
and foreign terrorist fighter threats. Notwithstanding
that, more work needs to be done with regard to the
implementation of those norms and mechanisms,
including in the context of terrorist asset-freezing,
cross-border movement of cash, and human rights-
compliant travel measures to address the foreign
terrorist fighter threat.

Thirdly, the efforts of United Nations entities, as
well as those of other key actors, such as INTERPOL
and the Financial Action Task Force, have helped
strengthen regional and national frameworks to
counter terrorism financing and stem the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters. Other examples in the report
include CTED's assessments and identification of good
practices, and the capacity-building initiatives of the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the United
Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research
Institute, including on the legal and judicial aspects of
terrorism financing, kidnapping for ransom and asset
freezing, and border security and management.

The CTITF office and CTED recently concluded the
second iteration of the Security Council-mandated all-
of-United Nations capacity-building implementation
plan to stem the flow of foreign terrorist fighters.
While the projects and the plan continue to address
the entire life-cycle of the foreign terrorist fighter
phenomenon, the updated version focuses on the tail
end ofthe life-cycle, with a number ofprojects related to
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration to support
Member States in their efforts to address returnees. A
number of projects have now been completed or are
well under way. The plan now includes 50 projects,
submitted by 13 entities, with a total budget of
$107 million over five years. Forty-one per cent of the
total budget is funded.

Fourthly, the United Nations is assisting Member
States and regions most at risk and where United
Nations support can bring added value. For example,
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, as
mandated by resolution 2195 (2015) and presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/24, and in collaboration with
other CTITF entities, is developing a regional all-of-
United Nations integrated assistance for countering
terrorism initiative for the Group of Five (G-5) Sahel
countries, as well as a national initiative for Mali.

As mentioned in the report, the United Nations
engagement in the Sahel will evolve in response to
the continued threats posed by terrorism, violent
extremism, transnational organized crime and illicit
trans-border trafficking. Partnerships between the
United Nations system and regional stakeholders need
to be strengthened to effectively support G-5 countries'
efforts to fight terrorism and illicit trafficking. The
United Nations is renewing its engagement in the region,
following an independent review of the Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel.

Since the first report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to resolution 2253 (2015), ISIL and its affiliates
have remained under continuous military pressure and
experienced significant setbacks. At the same time, ISIL
is becoming an increasingly transnational threat, which
severely undermines international peace and security.
Consequently, the Secretary-General welcomes the
focus that the Security Council has put on this matter
and urges it to enhance multilateral cooperation to
address the threats and challenges he has reported on.

The Secretary-General considers countering
terrorism and preventing violent extremism to be one
of the highest priorities of the Organization. That is
why, in his report contained in documentA /71/858,
currently being considered by the General Assembly,
he recommends the establishment of a new office of
counter-terrorism headed by an Under-Secretary-
General. I am convinced that the new office will provide
stronger leadership to our counter-terrorism efforts,
enhance United Nations coordination and increase the
impact of our assistance to Member States.

