Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I have the honour to
present the 90-day report of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), in accordance
with paragraph 18 (h) of the same resolution. The
report covers the period from 5 December 2012 to
4 March 2013, during which time the Committee held
one meeting and conducted additional work using the
non-objection procedure envisioned by paragraph 15 of
the guidelines for the conduct of its work.

At the informal consultations on 13 February, the
Committee exchanged preliminary views on a case
reported by a Member State in a note verbale dated
6 February 2013, according to which the authorities of
that State had intercepted, on 23 January, a vessel that
it suspected was carrying illicit weapons from Iran to
be delivered to that State. Given the serious allegations
contained in the report, the Committee encouraged the
Panel of Experts to expedite its investigation of the
incident and report to the Committee on its findings.
The Committee stands ready to examine in an impartial
and objective manner and, based on solid evidence,
take appropriate action upon receipt of that report from
the Panel.

The Committee also discussed the incident report by
the Panel dated 11 January 2013 on the missile launches
by Iran during the Great Prophet VII exercise, conducted
from 2 to 4 July 2012. Members of the Committee took
note of the Panel's conclusion that Iran's launches of
Shahab-l and Shahab-3 missiles during the exercises

constituted a violation of paragraph 9 of resolution
1929 (2010). Several Committee members expressed
great concern that Iran's launches represented a clear
violation of resolution 1929 (2010), condemned the
launches and suggested that the Committee consider
appropriate actions in response. The Committee is
currently exploring those options. In the meantime,
the Committee emphasizes the importance of all
Member States redoubling their efforts to implement
all measures required in resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747
(2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010).

As my predecessor informed the Council in
December (see S/PV.6888), the Panel had been tasked
by the Committee with compiling publicly available
statements made by Iranian officials and alleged
recipients of Iranian military assistance regarding
potential violations of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747
(2007). The compilation was transmitted by the Panel
to the Committee on 14 December 2012, and was
considered at the informal consultations I mentioned
earlier. During the discussion, several members
expressed the view that it would be appropriate to
send a letter to Iran inquiring as to the veracity of the
statements reflected in the compilation.

While not questioning the possibility of sending
such a letter to Iran in the future, other members
believed that the Committee should be prudent and
that further efforts should be made first in order to
obtain material evidence of the alleged arms transfers
mentioned in the statements. The Committee believes
strongly that any transfer of arms or related materiel in
violation of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007) is a
matter of grave concern. In line with its mandate, the
Committee stands ready to examine alleged violations
in an impartial and objective manner and, based on
solid evidence, to take appropriate action regarding
them. Furthermore, during the informal consultations,
the Panel briefed the Committee on its investigative and
outreach activities.

During the reporting period, the Committee
received communications from five Member States
relating to action they had taken in implementation of
the relevant Security Council measures. One of those
was the letter I mentioned earlier concerning a possible
violation of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007),
which was discussed by the Committee at its informal
consultations on 13 February. In the second, dated
17 January 2013, a State informed the Committee of
an alleged breach of the embargo on Iran by a company
located in that State. In the third, on 24 January 2013,
a State provided details relating to the inspection and
seizure, on 15 March 2011, of three shipping containers
of arms and related materiel onboard the ship
M/V Victoria. In the fourth, on 1 February 2013, a State
reported to the Committee the arrest of a businessman
suspected of violating the national law implementing
the relevant United Nations sanctions measures. Lastly,
the fifth State transmitted, on 14 February, a report on
the shipments confiscated by its respective authorities
during the second quarter of 2012, and on measures
taken to prevent transit of shipments to Iran that are
suspected to contain prohibited items. All those cases
are currently being investigated by the Panel.

The Committee is pleased that States are responding
to its requests for information on reported incidents of
non-compliance. I would like to take this opportunity to
encourage all States to cooperate with the Committee
and its Panel of Experts in reporting and investigating
possible sanctions violations.

Following up on the Panel's findings in other
cases of non-compliance, the Committee agreed, on
20 December 2012, to designate two entities, namely,
Yas Air and SAD Import Export Company. A note
verbale was sent on 8 January 2013 to all Member
States informing them of the designations. On a related
matter, the Committee sent, on 23 January 2013, another
note verbale to all States requesting them to provide, on
a voluntary basis, additional identifying information
regarding the individuals on the Committee's
consolidated list. I take this opportunity to renew that
request for information.

The Committee continues its efforts to assist States
implement the relevant Security Council measures.
I am pleased to report that the Committee adopted,
on 26 December 2012, an implementation assistance
notice (IAN) on conventional arms and related materiel
and, on 27 February of this year, an IAN on financial
and business measures. Both were posted on the
Committee's website.

The Committee decided, on 4 March, to update the
lists ofnuclear-related and ballistic missile-related items
referred to in paragraph 13 of resolution 1929 (2010).
The updated lists are available on the Committee's
website.

During the reporting period, the Committee
received a number of written inquiries concerning
the application of the sanctions. In two letters dated
16 January 2013, the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization (UNIDO) requested
confirmation that two proposals for technical assistance
to Iran by UNIDO did not contravene the applicable
Security Council sanctions regime. On 1 February, the
Committee informed UNIDO that the projects were not
prohibited by the relevant resolutions.

In a letter dated 10 December 2012, a State sought
information from the Committee on the return of the
funds concerning an advance payment made by the
Ministry of Defence of the Islamic Republic of Iran to
a company located in that State. As the contract was
signed before 2007, when the relevant measures were
imposed, the Committee advised the State that there
were no obstacles to the return of funds.

The Committee also received communications from
two Member States, one dated 10 December 2012 and
the other 4 January 2013, requesting information as to
whether certain specified entities were included in the
consolidated list of individuals and entities subject to
the travel ban and assets freeze pursuant to the relevant
Council resolutions. Committee members exchanged
views as to the possible ways to respond to such queries
during the informal consultations I mentioned earlier.

In addition, the Committee received a communication
dated 20 February from a State requesting an exemption
from the travel ban on a designated Iranian national who
had been invited to attend the high-level International
Atomic Energy Agency conference on nuclear power
in the twenty-first century in Saint Petersburg from
27 to 29 June 2013. The request is currently under
consideration by the Committee.

The Committee also received four notifications:
three from a Member State with reference to paragraph
5 (c) of resolution 1737 (2006), concerning the delivery
of items for use in the nuclear power plant in Bushehr,
Iran; and one from another Member State submitted
pursuant to paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006) and
paragraph 4 of resolution 1747 (2007), in connection
with the unfreezing of funds to make a payment due
under a contract entered into prior to the listing of an
entity.

Finally, I am very happy to note that during the
reporting period the Committee received a report from
Saudi Arabia on the implementation of resolutions 1737
(2006) and 1929 (2010).
