Mr. Ali (Malaysia): Allow me, first of all, to
congratulate you, Mr. Minister, and Indonesia on your
country's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of November. We are pleased to
see you preside over this principal organ of the United
Nations, which has primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. We also
wish to express our appreciation to you for convening
this open debate on the role of regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security. We believe that that is a most relevant
topic for discussion by the Council, in the light of the
many challenges confronting various regions and the
role that regional and subregional organizations could
play in maintaining peace and security in those regions.

Indeed, regional and subregional organizations
could contribute constructively to the work of the
Security Council in ensuring the prevalence of peace
and security in particular regions, particularly in light
of the ever-increasing demands placed upon the
resources of the United Nations and the complexities
of global politics. We share the view of former
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, that

"regional action as a matter of decentralization,
delegation and cooperation with United Nations
efforts could not only lighten the burden on the
Council but also contribute to a deeper sense of
participation, consensus and democratization in
international affairs". (S/24111, para. 64)

It is evident that the role of regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of peace
and security through the peaceful settlement of
disputes is recognized by the United Nations, pursuant
to Chapter VIII of its Charter. We are beginning to
witness an increased role played by regional
organizations such as the African Union and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in
countries facing conflict in their respective regions.
Without prejudice to the capability and effectiveness of
the United Nations, regional arrangements should be
seen as a complement to the Organization's mediation
and conflict resolution approaches, as regional and
subregional organizations generally have a better
understanding of the interplay of local and regional
dynamics.

The countries of South-East Asia, including
Malaysia, are familiar with the effectiveness of
regional arrangements in the promotion and
maintenance of peace and security. Although founded
initially as a regional grouping focusing on economic,
social and cultural cooperation, ASEAN has
progressively evolved towards achieving regional
solidarity and that has contributed to peace and
stability in the region.

The Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in
Southeast Asia, to which all ASEAN members adhere,
enshrines the principles of mutual respect for one
another's sovereignty, non-interference in internal
affairs, the peaceful settlement of intraregional
disputes and effective cooperation among its
signatories. It states that ASEAN political and security
dialogue and cooperation should aim to promote
regional peace and stability by enhancing regional
resilience, and that this resilience shall be achieved
through cooperation in all fields among its member
States. Through political dialogue and confidence-
building, ASEAN has well managed the occasional
bilateral tensions and conflicts among its members.

Malaysia maintains the importance of adhering to
the principle of non-interference in internal affairs,
particularly in the context of inter-State relations. The
so-called constructive intervention policy advocated by
some, involving loud criticism, adversarial posturing
and grandstanding, would only bring more harm than
good to the promotion of neighbourly relations. We are
in favour of engaging other countries in the region in a
dialogue on peace and security and in implementing
confidence-building measures. In this regard, the
ASEAN Regional Forum has served as a useful basis
for gathering all concerned parties in the region
through a process of dialogue on issues related to
regional peace and security. The objectives of the ARF
are to foster constructive dialogue and consultation on
political and security issues of common interest and
concern and to contribute to efforts towards confidence
building and preventive diplomacy.

Too often, the international community still takes
a reactionary and knee-jerk approach and is
preoccupied with the symptoms and consequences of
conflicts rather than addressing their root causes.
Learning from the lessons of other regional conflicts,
ASEAN has taken a more proactive and preventive
approach by investing seriously in conflict prevention
and peacebuilding. As conflicts are more often than not
sparked by competition for limited economic
resources, ASEAN's approach towards subregional
peace and security has been one of cooperation in the
economic, social and cultural fields for the mutual
benefit of all of its members. The peace, security and
stability that ASEAN has helped to maintain in South-
East Asia have been conducive to development,
creating a political environment where rapid and
sustained economic growth has become possible.
Economic development in turn has brought about
social progress and human development in the region.

Malaysia believes that a strong and successful
ASEAN is not only an economic necessity but also a
strategic imperative. A prosperous, consolidated and
stable ASEAN, at peace with itself and with its
immediate neighbours, provides the best guarantee for
the security of the entire South-East and East Asian
regions. Malaysia will continue to push for the
strengthening of ASEAN as a regional grouping. We
believe that the existence of ASEAN has encouraged
patterns of behaviour that reduce risks to security by
enhancing bilateral relations and by fostering habits of
open dialogue on political and security matters.

In conclusion, Malaysia wishes to reaffirm our
belief that regional and subregional organizations have
an important role to play in the maintenance of peace
and security at the regional level, and that they
complement the work of the United Nations.

