Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to start
by thanking Mr. Farid Zarif, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing. I would also
like to thank His Excellency Mr. Tomislav Nikolic',
President of Serbia, and Her Excellency Ms. Atifete
Jahjaga, President of Kosovo, for their statements.

Let me first of all express Lithuania's condolences
to and solidarity with all those in Serbia affected by
the worst flooding in the region in over a century.
Lithuania, together with other international partners,
stands ready to offer assistance and support to the flood
victims.

I would like to note Kosovo's constructive approach
in the negotiations for a Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the European Union (EU), which were
formally completed on 6 May. That is a reflection of
Kosovo's commitment to continuing comprehensive
reforms on its European path.

Today, I would like to touch upon three
elements - implementation of the Belgrade-Pristina
First Agreement of Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations, elections and the extension
of the mandate of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX).

During the reporting period, Belgrade and Pristina
maintained active engagement in the EU-facilitated
dialogue, even though the pace was somewhat reduced
due to the electoral cycles in both Serbia and Kosovo.
The continued commitment and political will of the
leaders to proceed with the dialogue and implementation
of the Agreement is commendable and encouraging.
We welcome the statement made by the head of the new
Government of Serbia, Mr. Vueie, that the continuation
of the Brussels-based dialogue is a priority for his
Government and is in the best interests of the Serbs in
Kosovo.

We hope that after the results of the parliamentary
elections in Kosovo on 8 June, tangible steps towards
normalization of relations with Serbia will continue as
well. The progress achieved so far must be sustained and
further advanced. We trust that a fair and democratic
conduct of the parliamentary elections in Kosovo will
further strengthen the functioning of democracy there
and will increase confidence in State institutions.
The elections in Kosovo will be followed closely by
the international community. We support the role of
European Union Election Observation Mission and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in
providing assistance to local authorities in conducting
the elections in accordance with international standards.

At the moment, the Kosovo Force and the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) continue to contribute to the maintenance
of peace and stability on the ground, while EULEX
plays a key role in the consolidation of the rule of law.
It is in Kosovo's legitimate interest to develop its own
capabilities to ensure rule of law and security within
its territory. That goal is fully achievable. Lithuania
welcomes the decision of the Kosovo Assembly on
the creation of a special court to follow-up on cases
investigated by the Special Investigative Task Force
on war crimes, as well as the invitation to extend the
EULEX mandate for another two years.

Much remains to be done, however. The escape
of the three high-profile war crimes suspects is a
cause for concern. We call on the Kosovo authorities
to ensure due process in war crimes investigations
and to bring all perpetrators to justice. The situation
in the north remains complex. Security gaps affect
institutions, international actors and the daily life of
local communities. A recent attack on 25 April against
EULEX police reminded us of the 19 September 2013
attack, when a Lithuanian customs officer was killed.
We call on the respective authorities to thoroughly
investigate all such criminal acts and to bring their
perpetrators to justice.

The implementation of the April Agreement aims
at building inclusive societies and bridges between
people. Tackling the legacies of the past and ensuring
transitional and transnational justice for all the victims,
including minority refugees and displaced persons,
remains a cornerstone of peaceful cohabitation within
the State and among the countries. In the context
of progress in implementing the Belgrade-Pristina
Agreement, my delegation, like others whose
representatives have spoken before me, remains open
to reviewing the current UNMIK debate cycle with a
view to reducing its frequency, as well as considering a
reduction of the United Nations peacekeeping operation
in Kosovo in accordance with the development of facts
on the ground.

