Mr. Raytchev (Bulgaria): First of all, on behalf
of the Republic of Bulgaria, I should like to express
our strong condemnation of the vicious terrorist attacks
that have occurred in Istanbul and to join others in
expressing our deep sympathy with the families of all
who have been affected by those terrorist acts.

We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for having
organized this timely public meeting on the Great
Lakes region. I should also like to welcome the
presence at this meeting of the Minister of the
Presidency for Parliamentary and Diplomatic Affairs of
Mozambique, the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Tanzania, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Special Envoy of the
Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union,
and to express to them our appreciation for their
important contributions. My delegation is also grateful
to the Secretary-General for his important presentation
at this Security Council meeting.

Bulgaria, as an associated country of the
European Union, fully supports the statement made
earlier by the representative of Italy on behalf of the
European Union. In my national capacity, I should like
to make the following comments.

Bulgaria welcomes the positive dynamics
emerging in the Great Lakes region of Africa. The
peace process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has made substantial headway in recent months. We are
also witnessing encouraging developments with regard
to the peace process in Burundi. We concur with the
Secretary-General that it is important to capitalize on
this new momentum. We think that this positive trend
must be sustained and supported, including through a
concerted multilateral regional approach and related
actions.

We agree that the holding of an international
conference on peace, security, democracy and
development in the Great Lakes region could make an
essential contribution to the promotion and
strengthening of the reconciliation processes in all
States of that part of Africa. In our view, such a
conference could also contribute to normalization of
relations in all spheres among the countries in the
region and to the establishment of confidence-building
measures and mechanisms aimed at achieving lasting
peace and stability.

Therefore, Bulgaria, like other countries,
welcomes and unreservedly supports the initiative of
organizing such a conference under the auspices of the
United Nations and the African Union. We are pleased
that the preparations for the conference are under way.
Needless to say, such an international conference will
have to be carefully planned if it is to be successful. In
that regard, we note with interest the information
provided by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2003/1099) and the briefings by the Ministers and
Mr. Fall with regard to the initial preparatory work
carried out thus far.

We are cognizant of the importance of African
ownership of the whole process. The common political
will of the States in the region to work in a concerted
way to achieve shared goals is a key element, in our
view, for the success of the proposed conference. In
that respect, we appreciate the emerging readiness and
willingness of the region's States to assist in the
preparation and holding of a productive conference.
My country would like to commend, in particular,
Tanzania for having offered to host a summit in the
course of 2004. We also welcome the appointment of
Mr. Walubita by the Commission of the African Union
as a Special Envoy for the Great Lakes region.

It is our view that the Declaration of Principles on
Good-Neighbourly Relations and Cooperation, signed
in New York on 25 September 2003 by the
Governments of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, as well as the
agreement between the transitional Government of
Burundi and the Forces for the Defence of Democracy
group, signed on 16 November in Dar-es-Salaam, have
provided grounds for hope and optimism for
normalization of the situation within the framework of
the comprehensive peace process in the region. We
believe that the international community should assist
the efforts of the region's States, the United Nations
and the African Union with a view to facilitating the
successful holding of the conference. In that regard, I
should like to express our appreciation for Canada's
efforts to establish a Group of Friends of the Great
Lakes region, whose objective is to provide support to
the conference.

In conclusion, I should like to say that we
appreciate the draft text of the presidential statement
submitted for the consideration of members of the
Council and that we are prepared to fully support it.

