Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): I would like in particular to thank Mr. Ladsous
for his presentation of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2016/824), which was comprehensive and
focused the attention of all of the members of the
Security Council on what remains to be done in the
Central African Republic.

Despite the efforts that have already been made
and those that the Government, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and
the international community continue to make, the
situation in the Central African Republic remains
extremely fragile. That is why it is important to
continue to pay particular attention to the situation. We
are not talking about inter-community actions; these
are really provocations. I would prefer to hear mention
being made of gangs and of people who snub peace in
our country in order to ensure that we do not achieve
the goals we have set.

It is important to ensure that resolution 2301 (2016)
is implemented and, in particular when it comes to
non-State armed groups. It is those armed groups that
continue to sow the seeds of the terror throughout the
country, and even in Bangui. When someone is killed
and it cannot be explained, it elicits a negative reaction
and more people die as a result. It is crucial for the
Security Council to continue to support MINUSCA's
efforts and to ensure that all material and logistical
resources needed are supplied, as mentioned in the
report. This report should compel us to do more and to
realize that there is still much left to be done. If we do
not pay attention, what is occurring now could continue
and the very implementation of the disarmament,

demobilization, repatriation and reintegration
programme, and even reconciliation, could pose more
problems.

We have already engaged in dialogue in the Central
African Republic in the past. We have tried to ensure
that communities work with each other. After the
elections and when the transition ended, the situation
was going well. But regrettably, we acknowledge that
the efforts we had been making to achieve the goals
we set are now being threatened. That is why I will
continue to support the work of MINUSCA, of the
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and of all those who participated in the
latest contact group meeting, so that we can work
together to ensure that our country will succeed in
re-establishing peace. When we talk about the Brussels
Conference, what we reap there will fall short. We will
still face the issue of security and that of struggling
to ensure that every Central African can enjoy safety
and go about their business in peace. The President has
emphasized that in his statements, even following the
recent unfortunate events. He has underscored that he
is not the President of a particular group, but that he is
the President of all Central Africans. And we as Central
Africans must stress that point ourselves in order that
people understand that the time has come for us to come
together to work as one.

I thank the Security Council for having once
again considered this agenda item and for convening
this meeting on the subject of the Secretary-General's
report in order to understand that much remains to be
done.

