Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
has listened to the briefings by Assistant Secretary-
General Jenca; Assistant Secretary-General Mueller;
the Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, Ambassador Apakan; and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Representative to the Trilateral Contact Group
Ambassador Sajdik.

Four years ago, the Minsk agreement was signed
and subsequently endorsed by the Security Council.
The agreement has played a critical role in the political
mediation of the Ukrainian crisis. Over the past four
years, all parties have held the agreement in high regard,
and various mechanisms relating to the implementation
of the agreement have largely been functioning well.

Regrettably, however, many of the provisions
of the agreement are yet to be fully and effectively
implemented. The political mediation process of the
Ukrainian crisis has come to a standstill, and there is
no effective guarantee of the safety of civilian lives and
property in the conflict area. China calls on all parties
concerned to effectively implement the agreement,
remain committed to the general direction ofa political
settlement and seek a comprehensive solution through
dialogue and consultation in order to facilitate the
achievement of peace, stability and development
in Ukraine.

A fundamental, long-term solution of the Ukrainian
issue requires that on the one hand the legitimate rights,
interests and aspirations of all regions and ethnic
groups in Ukraine be fully accommodated, and that, on
the other hand, attention also be paid to addressing the
reasonable concerns of all parties involved in order to
achieve a balance among all interests.

China has consistently maintained an objective and
impartial position on the Ukrainian crisis. We have
always believed that the crisis cannot be solved through
force and that dialogue and negotiation is the only
way out. China will remain committed to playing a
constructive role in the political settlement of the crisis.

