Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of Equatorial Guinea is
pleased with the initiative to adopt resolution 2464
(2019) to renew the mandate of the Panel of Experts
under Security Council resolution 1718 (2006). Today's
resolution is especially important at this juncture in
international relations, as it will enable the Panel of
Experts to analyse the situation with regard to the
activities surrounding the nuclear programme of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

The Security Council previously unanimously
adopted resolutions 1718 (2006) and 1874 (2009),
both of which condemned the clear violations of the
Council's resolutions and international instruments
on non-proliferation that pose a threat to international
peace and security, and were aimed at helping the
Council to properly carry out its mandate to maintain
international peace and security, as enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations. In line with that,
paragraph 12 of resolution 1718 (2006) established a
Security Council Committee made up of all members
to oversee the implementation by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea of the sanctions measures
established by the Council, including setting up a Panel
of Experts to support the Committee in carrying out its
mandate in line with paragraph 26 of resolution 1874
(2009). Both resolutions should help the Council receive
a clear answer as to the end of the nuclear programme
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

The international community has been responding
to the challenges from the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea by way of sanctions adopted in
Security Council resolutions, the latest being resolution
2397 (2017), the harshest to date given its potential
reach and how it could affect the economy of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Up to now,
the eight previous sanctions resolutions do not seem to
have thwarted the ongoing nuclear and ballistic-missile
programmes of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea in the way it is thought today's resolution might.
Sanctions against the country seem poised to effectively
have the expected impact in the short term with the
control mechanism established to date. Nevertheless,
the potential tensions, pressure and interests that each
State defends in the Security Council are poisoning
the work of the Committee and the Panel of Experts,
since despite being called independent, the Panel is
acting in a way that suggests that it is sometimes taking
direction from certain Governments in ways that could
lead to partiality in its duties and result in eroding the
credibility of its work.
I want to remind the Panel of Experts that regardless
of the unofficial agreements that may have been
reached in connection with its members' appointments,
they should be guided above all by the oath they took
to carry out with loyalty, discretion and impartiality
the functions entrusted to them by the representatives
of our 193 countries and in line with the Charter and
regulations of the Organization that employs them.
Whatever pressure they may be under, any bad decision
by the Committee's Panel of Experts could lead to
erroneous interpretations and onerous and disastrous
actions against innocent people, organizations and
States. We trust in the professionalism of the men and
women who make up the Panel of Experts. They do
very difficult and stressful work that we all sincerely
appreciate. We ask only that they act with wisdom
and impartiality.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea counts on the
strategy adopted under resolution 1874 (2009), which
set up the Panel of Experts to help the Committee
oversee the sanctions against the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea.

However, we should also avoid causing a collapse
by our actions and ensure that the Security Council
and the international community are not responsible
for the human consequences of sanctions that do not
differentiate between military and civilian targets
or between the public and private sectors. The basic
human needs in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea are important. If we seek only and at any cost to
destroy the weapons and the nuclear programme and
fail to pay attention to the walking dead and the sick, I
do not believe that we will be meeting our obligations
to maintain international peace and security. We might
destroy the sanctioned weapons, but we will see a
desolate nation of corpses, dead of disease and hunger.

In a case such as this, will our consciences allow
us to sleep easy when we find ourselves alone at night?
The 15 representatives here today, those who once sat in
these blue chairs and those who plan to occupy them in
future, will be responsible for the lives of every innocent
man, woman and child dying of malnutrition or disease
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
My country believes that we can achieve both
goals. We can be very vigilant with regard to luxury
items and fuel going to Government enterprises and
to components for manufacturing weapons of mass
destruction - through the array of measures to control
the non-proliferation of weapons in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea - while also allowing
the people to receive rice, bread, milk, medicine
and infusions, books and toys so as to live dignified
human lives.

The adoption of resolution 2464 (2019) should
mark a before-and-after in the Council's working
methods in terms of how the Committee and its Panel
of Experts are managed and informed with respect to
the dangerous arms race being led by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. I encourage the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) to
continue to attain excellent results.

