Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Thank you for
giving me the floor, Sir, and I wish to congratulate you
on your presidency of the Security Council. We believe
that it is particularly important that the Security
Council stay actively engaged with Timor-Leste. In this
context we welcome the visit scheduled for November.
I also wish to thank our dear colleague Ambassador
Sofia Borges and Special Representative Ameerah Haq
for their presentations, as well as the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive and valuable report
(S/2010/522).

Portugal naturally aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the European Union.
But, as a representative of a country that has a long,
shared history with Timor-Leste and as an active
member of the core group, I would like to underline
some specific points.

Portugal praises the encouraging achievements in
Timor-Leste during this reporting period and the
continuing stable environment, as a credit to Timor-
Leste's determination to long-term peace, stability and
development. In assessing these achievements, it is
important to acknowledge how far Timor-Leste has
come in the few short years since its independence, but
it is equally important not to lose sight of the
significant challenges that lie ahead. Elections
scheduled to take place in 2012 will test the capacity
and resilience of Timor-Leste's national institutions
and the progress made towards a stable democratic
political environment and culture.

We are aware of the profound social and
economic challenges still faced by Timor-Leste in
terms of fighting poverty, building an economy that
extends beyond oil, and ensuring that the young
Timorese will have the skills, training and
opportunities that they need to take charge of their
future. Problems such as slow agricultural
development, youth underemployment and lack of
human resources are hampering the recovery and
reconstruction process and having a fundamental
repercussion on the social cohesion of Timor-Leste.
These issues must be taken very seriously in the near
future.

On the other hand, it is encouraging that
continued advances were made in all four of the
mandated areas of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), including dialogue
initiatives on critical national issues, the achievements
on the resumption of primary policing responsibilities
by the national police, the promulgation of the national
security legislative package, the adoption of the Justice
Sector Strategic Plan and, last but not least, the
presentation of the National Strategic Development
Plan.
Further efforts are, however, required to
overcome the political, institutional and
socio-economic weaknesses that contributed to the
events of 2006. The continued good offices of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General will be
crucial to facilitating the political dialogue with
national political actors as Timor-Leste approaches the
next general elections, which will be held by 2012.

Long-term security and stability will also depend
on the capacity of the Timorese institutions to function
in an effective, responsible and accountable way, with
due respect for the rule of law and benefiting from
public confidence and support. To facilitate full and
effective progress towards the full reconstitution of the
Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL), a
reinvigorated partnership between the PNTL and the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) is required. A clear vision of the relationship
between the Falintil-Forcas de Defesa de Timor-Leste
and the National Police, as well as of their respective
tasks, is also crucial. In this context, we reiterate that
additional steps should be taken to facilitate the closest
possible coordination of the support of the
international community and bilateral donors.

However, no true progress will be achievable if
the sustainable socio-economic development of the
country is not made a priority. We support the
Government of Timor-Leste in its continuing efforts to
increase input into infrastructure development,
education and vocational training, and we call on the
international community to provide more assistance to
the Government and Timorese people in those relevant
fields.

We are aware that a number of fundamental
issues will require sustained, long-term attention well
beyond the date of 2012. For this purpose, Portugal
welcomes the preparation of a strategy to guide
UNMIT's transition beyond 2012. The consolidation of
those goals will require the sustained engagement and
support of the international community, in full respect
for the Timorese people's own choices regarding their
country.

Portugal remains fully engaged in supporting
Timor-Leste and remains a major bilateral donor in a
wide spectrum of areas, including governance and
public administration, justice, education and security
sector reform, and by contributing over 200 police and
military liaison officers to UNMIT and fully supporting
all areas under the responsibility of the Mission.

The people of Timor-Leste have repeatedly
shown their resolve to build a peaceful, democratic and
stable society. To that end, we will maintain our
engagement and solidarity with the Timorese, and we
encourage and support Ameerah Haq and the entire
team of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
carrying out their invaluable work.

