Mr. Moussa (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to
express my pleasure that my participation in a Council
meeting for the first time since I was chosen Secretary-
General of the League of Arab States comes as a
response to an invitation by the Mexican presidency. It
was based on an initiative that embodies your thinking,
Mr. President, as Foreign Minister of Mexico. I
therefore wish to congratulate you for presiding over
the Council in the month of April and for the
distinguished role you have played. I wish you success
in your endeavours. It gives me pleasure to
congratulate as well your predecessors, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and the Permanent Representative of
Guinea, for their efforts in the midst of extremely
difficult and complicated circumstances.

When I received the invitation in mid-March to
participate in this important meeting, the Iraqi crisis
was at an extremely critical stage. Every effort was
made to avoid war, to stress the authority of the
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security and to prevent the Council's failure
and paralysis. It should be recalled that the Council's
mechanisms, particularly the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC), proved that it was possible to
successfully monitor weapons of mass destruction
suspected to be in Iraq. We hoped that our meeting
would take place, in April, while the Council was
discharging its primary responsibility under the Charter
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
and while it was acting on behalf of the international
community in carrying out its duties under this
responsibility.

In fact, the Council was right when it refused to
give a license or authorization to a single State to
declare war on Iraq. The Council was also right when it
refused to qualify the war on Iraq as legitimate. Once
the war started, the Council's role was discarded
completely. Fighting raged for more than three weeks,
yet the Council remained silent, and this silence has
seriously affected its credibility and role. More, it has
affected the credibility of the collective security system
with which the United Nations is entrusted under the
Charter and the Security Council resolutions relevant
to international peace and security.

It was only normal that the situation sparked an
ignoble debate on the role of the Security Council.
Some do not see a role for the Council in the
preservation of peace in light of the new developments
and are trying to marginalize it, while others believe
that the Council's role has in fact already been
marginalized. Some want the Council to resume the
role assigned to it and want it reaffirmed. Others see
that the role of the United Nations as a whole is
diminishing. Is this not to be expected, given the
international situation and the attempts to call the shots
of war and peace worldwide and to steer the situation
away from the existing standards of international
legitimacy? This can happen only at the expense of the
United Nations, both the organization itself and the
system as a whole.

We would have wished to meet today with the
Council at the helm, addressing the issues and asserting
that security and peace, when threatened, should be
taken care of. This makes us wonder about the
principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity. Have
they not been violated and threatened? What is the
position of the Council? Where is its role? Judging by
the way things are, can we think that the Security
Council can remain faithfully entrusted with the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security in accordance with the
Charter? Can the Council concede - or has it perhaps
already conceded - that force is a source of
legitimacy, or a substitute for it? This soul-searching is
valid, particularly among third world countries that no
longer feel that the Security Council is the safe haven
they can resort to when danger is impending and when
stability, peace and security are threatened in their
territories or in the territories of their neighbours.

Despite our reservations, and those of others
referred to above, concerning the role of the Security
Council, we cannot accept that the Council should be
held in contempt. We cannot accept that its role should
be confined to repairing the damage of war, thus
reducing it to an executing arm for policies it did not
design. We cannot accept that the Council should be
forced to face the consequences without having first
addressed the causes. This is in many ways a dangerous
course, not in the least because it usurps the Council's
role in preventive diplomacy and in fulfilling its
mandate under the Charter - the maintenance of
international peace and security - but because it thus
gives legitimacy to the consequences of war once it is
over. I cannot imagine that any on the Council would
accept that. The permanent members are not authorized
to do that, and the non-permanent members were not
elected to bear witness to the diminished value of the
Council and its compromised role.

I came to this meeting in my capacity as the
representative of the League of Arab States. Like other
elements of the international system, the League is
currently under a severe attack, given the distressing
circumstances in the Middle East as accentuated by the
invasion of Iraq, as well as by the deliberate failure to
arrive at a just, balanced and peaceful settlement to the
Palestinian question and a just, comprehensive and
lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. The League
did, however, play the role expected of it by
responding to the deteriorating political and security
situation in the region with regard to Palestine, Iraq
and regional security. All of these tasks were an
expression of our upholding and furthering the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations and the Articles relevant to the role of the
Security Council and of regional organizations in the
peaceful settlement of disputes.

With regard to the question of Palestine, as the
Council may well be aware, the League of Arab States
decided at the highest level - the Council of Kings
and Heads of Arab State - to launch a straightforward
peace initiative calling for an end to the Arab-Israeli
dispute and for the conclusion of a peace agreement
with Israel that guarantees security to all the Arab
States of the region - if Israel will commit to a
complete withdrawal from the occupied Arab
territories, to a just solution to the problem of the
Palestinian refugees, and to accepting the
establishment of an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State on the Palestinian territories occupied
since 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
This was the decision of the regional organization in
the Middle East, that is, the League of Arab States, on
an issue related to peace and security in and around the
region and in the world.

What was the Security Council's position on that
important initiative, which was officially brought to its
attention? The Council did nothing. The initiative
earned no more than a cursory mention in Security
Council resolution 1397 (2002). Furthermore, also in
the context of the Arab-Israeli dispute and in addition
to that initiative, the States members of the League of
Arab States unanimously recognized that a just and
comprehensive peace, pursued in the context of
international legitimacy, is the strategic choice of the
Arab States. This calls for a concomitant commitment
by Israel.

Did the Council capitalize on the offer? Did it try
to build upon it, thereby sparing the peace process the
dangers inherent in the apparent partisan support for
one of the parties to the conflict on the part of some of
the brokers, which pursue a policy of double standards?
What did the Council do to end the complete disregard
and defiance by Israel of those resolutions? Again, the
Council did nothing. That was yet another failure by
the Council.

As for Iraq, the League of Arab States pursued its
role with clarity and determination from the very first
days of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 1990. In August
1990, the Council of the League of Arab States
adopted, at its Cairo Summit, a crucial resolution
reaffirming the League's commitment to the relevant
Security Council resolutions adopted earlier that
month. The League condemned the aggression; stressed
that it would not recognize the outcome; called for the
withdrawal of the invading forces to the positions they
occupied prior to 1 August 1990; reconfirmed its
commitment to the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Kuwait; and supported the measures taken by
Kuwait to liberate its territory. That resolution, adopted
by the League of Arab States, played a primary role in
legitimizing an Arab and international coalition to
liberate Kuwait in 1991.

Working collectively with Arab diplomacy, the
League of Arab States made a tremendous effort in
support of the Security Council's mission to inspect for
weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. It made a further
effort to ensure that when the inspectors returned to
Iraq they would be guaranteed freedom of work and
movement - an effort that was recognized in Security
Council resolution 1441 (2002). That was indeed an
important step, which gave the Council time and
justification to oppose the military option, which was
vehemently pursued last year, until, on 20 March this
year, it materialized, without authorization by the
United Nations.

On another level, the Arab States rallied round an
international effort aimed at implementing Council
resolutions on weapons of mass destruction, as shown
by the vote cast by Syria, the Arab member of the
Council, in favour of resolution 1441 (2002). That
resolution was supported by the League of Arab States
because it called for the enforcement of resolutions of
international legitimacy, while not triggering war,
either implicitly or explicitly.

When hopes for achieving a peaceful resolution
of the crisis became dimmer and the drums of war
began to beat louder, the Council of the League of
Arab States stood firm, clearly expressing its
opposition to attacking Iraq or threatening the safety
and security of any Arab State. It called for a peaceful
resolution of the Iraqi crisis in the conflict of
international legitimacy. That was an outcome of the
Arab League Summit held in Sharm el-Sheikh in
March 2003, just as it had been in Beirut in March
2002.

In other words, the official position of the League
of Arab States with regard to the question of Palestine
and the Arab-Israeli conflict - a conflict that is still
raging and that can be ended only through a just and
balanced peace - as well as to the situation of Iraq,
which will trigger grave developments inside that
country and at the regional level, is supportive of
international legitimacy, which is the only path to
justice and security and, therefore, stability and peace
in the entire Middle East region.

In addition to dealing with those two major
issues, the League of Arab States has defined a
framework vision for regional security in the Middle
East. That vision can be realized only through the
elimination of all weapons of mass destruction from
the region, without exception. Disarming Iraq of its
weapons of mass destruction is just one step on the
road towards making the Middle East region a
nuclear-weapon-free zone, in accordance with the
provisions of paragraph 14 of Security Council
resolution 687 (1991), adopted under Chapter VII of
the Charter, which makes compliance mandatory.

I would like to speak frankly about Israel's
possession of weapons of mass destruction, particularly
nuclear weapons, and about the need to address the
threat that they pose and to subject them to inspections
as the preliminary steps ultimately leading to the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East, thus preventing an arms race there.

The League of Arab States is thus seeking to
invigorate its regional role in the prevention,
management and settlement of disputes by peaceful
means. The Ministerial Council of the League recently
recommended the establishment of an Arab mechanism
for that purpose, which we are planning to activate as
soon as possible. Furthermore, given the importance
attached by its member States to fighting terrorism, the
League of Arab States has appointed a focal point
entrusted with coordinating our efforts with those of
the Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee. Work is
currently under way to enhance our human resource
capabilities in various fields, including those of
disarmament and civil society.
Moreover, the League of Arab States, working in
cooperation with the United Nations, has played a vital
role in launching the first-ever Arab effort to evaluate
human development in its member States. The
objective is to set out a comprehensive vision that will
assist our member States, individually and collectively,
in addressing their vulnerabilities and addressing them
in accordance with regional and international
prerogatives. In seeking to reactivate and renew its
role, the League of Arab States is trying to rise to the
challenge and respond to the demands of our times.
However, that effort must be consistent with the
purposes of the United Nations and must be carried out
in cooperation with its agencies.

The collective security system provided for in the
Charter of the United Nations was based on solid
principles, foremost among them respect by all for
international law; the commitment of the Council to its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security; and cooperation in
pursuit of thess objectives with regional arrangements
as defined in Article 52 of the Charter.

While seeking to address the challenges that the
system faces, we should note that that system - which
has thus far stood the test of time - is currently facing
one of the most serious challenges to its authority.
Bypassing the law and the Charter and giving
precedence to the use of military force outside the
context of international legitimacy has almost become
commonplace. Some are even deliberating on how to
codify occupation and on ways in which foreign forces
might administer an independent State. The Council is
being called upon to jump on the bandwagon and
legitimize these cases, which were generally
considered a thing of the past. This is an extremely bad
omen for the future of international relations. Should
such a scenario come to pass, the system enshrined in
the Charter will be threatened with collapse. The
United Nations cannot legitimize or legalize a
government installed as a result of military invasion,
contrary to the will of the people concerned.
Legitimacy is the product of the people's acceptance of
its Government, not the product of a decision taken by
foreign forces - not, indeed, of a programme drawn
up by an international organization, even if that
organization is the United Nations.

Chapter VIII of the Charter allows regional
organizations and arrangements considerable leeway
within which they can navigate the containment and
settlement of disputes, always recalling that the
primary responsibility remains with the Security
Council. The fact is, however, that the Council does not
deal with all regional arrangements on the same
footing. While the Council may give a particular
regional organization the opportunity to assist in
preventing or settling a crisis, it may ignore another
regional organization in a similar situation. We believe
that the proper functioning of the collective
international security system in the coming years will
require the Council's efficient use of assistance by the
regional organizations in addressing various crises.

Finally, Sir, at the beginning of your introduction
of the item under consideration, you stressed the
gravity of the challenges - longstanding or new -
that our world is facing. You called on participants to
mobilize their efforts in order to overcome these
challenges. Both you and the Secretary-General
referred to the importance of peacekeeping,
peacemaking and peace-building operations, and,
finally, you called on us all to participate, at the
international and regional levels, in the prevention,
management and resolution of disputes. This is logical
and acceptable, but reality and current problems may
require different and quicker mechanisms.

Seasoned statesmen among us - those well
versed in international relations and who follow
regional conflicts and the role of the United Nations in
such conflicts - have noted that these ideas have, to
the letter, been on the minds of those who have sat at
this table year after year, decade after decade. I truly
fear that we are taking the same road our predecessors
took and that we will end up with the same
recommendations, only to see them flouted.

Yes, a fait accompli has forced itself upon us; we
all are aware that the war in Iraq is a dangerous
international conflict. Perhaps its first chapter is over,
but there surely are more chapters to come. Foreign
occupation, in whatever guise, will sooner or later lead
to a revolution, particularly since emotions throughout
the region are running high. People in the region are
enraged and infuriated.

Then there is the failure by the Security Council
and the General Assembly to address this conflict as
mandated by the Charter. This failure threatens the core
of our system of collective security. I say this because
the situation is both novel and grave. Indeed, the
Security Council was silenced, and the war is raging. It
is a real war - one that the members can watch day in
and day out, as if it were a sad movie.

Adding insult to injury, some are saying that this
war is but the first act of a long play that will threaten
the entire Middle East region. This alone makes it
incumbent upon us not to let this meeting share the fate
of similar, earlier meetings at which recommendations
were adopted.

Here I would suggest that we call for the
convening of an international conference, under the
auspices of the United Nations, similar to other
conferences that were convened to address problems
drastically affecting societies, such as the question of
human rights. It is high time for us to convene an
international conference on international peace, its
maintenance and the challenges facing it.

Such a conference should be preceded by regional
meetings on the same subject. These could be
organized by region or by geographic grouping and
would do preparatory work relating to the maintenance
of international peace and security. They would also
consider the status of the collective security system in
the wake of the blows it has been dealt, with a view to
averting any further blows.

International and regional security cannot and
should not be allowed to be defined by one State alone,
or even by a group of States, outside of the United
Nations. As long as it is possible for the Council to be
silenced and for the General Assembly to be prevented
from undertaking its role, the only solution may be the
convening of an international conference to address
existing problems. We hope, Sir, that the Council will,
under your presidency, propose this idea and that it will
be addressed in other regional organizations. We hope
that this idea will not be ignored - as the Security
Council and the General Assembly were at one of the
most critical moments for regional and international

security.

