Mr. Jeremic' (Serbia): I want to thank all the
participants in today's discussion for their valuable
contributions to our work. I think we are now getting
close to a point where we can unite behind the
Secretary-General and the report that he produced. I
think it would be very important for our work today to
conclude with the entire Council standing behind the
Secretary-General's report with the strongest possible
language. I invite the Council to support the report of
the Secretary-General in the strongest possible
language. I would like to see this report being
implemented. The stronger the language used by the
Council in endorsing and supporting the work of the
Secretary-General that involves the reconfiguration
proposal as well as the deployment of the European
Union Law and Order Mission, in conformity with
resolution 1244 (1999) and the status neutrality that is
laid out in the report of the Secretary-General - the
stronger this language is, the better the chance we will
have to implement this important work that we need to
do together.

Many have said during this debate that 52 nations
have recognized Kosovo, but no one mentioned the
number 140, which is the number of countries that
have not recognized the unilateral, illegal and
illegitimate declaration of independence of our
southern province.

I think it is very important that many speakers
mentioned the General Assembly and its work to
engage the institution of indisputable legitimacy - the
International Court of Justice. I regret the fact that the
representatives of Kosovo Albanians regret the use of
international law and institutions of international law.
They have clearly expressed their regret that Serbia has
decided to pursue that peaceful and legal path.

I must take note of the fact that in recent months
many people have started listing the great democratic
achievements of the so-called Republic of Kosovo,
noting that it has printed passports and passed a certain
number of laws. But this is the third time that I have
talked in the Council about a church that was burned
and paved over. I will keep repeating this: I do not
think that a multi-ethnic, peaceful and democratic
society can afford to burn and pave over churches. The
number of illegally seized properties has not decreased
at all. Solving such problems, I think, is what really
makes a society democratic, peaceful and multi-ethnic.

By the way, I would say that Mr. Zannier is the
only totally and technically impartial person. I wish to
thank him for his great effort to make this whole
process possible. He has come from Pristina and his
observation - correct me if I am wrong - is that
Kosovo today is a deeply segregated society. In my
opinion, "deeply segregated society" is the total
opposite of "multi-ethnic". I would therefore like for
us to reflect on the observation of Mr. Zannier, who has
just come from Kosovo.

Having said all that, I really hope that this is
going to be a very important step in our common
effort, that we are going to move the process forward
and that the reconfiguration is going to go forward
according to the recommendation of the Secretary-
General. It is important that we stay loyal to the
decisions made in this Chamber and that we stand
behind the Secretary-General's efforts. Serbia is going
to continue to be a constructive participant in that.
Serbia has demonstrated its constructiveness in that
process. We intend to be a constructive participant in
the future.

I would like to close by saying that it is indeed
the European future of the Western Balkans that all
countries Members of the United Nations in the
Western Balkans should look forward to.

