Mr. Quintana (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for their briefings, and we congratulate
them on the efforts that both Tribunals have made
to implement the completion strategies adopted by
the Council and ensure an expeditious transition to
the Residual Mechanism. Our thanks also go to the
delegation of Guatemala, whose work in chairing the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals has
considerably facilitated the progress that has been made
in this area.

My delegation is convinced that both Tribunals
have provided an invaluable service to the cause
of international justice and the maintenance of
international peace and security. We believe that in the
past few months in particular both bodies have worked
diligently to implement Council decisions relating to the
completion of their mandates. Of particular importance
is the compendium of administrative measures adopted
with a view to reducing the length of trials, which has
meant that several of them have been able to either begin
or conclude earlier than planned. We are therefore very
close to meeting our common objective of concluding
all Trial Chamber cases before the Tribunals before the
end of this year and to deal with all possible appeals by
the end of 2014.

In practical terms, we note that the Fifth Committee
has approved the budget for the first biennium of the
Residual Mechanism and that modest progress has been
made with regard to ensuring the retention of Tribunal
staff. In particular, we commend the Secretary-General
for his willingness to facilitate the hiring of trainees
or interns, who now have valuable experience in the
workings of both Tribunals that otherwise could have
been lost.

The Office of Legal Affairs also deserves
commendation here, since it is the determination of their
officials that has made it possible to have near-complete
versions of the various legal instruments required for the
functioning of the Residual Mechanism. That is the case
with respect to the Rules of Procedure and Evidence,
the Secretary-General's bulletin on the archives of the
Tribunals and the Mechanism, and the headquarters
agreements for the host countries of the two branches of
the Mechanism, in Arusha and The Hague.

There are two aspects related to the Tribunal for
Rwanda that my delegation believes we should consider.
First, we are concerned by the situation of people who
have been exonerated by the Tribunal and who are
supposed to be relocated, because it has not been easy
to find countries willing to welcome them on their
territory. The President of the Tribunal has said that that
is a persistent problem that he is going to make vigorous
efforts to resolve. We believe that the Security Council
could support President Joensen with respect to that
matter by sending a clear signal that the fate of those
individuals is a concern for all of us.

Secondly, in contrast with the Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, some of those accused by the Tribunal for
Rwanda have yet to be captured even though there is
relatively exact information on their whereabouts. We
believe that, consistent with their clear intention to close
that chapter in the history of hatred and violence in that
region of Africa, the Council should reiterate its call for
all States to cooperate effectively with the Tribunal and,
in particular, for those States responsible for ensuring the
arrest of the fugitives and for handing them over to the
Tribunal to fulfil their obligations under the resolutions
according to which that body was established.

The International Criminal Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda constitute the primary vehicle
through which the Security Council has channelled the
will of the international community to end impunity
for atrocious crimes of international magnitude. We are
pleased to observe that the various bodies of the United
Nations are taking the necessary steps to guarantee the
efficient and orderly conclusion of the mandates of the
Tribunals and to ensure the appropriate functioning of
the Residual Mechanism established by the Council. We
will spare no effort to continue working towards that
end.

