Mr. Ahmad Tajuddin (Malaysia): At the outset,
I would like to join others in congratulating you,
Mr. President, on the Dominican Republic's accession to
membership of the Security Council, joining the ranks
of Belgium, Germany, Indonesia and South Africa. I
trust that, with the mandate given, you will be able to
implement great tasks ahead with the ultimate view of
maintaining world peace and security, as enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations.

The growing tension in the Gaza Strip and West
Bank in recent week, leaving dozens more innocent
Palestinian civilians - including children - dead, with
the continued illegal demolishing of Palestinian homes,
continues to paint a bleak future for the prospects of
a two-State solution. The situation in Palestine, as
illustrated by Special Coordinator Nikolay Mladenov,
continues to spiral downward each day. Malaysia
strongly condemns the excessive, disproportionate and
indiscriminate uses of force by Israeli forces against
Palestinian civilians in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in East Jerusalem, the West Bank
and, particularly, the Gaza Strip.

We have heard repeated warnings by Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres and Special Coordinator
Mladenov on Israel's expansion of illegal settlement
activity, despite considerable international pressure
for its immediate and complete cessation. As those
violations continue and grow more prolonged, the
prospects of a two-State solution could just as well
become another utopian dream. In the interest of
progress, Malaysia reiterates its call on the parties to
the conflict concerned to exercise the utmost restraint
with a view to de-escalating tensions.

After decades of Israel being allowed to commit
violation after violation, Malaysia would like to reiterate
its call on all United Nations Member States and the
international community to continue pressing Israel and
to demand that it cease immediately and completely all
illegal settlement activities in the occupied territories,
as well as all other violations of international law and
international humanitarian law, and that it fully comply
with all relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016), and the United Nations Charter.

The current deadlock in the Middle East
peace process needs pragmatic solutions based on
international law and norms. It is therefore important
that the international community create such conditions
for peace talks in advancing prospects for a peaceful
solution to this long-standing conflict.

Malaysia remains steadfast in its long-standing
and principled position in favour of the inalienable
rights of Palestinians, including the establishment
of an independent and sovereign State of Palestine
based on the pre-l967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. We are unequivocal in our belief that the
Security Council must reassume once more its rightful
role as the ultimate broker of peace, particularly with
respect to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The long-
standing trust deficit due to the Council's inaction must
be overcome now.

