Mr. Ikouebe (Congo) (spoke in French): It is my
honour to speak to the Council today on behalf of the
members of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS): Angola, Burundi, Cameroon,
the Central African Republic, Chad, the Republic of
the Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Gabon, Equatorial Guinea, Rwanda and Sao Tome and
Principe.

First, I would like to congratulate you, Mr.
President, on your initiative of convening this meeting,
which provides the subregion I represent with an
opportunity to sketch the general outline of
developments taking place in that part of the African
continent in the area of peace and security, within the
framework of partnership with the United Nations. I
would also like to congratulate the Secretary-General's
Special Adviser, Mr. Gambari, for his excellent
briefing, which contained suggestions that were
entirely compatible with the expectations of Central
Africa.

For 11 years now, Central Africa has had a United
Nations body for cooperative action tasked with
promoting preventive diplomacy in this subregion

universally viewed as particularly sensitive: the
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa. The Committee held its nineteenth
ministerial meeting two weeks ago in Brazzaville, from
14 to 17 May 2003.

Since I will later focus on the United Nations
missions in Central Africa, I would like to point out
that those missions have been intensively prepared for
several weeks now in New York, where representatives
of the Central African countries have gathered since
the beginning of this month to meet with high
Secretariat officials to discuss the content of the two
missions: the Security Council mission and the inter-
agency mission. Both are to go to Central Africa at the
beginning of next month, and our representatives have
been making preparations for the visit. Since the Congo
is the current Chairman of ECCAS, it was my honour
to represent all my colleagues at the ministerial
meeting in Brazzaville - I shall later describe that
meeting. A report on the meeting will be distributed
later to all States Members of the United Nations.

I would like to stress that at that important
meeting, the ministers, above all, welcomed the
progress made in most States of the subregion in the
area of peace and security. In Angola, Burundi, the
Central African Republic, my own country of the
Congo and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
significant progress has been observed, although that
progress remains to be consolidated in certain cases.

That is why urgent appeals have been made to the
international community, in particular to the United
Nations and the donor community, to provide the
appropriate, substantial assistance enabling the
stabilization and subsequent improvement of the
situation. In particular, there is need to help in the
implementation of peace and ceasefire agreements
when they have been signed, and to support the various
programmes for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants. There is need also to
provide assistance to refugees and displaced persons.

The ministers noted that in most cases, we must
above all provide concrete follow-up to the financial
pledges already made by the international community
for countries such as Angola, Burundi, the Central
African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Naturally, everyone is aware that peace-
building also requires, above all, the improvement of
the living conditions of the population and the
economic reconstruction of the countries.

With respect to the Central African Republic in
particular, the ministers of the countries members of
ECCAS meeting in Brazzaville adopted a joint
declaration appealing to the international community to
provide substantial assistance to that country at this
crucial yet promising stage.

The ministers also expressed their concern at the
tragedy unfolding in the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in particular in Bunia. They
called on the Security Council to amend the mandate of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in order
to adapt it to the situation on the ground. In that
respect, ECCAS welcomes the adoption by the Security
Council this morning of resolution 1483 (2003),
authorizing the immediate deployment of a
multinational force to Bunia.

I should like to express the gratitude of the
countries of Central Africa to the United Nations,
which over recent months has created many initiatives
for the subregion. We recall the Council's 22 October
2002 meeting on strengthening cooperation between
the United Nations system and the Central African
region in the maintenance of peace and security. That
meeting led to the Council's presidential statement of
31 October 2002 (S/PRST/2002/31), which gave new
impetus to the partnership between the United Nations
and Central Africa and which served as a frame of
reference for the discussions of the nineteenth
ministerial meeting of the Standing Advisory
Committee, to which I referred earlier.

That is why the ministers have welcomed the
dispatch of a Security Council mission to the subregion
of Central Africa in early June, to visit areas where
great tension persists. They welcome, as well, an inter-
agency assessment mission tasked with formulating an
approach for problems of peace, security and
development in Central Africa that is comprehensive,
integrated, resolute and concerted in nature. The
ministers expressed the hope that this inter-agency
mission might recommend, among other things, the
creation of a subregional United Nations office to
support the work of peacekeeping and peace-building
missions and of the special representatives and special
envoys of the Secretary-General in Central Africa.

As well, the ministers welcomed the preparations
for an international conference on peace, security,
democracy and development in the Great Lakes region.
They issued an appeal for all countries of Central
Africa to participate in the organization and holding of
the conference.

Finally, since we are discussing conflict
prevention and resolution, I would be remiss if I
concluded without announcing that previous to the
Brazzaville ministerial meeting of the Advisory
Committee, a seminar was held from 12 to 14 May on
the implementation in Central Africa of the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. The outcome of the
seminar, in particular the plan for the subregion's
activities, will be presented during the first biennial
meeting of countries Members of the United Nations,
which will be held in New York from 7 to 11 July
2003.

