Ms. Gunnarsdettir (Iceland): Climate change is
one of the greatest challenges of our times. Indeed, the
very existence of some Member States is in danger due
to rising sea levels. In that regard, we recognize that

 

small island developing States are especially
vulnerable. Others will face serious droughts and
increased frequency of extreme weather conditions.
These developments and others, which are well known
to all of us, will have a significant environmental,
social, economic and political impact.

The consequences of climate change can increase
tension and potentially lead to conflict. It is therefore
very timely and important for the Security Council to
address the security implications of climate change.
While the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change remains the primary forum for
addressing climate change at the international level, the
Council, in fulfilling its role in maintaining
international peace and security, should recognize the
threats posed by climate change and seek ways to
address them and ensure the viability and sustainability
of our societies.

Although everyone will be affected by climate
change, it is important to remember that climate
change magnifies existing inequalities. Women are
especially vulnerable. Rural areas in developing States
and emerging economies, as well as sectors and
activities traditionally associated with women, are
disproportionally affected by climate change. As a
result, women face greater hardships with household
activities and the daily struggle for survival. Fewer
water resources also have a negative effect on health,
sanitation and food security, which puts an additional
burden on women. Due to their social roles and
responsibilities, women are also more vulnerable to
natural disasters than men.

The principles guiding the Security Council when
it adopted its landmark resolution 1325 (2000), on
women, peace and security, must also guide the
Council's work when addressing the security
implications of climate change. Women should be
portrayed not only as victims of climate change, but
also as fundamental actors in action against it. The
Council must ensure that any response to climate
change takes the gender perspective into account and
that both women and men are included in the debate,
decision-making and implementation with regard to all
aspects of climate change. This will make the response
to climate change more effective and appropriately
contribute to greater gender equality worldwide.

