Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Sir, for your initiative in convening
today's meeting.

(spoke in English)

Extremists such as those ofthe Islamic State of Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) have been deliberately persecuting
ethnic and religious minorities in the Middle East. The
convening of today's meeting is therefore opportune
and relevant. We need to mobilize against terrorists'
attempts to eradicate the diversity of the social fabric
of the region.

The Victims of violent extremism are not limited to
ethnic and religious minorities. Violent extremism has
led to the killing ofa considerable number of citizens of
all backgrounds in the Middle East. At the beginning of
this year, Mr. Haruna Yukawa and Mr. Kenji Goto, both
Japanese citizens, were also brutally murdered by ISIL.
My Government firmly condemns such inhumane and
despicable acts of terrorism. ISIL and other extremists
reject the rule of law upon which the international
community is based. They pose a serious threat to the
international community. Faced with such barbaric
acts, we must work together to fight against violent
extremism. Allow me to present two efforts that Japan
has undertaken to that end.

First, Japan supports Middle Eastern countries in
building counter-terrorism capacities. To that end, Japan
has specifically decided to contribute $15.5 million with
a view to enhancing the capacity for investigation and
prosecution and border control, as well as strengthening
counter-terrorism legislation. Japan is also steadily
implementing the Security Council resolutions related
to counter-terrorism, while cooperating with partner
countries to strengthen international counter-terrorism
frameworks.

Secondly, Japan provides assistance in creating
societies that are resilient to radicalization. We believe
that the best way to nip violence in the bud is to bring
stability to people's livelihoods by fostering a middle
class, even if it takes time. Our assistance therefore
includes a youth employment policy, the improvement
of income disparities and assistance for education.
Expanding people-to-people exchanges is also part of
our cooperation programme. For instance, we supported
the establishment of the Egypt-Japan University of
Science and Technology in 2010. That institution has
been developing human resources that are expected to
play leading roles in achieving economic and social
development in the Middle East and Africa.

As a country located in Asia, Japan will continue
to strengthen its partnership with the countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations to promote
moderation in the region. Japan will host workshops
and seminars on countering radicalization in Asia.

While undertaking efforts to combat violent
extremism, Japan will continue to carry forward its
diplomacy to promote stability and prosperity in the
Middle East. In January, in a policy speech in Cairo,
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan underscored the
idea that "the best way is in the middle". That ancestral
Middle Eastern proverb encourages people to embrace
moderation so as to stabilize their livelihoods. In that
speech, Prime Minister Abe pledged humanitarian
assistance totalling $200 million for the countries
fighting against ISIL in the region. That money has
already been disbursed. Japan will also continue
to contribute to promoting regional cooperation in
the Middle East and to stabilizing its societies and
economies through economic assistance. Japan's
Corridor for Peace and Prosperity initiative in Palestine,
starting with its Jericho Agro-Industrial Park project, is
part of such efforts.

The international community must stand firm
against Violent extremism. I would like to reiterate
Japan's determination to play an active part in this
endeavour.

