Mr. Beasley: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to brief the Security Council today on the situation in
Yemen. I would also like to thank my colleagues Mark
Lowcock and Martin Griffiths for all their hard work
and updates.

When I briefed the Council about four weeks ago
(see S/PV.8551), I said that the World Food Programme
(WFP) was being prevented from feeding the hungriest
people in Yemen. We were being prevented from
operating independently, as we must, and much-needed
food was not, in fact, reaching the right people who
needed help. I ended my briefing by begging the Ansar
Allah leadership, in front of the world, to just let WFP
do what it does best - save lives. It is just that simple.

Because of the access challenges, food being
diverted away from intended beneficiaries and the lack
of accountability - and all the issues that I outlined
last month - WFP made the difficult decision to begin
a phased suspension of assistance in Yemen in late June.
The suspension started in Sana'a and affected 850,000
women, men, girls and boys. As I am a father, those
present can imagine how difficult a decision like that
is. Not a day has gone by when I have not thought of
the impact that suspending food assistance may have. I
must tell the people in city of Sana'a, and through all of
Yemen, that I am so sorry they are going through that.

But let me add that despite the suspension, we have
increased, as Mark Lowcock said, the number ofpeople
who we have reached, from 10.6 million to 11.3 million,
and we are continuing to scale up. In fact, we expect
to reach over 12 million by the end of this month.
Following the suspension, we have also expanded our
nutrition programmes inside the city of Sana'a, where
the suspension is in place, to ensure that the most
vulnerable children, pregnant women and nursing
mothers have the food that they need to survive.

I want to make it very, very clear to everyone that
the responsibility to stop malnutrition and hunger lies
first and foremost with those who are at war and not
with WFP, any of our partners or the United Nations.
We are in Yemen only for the sake of humanity, to offer
our assistance when warring parties cannot or will not
fulfil their responsibilities. We are not in it for us; we
are in it for the innocent people and victims of war
in Yemen.

No one will be happier than all of us at the World
Food Programme when we are no longer needed in
Yemen because there is no more hunger. But until that
time, when it comes to humanitarian assistance and
issues, let us leave the politics out of it and uphold
our obligations under international humanitarian law,
which that specifically protects neutral, impartial
and independent humanitarian action, including the
delivery of essential items, including food.

Despite all the difficulties that I outlined last
month, we have continued to engage in good faith. For
the sake of those who need our help the most in Yemen,
we have kept the lines of communication open. We have
offered dialogue at every level. We have had dozens
upon dozens of meetings and engagements with the
Ansar Allah authorities. We have listened to and heard
their concerns. We have explained our positions over
and over and over, and we have looked for common
ground. We have worked tirelessly to find solutions
to accommodate the concerns that were raised and
put forward workable proposals. That kind of work, as
members of the Council well know, is not always so
easy, but it is worth it.

While we have yet to sign an agreement, I must
say that we have made substantial progress in the
discussions. In fact, I want to read this one text message
to make sure that we did not get a signed agreement
in the past few minutes. The bottom line I have just
received is that we were negotiating all night long and,
as of this moment, we have an agreement in principle,
but it is not a signed agreement as of yet. A lot of
progress has however been made in that regard.

I want to thank Abdul-Malik Al-Houthi for his
leadership. I want to thank Martin Griffiths and
Resident Coordinator Lise Grande, who are on the
ground. It has been tough. There has been a great
deal of hard work taking place in the past few weeks
and the past 24 hours. But we must find a definitive
solution. I believe that we will get there. I am hopeful
that we will. As I said a little earlier, I have just been
assured by this last-minute text message that they are
meeting as we speak. I was hoping that we would have
a signature before I got to this point in my briefing,
but we have not reached that signature. So the door is
still open. But once that is resolved, we are ready to
begin implementing the agreement immediately. We
will have food back on the streets in Sana'a in a matter
ofjust days. That is what the people of Yemen deserve
and demand of us.

While the agreement will help to ensure that the right
people get the food, it will also allow the accountability
framework required to start cash programmes. Cash
will help to stimulate the local economy and to stabilize
the rial, which will have a multiplier effect, bringing
benefits to everyone in Yemen, not only the 12 million
to whom we are providing assistance on a daily basis.
That means another 18 million people, who now get
their food through the market. The rial will stabilize.
It will help mothers to provide more food for children,
which will help us in so many ways, as Mark Lowcock
has alluded to.

But let me be extremely clear: if we do not reach an
agreement or if an agreement is reached and progress
is not made on implementation, because we have been
at this point before, we will find ourselves in the same
position in which we are today but probably worse. Let
us hope and pray that everyone, on all sides, will do
what is good for the people of Yemen. We will keep the
Council informed.

The suspension has been the headline story from
Yemen over the past month. But the real story has
been, and should continue to be, the humanitarian
catastrophe that continues to unfold in Yemen. Lives
are lost, livelihoods are gone and, for far too many,
the hope for a better future grows dimmer every day.
Approximately 30 million people live in Yemen, and
more than two thirds of them are food insecure. That
is 20 million people - boys, girls, men and women.
Ten million of them are severely food insecure. They
do not know where their next meal will come from as
they march towards starvation. Every day Yemenis are
making impossible choices just to survive. That is the
toll that conflict and war collect.

Even in the most difficult circumstances, WFP
continues to save lives, working with its other
humanitarian partners. As I have said before, we
have scaled up our operations and, even despite the
suspension, we have been able to increase the number
of beneficiaries to more than 11 million, hopefully
12 million by the end of this month. We hope to continue
to provide assistance.

Let me add that in December, we learned that
250,000 people in Yemen were facing catastrophic food
security conditions. That is as bad as it can get. We
tripled food assistance in the hardest-hit districts. It did
the job. In 29 of the 45 districts where we were able
to collect data, we can now confirm that none are in
the catastrophic phase anymore. While we have seen
those numbers go down, other numbers - for those
who have gone from insecure to more insecure to more
severe - are going up. The numbers are still bad and
they are getting worse. In general, we are just keeping
more and more people from death.

That is just one success story among many others. I
want to thank those that have been extremely generous,
such as the United States, the United Arab Emirates,
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom and
others, in allowing us to achieve these objectives.

Let me recount another success story, because
there are so many bad stories. We know that the school
system has all but collapsed because of the war, but we
are doing our part to ensure that children still receive
an education. This year alone, we were able to provide
nutrition in schools for more than 700,000 children.
Those are meals that give parents a little extra comfort,
knowing that their children will get fed, in addition to
what we are able to provide them at home.

That keeps the children in school, and it is an
investment in the future onemen. At some point, when
the guns go silent, and Yemen rebuilds, it is those little
boys and girls who will turn Yemen into the country
that it deserves to be.

We are grateful to everyone for all the support of
the donors, many of whom are around this table today,
whose generosity enable us to do what we do. However,
donors must be even more generous because we need
more help. Many of our humanitarian partners are not
getting the assistance that they need. In order to keep
reaching the most vulnerable, we need $1.2 billion over
the next months. We are only 43 per cent funded at
the moment. Our partners also need more. WFP has a
critical role to play in the humanitarian response but if
our partners do not have the support that they need, it
does not matter how much food we deliver - lives will
be lost.
I have a few requests today on behalf of the
teachers, doctors, nurses, mothers, fathers and, last but
not least, the little girls and boys, who just want to eat,
play and learn. We request Member States to continue
to be generous with their contributions. We ask that
those that have made pledges honour them.

But I must say that we are reaching the point where
no amount of money in the world will truly alleviate
the suffering of the Yemeni people. The people in
Yemen, the people at WFP and our partners do a heroic
job, working hard day and night, risking their lives in
order to make success stories and keep people alive.
But when war destroys everything - lives, livelihoods,
economies - there is only so much that we can do.
We are fast approaching those limits. Please, for the
Yemeni people, stop this war, find peaceful ways to
settle the differences and end the suffering. We cannot
give up. We owe the people of Yemen nothing less.

