Mr. Ali (Malaysia): First and foremost, Sir, I
would like to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council and to thank
you for organizing this open debate on the situation in
Timor-Leste. I wish to also thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing on the operation of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT). Most importantly, I also wish to
acknowledge and welcome the presence of Mr. Jose'
Ramos-Horta, President of the Democratic Republic of
Timor-Leste, and thank him for his statement and kind
words with regard to Malaysia.

Malaysia associates itself with the statement just
made by the representative of Thailand on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Nevertheless,
we wish to make the following statement as a country
and neighbour that would like nothing more than to see
a peaceful and prosperous Timor-Leste.

Malaysia welcomes the progress achieved
by Timor-Leste. The Secretary-General's report
(S/2009/72) highlights the fact that the situation has
returned to normalcy. What was a crisis has turned into
an opportunity to solve the two major residual issues
from the conflict of 2006 - those of petitioners and
internally displaced persons (IDPs). To date, the
petitioners have fully disbanded and been reintegrated
into society, and 54 of the 63 IDP camps have closed.

We wish to congratulate the leaders and people of
Timor-Leste, who, with the assistance of UNMIT and
other international partners, have been successful in
maintaining peace and stability in the country. This
proves yet again that the Timorese are more than
capable of reconciling whatever differences emerge for
the sake of the peace and prosperity of their country.

The encouraging security situation augurs well
for the planned resumption of policing responsibility
by the National Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL).
National ownership of policing responsibilities will
represent a major milestone in the rehabilitation of the
security sector in Timor-Leste and enable Timor-Leste
to graduate from UNMIT soon. In spite of that positive
development, Malaysia believes that the resumption
process should be carefully implemented in a phased
approach that emphasizes the need for PNTL units to
meet the criteria mutually agreed to by the Government
of Timor-Leste and UNMIT, in accordance with the

related arrangements, as set out in paragraphs 21 and
22 of the Secretary-General's report. In that regard, we
would like UNMIT and the international community to
continue providing the necessary support so that
Timor-Leste can take on the policing responsibility
based on mutually agreed criteria and without
imposing arbitrary deadlines.

As to the issue of security, we are of the view that
it requires a holistic approach. In that regard, Malaysia
welcomes UNMIT's medium-term strategy, which is
focused on economic and social development and the
promotion of a culture of democratic governance and
dialogue, besides security sector reform and the
strengthening of the rule of law. The introduction of
benchmarks for the medium-term strategy is important.
Benchmarks will facilitate measurement of the
performance both of UNMIT and of the Government of
Timor-Leste. That will enable adjustments to be made
to the strength and mandate of UNMIT in due course.

While there is progress, stability remains fragile.
The Secretary-General's report underlines several
major root causes, such as poverty and unemployment,
urban migration, the absence of an effective land and
property regime, a weak judicial system and weak
security institutions.

Consequently, Timor-Leste still requires the
robust presence of UNMIT. In that regard, Malaysia
supports Timor-Leste's expressed interest for the
mandate of UNMIT to be further continued on a yearly
basis. UNMIT's continued presence and support is
critical, as it allows for proper traction in the reform of
the security sector, especially with regard to
reconstituting the PNTL, integrating the rule of law,
implementing economic and social development and
consolidating effective and sustainable democratic
institutions and governance. We wish to reassure
Timor-Leste of Malaysia's continued support and
cooperation, be it bilateral or multilateral through
UNMIT or other regional and international
mechanisms.

Finally, Sir, Malaysia is happy to see you chairing
the core group on Timor-Leste. We wish to also
commend Mr. Atul Khare, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, and his team
for the good work that they have accomplished for
Timor-Leste.

