Mr. Auvaart (Estonia): I would like to begin by
thanking the presidency of the United Kingdom for
convening this debate on mediation and the peaceful
settlement of disputes.

Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

Today's meeting is very timely. Not only are we
witnessing an increase in conflicts, but a number of
peace processes are experiencing setbacks, ceasefire
agreements are not holding and an unprecedented
number ofpeople are being displaced from their homes.
While we may start to doubt our capacity to settle
conflicts in peaceful ways, we must remind ourselves
that we cannot afford to do that. The peaceful resolution
of conflicts is the very purpose of our Organization, and
it is our collective responsibility under the Charter of
the United Nations to do everything we can by peaceful
means to avert the outbreak of crises.

The aspects of today's topic that I would like to
focus on are mediation capacity, inclusivity and political
will and leadership. Estonia supports the increasing
focus of the United Nations on mediation as a crucial
means of action in conflict resolution. We thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and welcome his
initiatives to enhance mediation capacities in the
United Nations itself as well as nationally and locally.
Improving the ability to anticipate and react quickly
to emerging and existing conflicts and enhancing the
skills of cooperation and partnership-building and the
virtues of care and trust are necessary investments
in effective conflict prevention. The establishment of
the High-level Advisory Board on Mediation is also a
step in the right direction. Besides that, Estonia greatly
values the work of the Department of Political Affairs
in the areas of prevention and mediation and we are
proud to be among its supporters.

As many have already stressed today, we believe that
inclusivity is key to successful conflict prevention. An
awareness of the grievances and perspectives of various
communities and groups - including the young and
old, women, religious groups and minorities - is vital
to understanding the challenges around these issues
and achieving lasting and sustainable solutions to
them. We would like to emphasize that the specific
inclusion of women is not only about ensuring their
equal participation in negotiations but also helps
to raise women-specific issues within conflicts. In
that regard, it is important to ensure that women are
included at decision-making levels and appointed as
high-level mediators.

Lastly, let me emphasize how important political
will and engagement are to successful mediation
processes. We appeal to the Security Council to use the
full potential of Chapter VI of the Charter in a united
manner and in the spirit of cooperation. It is also just
as much up to us, as the international community, to
find ways to support and incentivize the political will
for conflict resolution that we need to see from all
individual Member States at all administrative levels.

Estonia has contributed to the peaceful settlement
of disputes by taking part in several United Nations-
led peacekeeping operations around the world,
including the missions in Lebanon and Mali and in
the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization.
Peacekeeping, however, normally follows events that
have already caused Violence and suffering. In order
to ensure that we do not simply react to conflicts
as they occur, we must step up our efforts to use all
available means to prevent conflicts in the first place.
In that regard, I would like to emphasize the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission as a central actor in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding in the United Nations
system. Estonia had the privilege of being a member
of the Peacebuilding Commission last year, and we
firmly support its broader focus. In addition, Estonia
has supported the Peacebuilding Fund since 2013, as we
believe that it is an effective peacebuilding instrument
for providing catalytic, fast and flexible assistance. We
will continue to promote those ideas throughout our
first-ever bid for a non-permanent seat on the Security
Council for the period from 2020 to 2021.

