Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand welcomes
the firm resolve expressed by Pakistan in response to
the atrocity in Peshawar, and I reiterate the comments
of sympathy and support that I expressed to the Council
three days ago in an earlier debate.

I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
debate. It is an important reminder to the Council and
the United Nations more generally that terrorism does
not sit in isolation from other threats. In many contexts,
terrorism and transnational organized crime are closely
linked. Funds provided by criminal enterprises are often
the lifeblood of terrorist operations, as is the supply of
weapons. We have seen that pernicious relationship in
West Africa, South-East Asia and elsewhere. To focus
solely on terrorist threats at the expense of the wider
context in which terrorists operate is not only outdated,
but downright dangerous. The most effective efforts to
counter terrorism are those that are well calibrated to
the contours of the particular threat.

This debate and the strategic review that has been
called for are opportunities to refocus our attention on
ensuring full implementation of existing foundational
tools on counter-terrorism, such as resolution 1373
(2001). Furthermore, we should take this opportunity
to ensure that the United Nations overall counter-
terrorism architecture, particularly its mechanisms
for providing or facilitating assistance, supports that
implementation in a way that genuinely responds to
contemporary terrorism challenges.

Once new trends are identified and new measures
are agreed, we need to monitor implementation and we
must be brutally honest in assessing the effectiveness
of What we have decided to do. The illicit activities that
help fund terrorism differ from country to country and
even between regions. So a one-size-fits-all approach
is simply never going to be effective. For example,
mineral and diamond smuggling have long been at the
heart of conflicts in Africa, although recently, cocaine
trafficking has increasingly been playing a role. By
contrast, as Germany emphasized a short time ago, in
Central Africa, cross-border wildlife poaching may be
an increasing factor in conflict dynamics.

A clear assessment of relevant risks and
vulnerabilities is a crucial step in any response,
particularly in conflict settings, but those assessments
must be ongoing and, as I said earlier, they must be
brutally honest. Bilateral and regional coordination and
information-sharing are also essential, as are integrated
national mechanisms for confronting those threats.
The United Nations must play its part by ensuring that
relevant entities, not least the Council's subsidiary
bodies, take a coordinated and coherent approach to
dealing with those challenges.

National authorities, in particular police and
border control, are at the very front line of addressing
terrorist and transnational organized crime, but,
for many States - those most affected by those
phenomena - such institutions remain weak. The
international community needs to work bilaterally and
through appropriate forums to help strengthen relevant
national capabilities.

New Zealand welcomes the proposed strategic
review. We hope that it can shed light on how, and in
what circumstances, responses that address terrorism
and transnational organized crime can be mutually
reinforcing, and we hope that it will include concrete
options that the Council can consider. We look forward
to the opportunity, as a future member, to doing just
that. The review should be relevant to the United
Nations efforts across a number of areas, including
conflict resolution. New Zealand will therefore look
for connections between the review and others that are
currently ongoing, such as those on peacekeeping and
peacebuilding.

