Mr. Seenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): We, too, are very pleased to see that under your
leadership, Mr. President, the Council is holding this open
debate today to hear the briefing presented by the United

 

Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mrs. Ogata, to
all the Members of the Organization.

We believe that today's open meeting is a pioneering
step in what has been indicated as the right direction, the
direction of transparency and democratization of the
Security Council. Costa Rica trusts that this could become
a definitive precedent for the customary proceedings of the
Council so that all reports and briefings by the Secretariat
and by specialized agencies and agencies involved in
matters of international peace and security would be
presented to the Council in this manner.

In accordance with decisions taken in informal
consultations, we made a list of concerns and questions for
Mrs. Ogata. However, many of them have already been
covered in her initial statement. We should therefore like to
make some general comments and focus on particular
points.

We attach great importance to what Mrs. Ogata said
about the political support and pressure needed in order to
resolve conflicts that violate international peace and
security. Frankly, discrimination or focusing on certain
issues at the expense of others is not acceptable to us. We
believe that even-handed, but constant, pressure is
necessary wherever there is conflict.

With regard to the situation in Kosovo in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, Mrs. Ogata referred to the need for
certain political and legal actions and steps that could help
consolidate the humanitarian situation of the civilian
population affected by the conflict. We take note of the
possibility of an amnesty, which we consider to be
interesting and useful. It should be seriously considered by
those involved as part of an effort to strengthen the
humanitarian situation. It seems to us that an amnesty
would be a good step to take, but we also believe that other
concrete actions should be taken to promote respect for the
legal order and the rule of law. Above all, we believe that
such measures must not used to perpetuate impunity with
respect to violations of human rights committed in the past.

I should also like to refer to the general situation with
regard to refugee camps, a matter with particular impact in
the African regions affected by armed conflict. Costa Rica
attaches the greatest importance to the security situation in
those camps. As we all know, it not only affects the
conditions in which humanitarian assistance is delivered,
but represents a real threat to the people living in the
camps. We would like to know the High Commissioner's
thinking about that situation, and in particular her View on
the effectiveness of existing measures to guarantee, for
example, the separation of civilians and combatants,
which is a key element.

With regard to my earlier comments about the need
to clear sufficient space to allow for political pressure
leading to conflict resolution, it seems to us that it is
necessary to continue the political measures that have
been carried out in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
with a View to rapidly arriving at a ceasefire. We are
concerned that the present concentration on achieving a
ceasefire might relegate humanitarian issues to second
place. We would also like to stress the urgent need to
discuss and agree quickly on arrangements with regard to
the humanitarian situation in that country.

We have always emphasized the need for innovative
solutions and novel mechanisms with regard to the
humanitarian situation and, as we have said, the security
situation in the refugee camps. We have, for example,
emphasized that the precedent provided by the Tripartite
Commission in Burundi and Tanzania is a step in the
right direction. We would like to know whether
Mrs. Ogata has a new assessment of the evolution of the
work of that Commission and, above all, whether there is
a possibility of such arrangements being applied in other
regions where there are conflict situations with
humanitarian consequences.

In conclusion, we would also like to refer to the
future measures envisioned by Mrs. Ogata. In particular,
we would like to emphasize the issue of multidisciplinary
peacekeeping operations. We believe that that represents
an important achievement in the doctrine and practice of
the United Nations, in large measure - as was said
earlier - inspired by concepts which the High
Commissioner has constantly brought to the attention of
the Security Council. Of course, we feel that humanitarian
assistance is a crucial element in broadening United
Nations peacekeeping operations. However, we would like
to underscore that we believe the major lesson to be
drawn is that, given the complexity of conflict situations,
the disciplinary scope and the nature of such operations
should be further broadened to cover other relevant areas
in relation to peace-building, as Mrs. Ogata said. We
would like to make that clear and to learn the opinion of
the High Commissioner about that process of broadening
the multidisciplinary nature of peacekeeping operations.

