Mr. Al-Shamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, it gives me great pleasure to
extend to you, on behalf of the United Arab Emirates,
my sincerest congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month, and I
wish you every success. I would also like to thank your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Great
Britain, for his efforts in managing the activities of the
Council last month.

Mr. President, your quick response to the request
to convene an emergency meeting for the second time
in 10 days reflects the growing international concern
regarding the tragic and serious situation in the Middle
East that has resulted from the grave violations and
illegal acts committed daily by the Government of
Israel, in defiance of relevant international norms and
resolutions.

Many international appeals and calls have been
made by the United Nations and by world leaders,
including the members of the Quartet, urging the
Government of Israel to end its flagrant policy of
violations of the national, political and human rights of
the Palestinian people, including the construction of
the disturbing, illegitimate, racist separation wall
through the occupied Palestinian lands and cities. It is
regrettable that despite those appeals the Government
of Israel intransigently continues its policy and has
started the second phase of the separation wall,
ignoring all appeals and flouting with contempt the
legal, political and moral obligations imposed by peace
agreements, international law and other relevant and
legitimate international resolutions.

The series of important periodic and regular
reports submitted by the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, and
by his other assistants for political affairs, to the
Security Council and to other bodies regarding this
subject have strongly warned of the separation wall's
dangerous and negative impact on the daily life of the
Palestinian people as well as on the peace process.

The separation wall, which is built deep inside
Palestinian villages and cities - 6 kilometres deep in
some areas - will result in the de facto annexation of
thousands of acres of private and public Palestinian
lands, which contain water and other natural resources,
in addition to the other Arab and Palestinian lands that
were seized militarily by Israel during previous
decades. This concrete wall has resulted in extensive
destruction of fertile Palestinian lands and in the
separation and isolation of many villages and cities. It
has affected the lives of thousands of Palestinians who
lost their jobs and have been denied access to their
schools, families, lands and other basic services, such
as hospitals and other facilities.

Moreover, most dangerous of all is that
construction of this walled barrier, fortified by barbed
wire and trenches, will penetrate into East Jerusalem. It
is an attempt to illegally and illegitimately annex this
Holy City, which is considered the capital of Palestine.
That will lead to the disintegration of Palestinian
society and will affect the future Palestinian State in
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, areas that were
occupied by Israel in 1967 in violation of legitimate
international resolutions, in particular resolutions 242
(1967) and 1397 (2002).

The Security Council's failure to take the
necessary and effective measures to stop Israel's
policies of aggression and its flagrant violation of its
resolutions and of international humanitarian laws and
norms has conveyed a wrong message to the
Government of Israel and has encouraged it to continue
its aggression against the countries and peoples of the
region. Otherwise, how can we explain the continued
Israeli military attacks against the cities, villages and
camps of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, the killing
and displacement of hundreds of Palestinians, the daily
demolition of dozens of Palestinian homes and
properties, penetration of Lebanon's airspace and its
unjustified military attack against Ein Saheb in Syria
on 5 October. These provocative Israeli acts constitute
a gross violation of the separation agreements between
the forces, in the Golan Heights in 1974, the Blue Line
understanding sponsored by the United Nations in
southern Lebanon and the other relevant international
resolutions.

We therefore appeal to the international
community to move with all urgency to stop the Israeli
threat to international peace and security. If this threat
is not stopped it will ruin peace efforts and
opportunities and will drag the entire region and its
peoples into a new circle of violence and war.

Furthermore, the United Arab Emirates strongly
deplores the Israeli position on building the separation
wall, and its continuing occupation and aggression
against the Palestinian and Arab lands, which
constitute part of its expansion and colonization plans
for the region. We also urge the Security Council to
issue an effective resolution that categorically
condemns the separation wall and demands that Israel
fully and unconditionally remove the wall, in
accordance with the United Nations Charter,
international humanitarian law and the relevant United
Nations resolutions.

We also appeal to the Quartet - and especially to
its influential members - to bring pressure to bear on
the Israeli Government to compel it to respond to
international appeals immediately to cease construction
of the separation wall, to resume negotiations and to
comply with its obligations under the provisions of the
road map, which calls for the establishment of two
States - Palestine and Israel - living side by side in
peace and security in the region.

