Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend my thanks and appreciation
to Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her comprehensive briefing
on developments pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).

More than two years ago, Libya emerged from
dictatorship and despotism and entered an era of
building democracy in a State built upon the rule of law.
The entire world welcomed that positive transformation,
which was not an easy task. On the contrary, the sisterly
country of Libya encountered intractable difficulties.
Human rights were violated, and the Libyan authorities
do not deny that.

The Libyan authorities have undertaken a
commitment to face, at the national and international
levels, the challenges coinciding with the new situation,
whether in the field of security or in humanitarian,
economic and social affairs. To demonstrate that
commitment, Libya has even-handedly addressed
violations committed against Libyans and has given
priority to the judiciary in issuing laws that guarantee
independence, transitional justice and the establishment
of a national reconciliation commission to look into
allegations of human rights violations - which the
Libyan Constitution also refers to with regard to
international treaties. That is very important.

The Libyan authorities have also stated that
they will not protect those suspected of perpetrating
crimes against humanity, nor will they allow impunity
for them. By the same token, they are undertaking
serious investigations, and they will try the accused
in a just manner and in accordance with international
instruments.

The Libyan authorities have also promised to try
those responsible for crimes against humanity and
to develop a plan to achieve national reconciliation,
national justice and the preservation of social justice.
At the same time, the new Libyan authorities, starting
with the National Transitional Council, have declared
their willingness to cooperate with the International
Criminal Court (ICC) with a view to safeguarding
justice for the victims of human rights violations. In
that connection, consultations have been held to look
into the matters under discussion, in a manner that
corresponds with the requirements of national and
international laws, through the investigation and fact-
finding missions sent to Libya.

The Libyan authorities continue to emphasize their
intention to cooperate with the ICC in the contex of
respect for Libyan laws and international law. Libya's
insistence on trying the inner circle of the former
regime does not run counter to ongoing cooperation
with the Court; rather, Libyan authorities are pursuing
the admissibility challenges in accordance with the
Rome Statute.

On that basis, we welcome the general trend in the
Council to give priority to the Libyan judiciary while
respecting the principles of complementarity with
international jurisdictions and taking into consideration
the fact that the Libyan judiciary's work in dealing with
such cases should be carried out in accordance with
objective, well-known and well-recognized criteria.

We are certain that the new Libya is qualified to
respond to all the aspirations of the Libyan people,
whatever they might be. The new Libya will remain an
active partner in the Arab Maghreb Union in an effort
to achieve the goals and unity we all aspire to and to
avert the dangers flowing from the proliferation of
secessionist terrorist groups and criminal gangs.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our full
support and backing for the Libyan Government, which
is, as we all know, working in a delicate security situation.
We urge the international community, represented by
the Council - as mentioned in the statement made by
Ms. Bensouda - to provide the necessary assistance
with a view to enabling the Libyan Government to
face up to the challenges it faces, foremost among
which are disarmament, security, border monitoring,
the reintegration of former combatants, solving the
problems of refugees in a manner that respects human
rights and the achievement of national reconciliation. I
would like to express Morocco's readiness to continue
to cooperate with our brothers in Libya to develop
national laws and institute national transitional justice.

