Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): My delegation wishes
to congratulate France and Germany for the successful
joint presidency of the Security Council for the months
of March and April. It is an example of how collaborative
partnerships can help to strengthen multilateralism. I
would also like to note with appreciation the positive
changes introduced in recent months to improve
transparency in the workings of the Council, and
thereby help to increase the legitimacy of its decisions.

And yet the Council is failing to protect its legitimacy
on the question of Palestine, which is probably the
most enduring issue in the Council's history. Since
the previous debate on this topic, held in January (see S/PV.8449), more countries have announced their
intention to move their embassies from Tel Aviv to
Jerusalem. And in recent weeks we heard the disturbing
news that Israel's illegal annexation of the Syrian Golan
is also receiving recognition. Such decisions are illegal
and in clear violation of the resolutions of the Council
and the Charter of the United Nations.

The Council has declared null and void - through
resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980) - Israel's illegal
occupation of Palestine, the annexation of Jerusalem,
the shifting of Israel's capital to Jerusalem and the
decision by any country to recognize Jerusalem as
Israel's capital. Through resolution 2334 (2016), the
Council called upon all States to distinguish, in their
relevant dealings, between the territory of the State
of Israel and the Arab territories occupied since 1967.
Similarly, any action by Israel to exercise sovereignty
over the Syrian Golan violates resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 497 (1981). The Maldives therefore
requests the President of the Security Council to
publicly condemn the decisions by any country to
recognize Israel's illegal annexations of Jerusalem
and the Syrian Golan and encourage those countries to
return to the right side of international law and conduct
themselves in a manner consistent with international
norms of acceptable behaviour.

Israel's seven-decades-long illegal occupation of
Palestine violates the basic human rights of thousands
of men, women and Children. Israel's illegal seizure
of Palestinian lands must stop. The illegal blockade
of Gaza must come to an end. The racial and religious
discrimination against the Arabs must end. The
Maldives reiterates its calls on Israel to stop the
attacks on Palestinian civilians, including women and
children. Palestinians must be treated with dignity
and respect, and their inalienable rights must be
restored immediately.

The Maldives has always believed that an
independent and sovereign Palestine, established on
the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living side by side in peace and harmony with Israel,
is the best and the only solution to the conflict. The
Maldives calls upon the occupying Power, Israel, to
fully implement the resolutions of the Council and
respect the legal obligations under the Charter of the
United Nations. We also urge the Security Council and
the international community to redouble their efforts
to end the conflict and to bring meaningful and lasting
peace to the people of Palestine.

The conflict in Syria has already claimed the lives
of hundreds of thousands of people, including children.
It has levelled entire cities and towns to the ground and
reduced them to rubble.

On Yemen, my Government is encouraged by the
Council's decision to adopt resolution 2452 (2019) on
16 January and to establish a Special Political Mission
to support the implementation of the ceasefire. The
Maldives calls upon the parties to exercise maximum
restraint and bring an end to the long suffering of
millions of civilians and children in Yemen. The
Council must expedite the pooling of resources to
observe the truce, which is still very fragile.

My Government reaffirms its support to the
Council and the Secretary-General in all ongoing
efforts to bring lasting peace to the Middle East. As we
begin to observe the holy month of Ramadan in May,
it is also our wish that the people of the Middle East
will be able to observe the holy month free from the
hardship of conflict, perform their religious duties with
dignity and be treated with compassion.

