Mr. Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark): We would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
today's debate on small arms. We welcome the report
of the Secretary-General on the issue (S/2005/69). I
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Abe,
for his useful comments, and Ms. Kawaguchi for her
presence here in the Council.

I would like underline at the outset that Denmark
associates itself with the statement to be delivered later
by the Permanent Representative of Luxembourg on
behalf of the European Union.

The challenge that small arms and light weapons
pose for us is complex. Those arms fuel underlying
tensions, exacerbate conflicts and hamper
peacebuilding efforts. The arms are an easy currency
for smugglers, sanctions busters and terrorists, and are
widely traded for illegally extracted natural resources.
At the same time, in many parts of the world small
arms are also the breadwinners and the primary means
of protection for civilians struggling to survive in
societies where the rule of the gun rather than the rule
of law dominates.

This complex challenge must be tackled through
a comprehensive approach that addresses both the
supply side and the demand side of the equation. It
should bring together a range of measures - security,
legal, political and developmental - and engage a
wide variety of actors, the Council being only one of
them. I would like briefly to offer some views with
respect to three areas of action.

First, Denmark fully supports the expeditious
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action. We hope that the Biennial Meeting this year
and the review conference in 2006 will further develop
the Programme as a platform for advanced policies on
small arms and light weapons.

The ongoing negotiations on marking and tracing
small arms, light weapons and ammunition could be a
major achievement in this regard, and we strongly
believe that the international community should move
directly to the adoption of a legally binding
international instrument.

Developing a tool to confront illicit brokering is
the next step forward. The legal and illegal supply
chains are closely interlinked. Often it is only at the
last stage that a transaction becomes illegal. The
development of a verifiable and credible end-user
certificate system would be of critical value in further
tackling illicit arms transfers.

Secondly, we would like to stress the need for the
Council to continue to explore ways and means of
using and enforcing its arms embargoes. We agree with
the recommendation of the Secretary-General that the
Council should move to use arms embargoes sooner
rather than later, to try to prevent heightened political
tension from turning into outright violent conflict. This
will also often be a way of effectively breaking the link
between the illegal exploitation of natural resources
and illicit arms trafficking.

Establishing panels of experts has greatly
enhanced the monitoring of arms embargoes, but the
follow-up to the recommendations of the panels must
be strengthened, for example, through stronger
provisions for secondary sanctions on countries or
individuals that violate sanctions regimes. We believe
that the Council should stimulate further consideration
of the role peacekeeping units and other relevant
actors, including civil society, could usefully play in
enforcing sanctions regimes. Again, attention should
be directed at both ends of the chain of supply and
demand. Arms embargoes work only if the necessary
means to enforce them are in place and if everyone
observes them painstakingly.

Thirdly, I would like to stress our particular
concerns about the situation in Africa, where illicit
arms transfers and the recirculation of weapons from
one conflict to another constitute a mounting problem.
Full use should be made of international and regional
instruments to curb illicit arms flows and enforce arms
embargoes in Africa. The challenge, however, can be
tackled in the long run only by acknowledging the
interlinkage between security and development. In
order to break the vicious circle, it is necessary to
address the root causes of why people procure arms:
poverty, lack of legitimate employment opportunities,
the failure of States to provide security, and civil strife.

That is why it is so crucially important to ensure
funds for the rehabilitation and reintegration phase of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
processes. The Council should engage in consultations
with relevant partners on new ways of securing the
necessary resources to create possibilities for
vocational training, education and real jobs, taking into
account the special needs of child soldiers and women.

We should approach with an open mind the
possibility of funding a larger share of DDR-related
activities in peacekeeping operations through assessed
contributions. But often the financial and human
resources are already there; we just need to coordinate
them better. Turf should be given up for the benefit of
cooperation. In this regard, there is also a need to
enhance regional cooperation and to harmonize DDR
programmes across neighbouring countries. Further
involving regional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States, is one way
forward.

Last but not least, it is important not to forget the
link to governance. For example, attempts at
strengthening the rule of law and enforcement may
enhance confidence in a country's legal system, which
in turn may help to reduce the temptation to take the
law into one's own hands.

It is clear that the Council is only one of a
number of relevant actors needed to tackle the complex
challenge of small arms and lights weapons. During its
tenure, Denmark will strive to enhance the cooperation
between the Council and other relevant agencies and
organizations inside and outside the United Nations in
this important endeavour. We believe that the security
and development challenge posed by small arms
underscores the importance of the current United
Nations reform agenda, in particular the pertinence of
the recommendation of the High-level Panel on
Threats, Challenges and Change to establish a
peacebuilding commission with the task of integrating
security, political, social and economical aspects of
peacebuilding.

Finally, I would like to thank the delegation of
Japan for having prepared the draft presidential
statement on this issue to be adopted at the end of the
meeting.

