Mr. Lajeak (Slovakia): Let me express my gratitude
to you, Mr. President, and to your country, Malaysia,
for convening today's open debate. It provides a great
opportunity for all of us to discuss and share our
views, particularly on the comprehensive review of
resolution 1540 (2004). Allow me also to express my
great appreciation for Spain's initiative, as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004), in organizing the formal open
consultations in June that addressed the comprehensive
review of the status of implementation of the
resolution. We found that meeting to be very timely and
beneficial and conducted in the spirit of cooperation
and transparency.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
is one of the major threats to international peace and
security. It has been further aggravated by an increased
risk of such weapons falling into the hands of terrorist
groups and other non-State actors. It should therefore
be our highest priority to avoid and prevent such
dangerous events from happening.

In that regard, I wish to highlight the centrality and
contribution of resolution 1540 (2004). Together with the
Biological Weapons Convention, the Chemical Weapons
Convention, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and their implementing mechanisms
and agencies, resolution 1540 (2004) has become a
significant component of the robust global security
architecture. It is also an efficient tool for tackling
the non-proliferation challenges connected with
various militant and terrorist groups. Its ongoing
comprehensive review process provides an opportunity
to work together towards its enhanced functioning.

But how can that goal be achieved? Preventing
non-State actors from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction cannot be accomplished by a single country
alone. Collective efforts and international cooperation
are therefore required. Security for of all of us is
interdependent. We are only as strong as our weakest
link. We are therefore convinced that we should adjust
and improve the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) to the fullest extent possible.

Countries that have difficulties with their national
implementation and reporting mechanisms should
have access to adequate assistance. We should foster
and utilize regional expertise and capacities and
ensure their availability to the countries that need it.
Assistance should be cooperative and goal-oriented
and respect the countries' needs and the interests of the
international community.

Furthermore, the 1540 Committee and its Panel of
Experts should have all the necessary resources at their
disposal. That is a prerequisite for the effective and
efficient fulfilment of their tasks.

It is crucial to take advantage of the rapid
developments and breakthroughs in science, technology,
finance and commerce. Non-State actors exploit new
technologies to pursue their illicit activities and often
have enough financial and human resources to avoid
existing export-control mechanisms. We must therefore
keep our national export-control mechanisms up-to-
date and dedicate sufficient financial and personnel
capacities to them. We should also reach out to industry
and civil society to raise awareness and create a true
partnership in our efforts to prevent the proliferation of
sensitive items to non-State actors.

Slovakia's strong commitment to resolution 1540
(2004) was underlined by our chairmanship of the 1540
Committee during our non-permanent membership of
the Security Council in 2006 and 2007. As a former
Chair, we know at first hand how challenging that
work is. We therefore fully support Spain in its efforts,
including the establishment of the Group of Friends of
resolution 1540 (2004). Slovakia is proud to be one of
the founding members.

Slovakia has also been active in promoting domestic
legislation on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). We introduced a wide range of legislative,
executive and enforcement measures before and after
April 2004. We have developed an effective national
export-control system. As an integral part of the strong
European Union export-control regime, it is regularly
updated to reflect contemporary non-proliferation
developments and requirements.

Let me assure Council members that Slovakia
remains fully committed to its disarmament and
non-proliferation obligations. We stand ready to
continue to help and assist the international community
in combating proliferation threats and challenges.

Finally, allow me to reiterate my appreciation
for the convening of this open debate and to wish
Malaysia a successful conclusion of its Security
Council presidency.

