The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity, as representative of Japan.

I would like to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for
his very helpful report. Japan wholeheartedly supports
and backs the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). I express profound
gratitude to all the staff of UNAMI, who work under
difficult conditions. We express our sincere
condolences to the families of staff members who have
lost their lives in a noble mission.

I would also like to congratulate Ambassador Al
Bayati on his very important statement and on the
progress that the Iraqi Government and people are
making.

Japan is pleased with the positive developments
during the reporting period, most notably the
successful governorate elections in January. Our
election observers who participated in the process
reported the high regard in which they held the
professional work of the Independent High Electoral
Commission and the generally smooth conduct of the
voting. I am grateful for the kind words regarding the
Japanese contribution.

Only a representative and inclusive electoral
process will carry the legitimacy necessary to gain the
support of the people. The result of the elections will
require political parties to work with each other to
select their officers. Japan hopes that the success of the
governorate elections augurs well for the future
democratic process. We hope for an even higher
turnout in the next stages - the national election and
the remaining governorate elections - with the
collaboration of the Independent High Electoral
Commission and UNAMI.

Improvement in security is vital to the
development of the country. The positive progress in
the security situation during the last quarter is
encouraging. We welcome the growing role of the Iraqi
security forces. I take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to the United States, the United Kingdom
and other coalition countries that are providing security
support. However, there are still disturbing incidents,
and we condemn all acts of violence.

Together with security, we should concentrate on
rehabilitation, reconstruction and development to
improve the living standards of all the Iraqi people.
Japan has extended $1.6 billion in grant aid for
immediate needs in such areas as supply of electricity
and medical services. In addition to $6 billion in debt
relief measures, Japan has pledged additional support
of $3.5 billion for the rehabilitation of large-scale
infrastructure. Already, 12 strategically important
projects, for a total amount of $2.5 billion, have been
agreed. The remaining $1 billion will place more focus
on development in the central and western regions.

However, there are still significant challenges
that remain to be tackled by the Iraqi people. First and
foremost, Iraq needs to achieve economic growth and
improve basic social services, which must be available
to all the Iraqi people, including displaced persons.
This has become a real challenge with the sharp
decline of oil prices. While the international
community, including Japan, is ready to support Iraq,
the Government of Iraq is expected to address the
undertakings it made in the International Compact for
Iraq. We are confident that, with appropriate technical
support, Iraq will soon become a vibrant economy that
can reap the benefits of peace.

Other challenges include the disputed internal
boundaries, the constitutional review and national
elections. The issue of the status of Kirkuk will soon
come to the forefront. I hope that the Iraqi people will
be able to find an equitable solution to this issue with
the assistance of UNAMI. Political issues can be
solved only through the political process. Resorting to
violence to achieve political gains is totally
unacceptable.

Another important issue is how to normalize
Iraq's relationship with the rest of us in the
international community and to achieve international
standing equal to that which it held prior to the
adoption of resolution 661 (1990). We very much look
forward to the Secretary-General's report in response
to resolution 1859 (2008).

We welcome the positive interaction of the
Government of Iraq with its neighbours. We strongly
call on the Government, as a responsible partner, to
work constructively with neighbouring countries and
the international community to work out solutions on
all outstanding issues.

As we recognize the gains achieved so far, we
note that 2009 will be an important year for the future
of Iraq. I would like to conclude by reiterating Japan's
strong support for the Government and the people of
Iraq.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to Mr. De Mistura to respond to
comments made by members of the Council.

