Mr. Bougacha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): It is
my pleasure at the outset to express the appreciation of
my country for your leadership, Mr. President, of the
Council during the month of April. Likewise, I thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for her very valuable briefing. We also
pay tribute to the role of civil society in promoting a
just settlement to the conflict in Middle East.

This meeting takes place against the backdrop
of a tense and deteriorating situation due to Israel's
ongoing occupation and violation of international
resolutions, while establishing a de facto policy through
its settlement activities in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem - which are all provocations, aggressions
and violations of all the rights, shrines, territories and
national capacities of the Palestinians- in addition to
its suffocating economic siege of the Gaza Strip.

Tunisia reiterates its appeal to the Security
Council and the international community to assume
their full responsibilities and take serious and urgent
action to pressure the occupying Power to comply
with the resolutions of international legitimacy,
including resolution 2334 (2016), to end settlements
and occupation. This is critical if we hope to achieve
any progress towards reaching a settlement to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, in accordance with
international law, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
principle of the two-State solution. That would ensure
the establishment of an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State within the lines of 4 June 1967, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, leading to a comprehensive
settlement of the Palestinian question and helping to
achieve stability and peace in the Middle East.

In the final statement of the Summit of the League
of Arab States, held on 31 March in Tunisia, Arab
leaders affirmed the central status of the Palestinian
question and committed themselves to making every
effort to relaunch serious negotiations in accordance
with a certain timeframe. They also affirmed that
peace, security and stability can be achieved only when
it is based on a just and comprehensive solution to the
Palestinian question and the Arab-Israeli conflict as
a whole. The Arab leaders renewed their rejection of
all the unilateral steps and actions of the occupying
Power to change the historic and legal position of
East Jerusalem.

Moreover, Arab leaders called upon the countries
of the world not to recognize Jerusalem as the capital
of Israel or move their embassies there, as well as to
comply with resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980).
They renewed their rejection and condemnation of the
so-called Jewish nation-State law as a consecration of
racial practices and a denial of the rights of Palestinian
people, especially their right to self-determination.

Arab leaders called on the international
community and the Security Council to shoulder their
responsibilities and provide the necessary protection
to the Palestinian people. They also renewed their
commitment to contributing financially to the budget of
the State of Palestine in order to enable it to cope with
its economic and financial difficulties, especially under
the arbitrary measures of the occupation authorities.
The Arab leaders also called on the international
community to continue supporting the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East so that it can provide basic services to
Palestinian refugees.

Tunisia expresses its support for any serious effort
to revive the peace process and return to negotiations
between the Palestinians and Israelis on the basis of
agreed international terms of reference, the Madrid
principles and the Arab Peace Initiative. That would
be according to a specific timetable during which an
agreement should be reached regarding final-status
issues with international guarantees, including the
issue of Jerusalem. We reaffirm that any endeavour
or initiative to settle the conflict that does not take
into consideration the aforementioned criteria and
the two-State solution is doomed to fail and will not
achieve progress.

Tunisia stresses once again the illegality of
recognizing Israel's sovereignty over the occupied
Syrian Golan, which is in violation of the Charter of
the United Nations and the resolutions of international
legitimacy, including resolution 497 (1981). My
country's delegation emphasizes, in line with the
statement of the Arab League summit in Tunisia,
that legitimizing the occupation is a totally rejected
approach. The most recent United States position on the
Golan does not alter the legal status ofthe Syrian Golan
as a Syrian territory occupied by Israel in 1967. That
position has absolutely no legal effect and does not give
rise to any commitment or create any rights.

In conclusion, my delegation joins international
consensus on the need for urgent action by the
international community, especially the Security
Council, in order to make a real change in dealing
with the Palestinian question and to provide a serious
and credible opportunity to reach a peaceful, just and
comprehensive solution, in accordance with the two-
States vision. That would achieve peace, security and
stability for all peoples of the region.
