Mr. Gonzalez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
1 would like to thank you, Sir, for convening today's
open debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General's Envoy on Youth; Mr. Simpson, the lead
author of the independent progress study on youth and
peace and security (see S/2018/86), and civil society
representatives for their briefings.

We welcome today's open debate, held during a
week that coincides with the holding of the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace and the report to be presented by
the Secretary-General to the Security Council on the
subject on Wednesday. The progress study on youth and
peace and security prepared by Mr. Simpson, pursuant
to resolution 2250 (2015), provides an opportunity for
us to review its findings and recommendations and to
share our views on the ways that Member States can
implement the youth and peace and security agenda. We
welcome the fact that a Colombian expert contributed
to the drafting of the study.

Let me give a brief overview of some of our
country's experiences in implementing resolution 2250
(2015), which mirrors some of the recommendations of
the study in terms of more education, an increase in the
number ofjobs and a boost in social capital. Colombia
applied these measures with equal vigour even before
the implementation of the peace process and in the very
same context.

According to the study, education was universally
recognized as a key theme of interest in peace and
security for young people, demonstrating the crucial
importance of education for young people of both
genders around the world. In Colombia, we guarantee
free education from kindergarten to grade 11, and we
have incentivized access to higher education. In seven
years, we increased access to higher education by
14 per cent. Similarly, we have implemented a national
programme that provides the best high school students
with access to the best private universities in the
country through a Government grant. That programme
has benefited more than 40,000 students. As the study
indicates, we want to provide a values-based education
for peace, and teach critical thinking skills and
non-violent methods of conflict resolution, with special
attention to the celebration of diversity.

With regard to employment, I would note Colombia's
awareness-raising campaigns to promote decent work
policies, with the aim of promoting the creation of new
jobs and the training and protection of workers so that,
through these campaigns, local authorities can learn
how to take the opinions of young people into account
when formulating policies that will have a long-term
impact. As an example of this, we have eliminated the
need to present military identification as a condition
of first employment - an obstacle to young people
gaining access to their firstjob in Colombia. Employers
can now offer jobs without that requirement. Obviously,
peacebuilding in Colombia is what makes it possible
for these and other measures to be considered by the
Administration. All those efforts have led Colombia
to achieve significant economic and social progress,
with policies targeting vulnerable groups, such as
young people - especially by focusing on combating
informality in the labour force.

Finally, with regard to the strengthening of
social capital in Colombia, we have understood that
peacebuilding requires an expansion of democracy that
allows for new voices to enrich the political debate on
Colombia's problems, to strengthen pluralism and the
representation of the different visions and interests
of society, and to provide guarantees for political
participation and inclusion.

If we are to avoid new conflicts or recurrence, we
must tackle not only the challenge of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes, but also of
bolstering our democratic culture and institutions in
order to regain the confidence of the population in State
institutions. That is precisely where the role of youth
is so important. We must risk thinking differently and
move towards the transformations we have sought as a
society. The peace process is designed for young people,
so that they can free themselves from the burden of
more than 50 years of war and propose new ways of
living together. We need to work on the issue of trust
in the regions. That is what young people have to work
on - how to bridge the gap between Colombians. The
best way to make a change is to open up scenarios for
dialogue, change the way we interact with each other
and promote environments free of discrimination.

With the recent approval by our Congress of the
youth citizenship statute, we are committed to promoting
the organization of this population group so that it can
establish youth groups, community organizations and
others that will allow them participate effectively in
our society. For example, their views on the priority
investments of their community resources will be
taken into account. Young people will have privileged
representation. In other words, we are empowering
young people right now to help them build a better
future for themselves. And we are sure that with that
law we will strengthen the capacity of young people to
do just that.
The recurrent use of force as a means of resolving
conflicts, at the expense of diplomacy and the peaceful
settlement of disputes, has only contributed to furthering
violence and bolstering extremism. Our actions must
provide our young people with options and give them
the tools to promote peace and isolate practices that
generate conflict. We reiterate our commitment to a
multidimensional response to the challenges posed by
extremism and remain convinced that cooperation and
dialogue within the United Nations framework will
enhance our capacity to combat this scourge.

We will only succeed ifwejoin efforts on the basis of
common values and strengthen multilateral cooperation.

