Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Allow me convey to you, Sir, my delegation's warm
congratulations upon your country's accession to the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. I would also like to congratulate the other
non-permanent members who will serve on the Council
in 2014 and 2015. I also take this opportunity to convey
to the Council members our best wishes for the new
year.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
15 member States of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). I would like to thank the
Secretary-General to report on the situation in Mali
(S/2014/1) dated 2 January, which is before the Council
today.

I would also like to congratulate the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Bert
Koenders, for his excellent briefing of the situation in
Mali, as well as Ambassador Sekou Kasse, Permanent
Representative of Mali.

Since the election of President Ibrahim Boubacar
Keita and following the recent transparent and
well-organized elections, we can say that normal
constitutional order has been re-established in Mali
fully and irreversibly. However, those gains must be
strengthened and consolidated by rapid progress, in
particular on the security, political, humanitarian
and human rights fronts, and above all through the
continued commitment of the international community
to sustainable solutions in Mali.

On the security front, the situation remained
relatively calm but volatile across the entire country
and extremely fragile and worrying in the Kidal region,
where tensions were high, as illustrated most clearly
by the double murder of French journalists Ghislaine
Dupont and Claude Verlon.

The situation in the north of the country is
characterized by asymmetric warfare in the form of
sporadic jihadist attacks against Malian armed forces
and the international forces of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and Operation Serval.

Two major facts illustrate the insecurity in northern
Mali, namely the jihadist attack on 23 October 2013,
at Tessalit by unidentified armed assailants against
Chadian peacekeeping troops of MINUSMA, and the
suicide car bomb attack on 14 December 2013, against
the Malian Solidarity Bank building. Two Chadian
peacekeepers and two Senegalese soldiers were killed
in Tessalit and Kidal, respectively.

Against that backdrop, the Malian Government
officially launched on 2 December the security sector
reform and set up 11 working groups to develop a
comprehensive strategy. The ECOWAS Commission,
through the Special Representation in Mali, has been
asked to nominate a representative to the working
group, who will have an active role throughout that
process.

On the political front, the developments included
the holding of talks in the north and the legislative
elections. With regard to the talks in the north, it
must be recalled that, pursuant to the provisions of the
preliminary agreement on the presidential elections and
on inclusive dialogue on peace in Mali, dated 18 June
2013, the talks in the north were held on 1, 2 and
3 November 2013, in Bamako. Their aim was to set out
and share the concerns and expectations of the Malian
people and to seek lasting, fair and inclusive peace.
Thereby, they produced a series of recommendations,
whose implementation will provide for decentralization
and for the harmonious development of the regions of
Mali.

Furthermore, a regional reconciliation forum was
held in Gao from 30 November to 2 December 2013.
The forum allowed for reconciliation in the north and
brought together more than 500 representatives - from
the second-level administrative units of Ansongo,
Bourem, Gao and Menaka - including religious
leaders, women, young people and members of civil
society organizations. This forum implements the
Government dialogue and reconciliation policy with
the aim of easing inter-community tensions.

With regard to the legislative elections, following
on from what the Malian Ambassador said, ECOWAS
notes that the electoral campaigns went calmly without
incident and that the first two rounds of elections
were held across Mali as planned on 24 November and
15 December, including in Kidal. There was a lower
turn-out for those than for the presidential elections.
Out of the 147 seats, the party of President Keita and
his allies won an absolute majority in the National
Assembly.

ECOWAS, through its Special Representative, has
provided continuous assistance to the Government of
Mali in the preparation and organization of the elections.
Overall, it deployed a 150 person-strong observation
mission to the first and second round elections. The
observers concluded that the legislative elections
of 24 November and 15 December, 2013, showed
significant progress in relation to the presidential
elections. They were held in acceptable conditions of
freedom and transparency.

On the humanitarian front, according to a report
dated 27 November 2013, from the Movement of
Populations Commission, which comprises several
international organizations, including the International
Organization for Migration, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the
World Food Programme and UNICEF, the number of
displaced persons had fallen since October 2013. Such a
decrease in the number of internally displaced persons
was found throughout the country, but was more
concentrated in the regions ofthe far north. However, an
increase was observed in the towns surrounding Kidal,
probably due to the insecurity and uncertainty linked
to the particular situation in that Kidal. With regard to
refugees, returns are being stepped up and only 185,000
refugees remain in neighbouring countries.

For its part, ECOWAS is fully committed to
assisting Mali through various humanitarian activities.
In that context, working with OCHA last November,
ECOWAS conducted predeployment training for 20
humanitarian observers, followed, on 19 December,
by a disbursement of donations totalling $500,0000 to
Malian authorities for the local purchase of provisions
to relieve the suffering of the population.

With regard to human rights, the situation is
improving progressively throughout the country thanks
to the determination of the new Malian authorities,
who decided to combat violations of human rights and
fight impunity. In recent weeks, that was evident in the
arrest and indictment of General Amadou Haya Sanogo
and some of his former comrades in the so-called
"red berets" case. With regard to the fight against
corruption, four judges and a clerk were arrested on
Tuesday, 10 December and placed in custody.

The extraordinary progress made by Mali under
the leadership of President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita
should be supported by the continued engagement of
the international community. In that context, the sixth
meeting of the international support and monitoring
group on the situation in Mali was held, on 2 November
2013. The meeting gave participants an opportunity
to take note of the latest positive developments in the
political situation in Mali since 1 July 2013. Participants
also urged the international community to continue to
provide technical expertise, assistance and financial
and material support to Mali so that the country
could regain its place in the comity of nations. The
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel and
the ECOWAS strategy, which encompasses a holistic
approach to security, the humanitarian dimension
and development challenges in the region, were also
presented at that meeting.

In conclusion, we should also welcome the holding
in Bamako, on 5 November 2013, of the first ministerial
meeting on the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel, which aimed at establishing a coordination
platform on the Sahel. The meeting, which benefited in
particular from the participation of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, African Union Commission Chairperson
Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma and the heads of
international financial institutions, including the
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the
European Union, was an opportunity to bring together
donors and to take stock ofthe funding pledges made
and the priorities identified in the Sahel region and
their implementation as set out in the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel.

It was clearly re-emphasized at that important
meeting that there is an intrinsic link between peace,
security and development and that there is a need to
set up projects centred around the development of the
Sahel in order to contain threats to peace and security,
such as poverty and insecurity, in all their forms. The
people of Mali and the Sahel region are anxious to see
the realization of those projects.

