I commend the Russian presidency for convening this open debate. I thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report (S/2020/946), and the Under- Secretary-General, the Executive Director of UN-Women and other briefers for their insights. We welcome the progress made in the implementation of landmark resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent relevant resolutions. The role of women and issues related to women, including sexual violence and gender equality, have been increasingly integrated in relevant mechanisms and regimes. We are encouraged by the report that, between 2017 and 2019, approximately 70 per cent of Security Council resolutions included explicit references to women and peace and security issues, while this number was only 15 per cent in the first five years since resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted. We also see increased participation by women in all areas, from conflict prevention to peacebuilding, peace processes and reconstruction efforts. However, much remains to be done. As mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General, the progress has been too slow, too narrow and easy to reverse. In this regard, to enhance the implementation of this agenda, I wish to highlight the following points. First, we call on all States to support the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and an immediate cessation of hostilities in all corners of the globe to reinforce diplomatic actions, help create favourable conditions for humanitarian assistance and bring hope to the people, including women and girls, who are most vulnerable to conflicts and the coronavirus disease pandemic. Secondly, peace can be sustained only if conflicts can be prevented and addressed at their roots. Therefore, we stress the importance of conflict prevention, socioeconomic development and post-conflict peacebuilding, recovery and reconstruction. During these processes, the women and peace and security issues should be fully implemented. Thirdly, we need to remove persisting barriers and push for a radical shift for women's meaningful participation in peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, while ensuring that women are fully involved as equal partners from the earliest stages in each and every peace and political process. Last but not least, progress primarily depends on States, but also States' partnerships, especially with a better-coordinated and adequately resourced United Nations. To that end, we call on the international donor community to keep providing a minimum of 15 per cent of official development assistance to conflict- affected countries to be used for advancing gender equality. For its part, Viet Nam fully recognizes the key role of women in conflict prevention and settlement, sustaining peace and socioeconomic development. Vietnamese women have not only fought for the country's freedom and independence, but also have worked hard and made significant contributions to the national recovery and development. When the situation demands it, Vietnamese women can also be effective agents of peace, as peacekeepers. Besides, women's organizations in Viet Nam, including the Women's Union, have played an active role in post-war recovery, mine clearance and assistance to victims of Agent Orange victims and veterans' families, to name but a few. Viet Nam has been also fulfilling its respective obligations and commitments under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the Beijing Platform for Action. In conclusion, Viet Nam reiterates its readiness and commitment to join the efforts of the international community to ensure that the voices of women are heard, their concerns and needs are addressed, and their roles and contributions to peace and security both are enhanced and recognized.
