Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to commend you, Mr. President, for our
brother nation of Japan's admirable work in presiding
over the Council this month, as well as to thank you
for convening today's open debate and for the related
concept note (S/2017/1016, annex). We would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
We welcome his Vision for conflict prevention and
preventive diplomacy.

The challenges to collective security today
are evolving as conflicts are becoming longer and
increasingly complex and terrorism and extremism
persist. That is why we must adopt a comprehensive
approach to promoting international peace and
security. Our shared challenges demand that we all
take a positive approach, engaging in dialogue rather
than confrontation and respecting international law.
Conflict prevention through dialogue is a step towards
establishing international peace and security. Without
that dialogue, conflicts become more complicated and
global instability increases. That is why Qatar believes
that if we are to achieve international peace and
security, we must strengthen our collective prevention
of conflicts, resolving those conflicts and differences
based on Article 33 of the Charter of the United
Nations. My country has always worked actively to
help to resolve conflicts peacefully. We therefore
welcome the Secretary-General's decision to prioritize
the prevention of conflicts and crises, which bring with
them immense human costs and undermine our ability
to achieve the overall objectives of the United Nations
in the areas of peace, development and human rights,
as the Secretary-General noted in his 17 December
report on reforming the peace and security pillar of
the Organization.

We support the Sustainable Development Goals
and preventive diplomacy, which are also priorities
for the Secretary-General where peace is concerned.
In that regard, we welcome the regional consultations
on sustaining peace in the Middle East to be held on
18 and 19 January 2018 in preparation for the General
Assembly's high-level meeting on the subject in April.

I am sure that the Council is aware that the major
and complex challenges in the Middle East constitute
a threat to international peace and security. That is
why we must redouble our efforts and our cooperation
with the countries of the region and the international
community in order to resolve these very different
crises and to eradicate terrorism, extremism and other
challenges. Our region is unfortunately dealing with
new crises that undermine stability and international
efforts to establish peace and security in the region
and fight terrorism. In that regard, I should note that
Qatar continues to suffer from the illegal blockade and
unilateral measures that are being conducted against it
on baseless pretexts, in violation of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations and to the detriment
of friendly relations among countries. Therefore, all of
the efforts for global peace and security are undermined
as well.

Major challenges and emerging crises have arisen,
such as those related to cybersecurity. Indeed, the
Internet is being used and abused in order to undermine
international peace and security. The world has seen
major Violations of many organizations in our region.
As the Secretary-General noted in his first statement
to the General Assembly (A/72/PV.1, cyberwarfare is a reality. We cannot ignore it, and it is growing. It
undermines relations among countries, bodies and
systems in the modern world. We are the Victims of
this piracy. That is why we reiterate that the absence
of a regulatory body holding perpetrators accountable
is a problem. It undermines international peace and
security and is a source of concern for the international
community. We need audacious, far-reaching and strict
measures. The perpetrators of these crimes must be
held accountable.

Qatar reiterates that it stands ready to participate
in any international joint efforts toend this scourge in
the area of cybersecurity. In that regard, my delegation
reiterates its support for the conclusions of the Group
of Governmental Experts on Information Security
and its assessment of the importance of strengthening
international cooperation, particularly in the area
of cybersecurity.

In conclusion, we reiterate our commitment to
working effectively and actively to support international
efforts to counter complex contemporary challenges.
That is the best way to implement the goals and objective
of the Charter of the United Nations and to help the
Council maintain international peace and security.

