Mr. Lamani (spoke in French): I would like to
express on behalf of the Secretary General of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference our concern
over the human and material suffering and losses
incurred by the Palestinian people following the acts of
aggression directed against that people and the
practices that have already cost the lives of the
hundreds of Palestinians and have resulted in thousands
of injured persons, as well as in the destruction of the
infrastructure in the territories - a direct consequence
of the policy of blockading and encircling the
Palestinian territories by the occupying power, Israel.

Nevertheless, we have had good reason to believe
that the Security Council, faced with the deterioration
of the situation, would not remain inert and impassive,
particularly since the international community has
mobilized itself behind the Palestinian people. One can
see tangible proof in the statements of the previous
speakers in this Chamber. Even the reprehensible
actions which the other party considers subversive are
only a clear and evident demonstration of the root of
the original problem, which so far has not been dealt
with in depth, and that is the Palestinian problem.

However, these acts cannot justify the policy of
sanctions and collective punishment designed to starve
an entire people. It is specifically this people that is the
last one not to have achieved the right to self-
determination. We must bear in mind that all the
cataclysms, which for more than 50 years have
continued to batter the Middle East, have their
epicentre in the tragedy imposed on the Palestinian
people.

Peace, security and the prosperity of the region
will remain unattained, with serious risks that these
disturbances will spread, as long as an adequate
solution, in conformity with the resolutions of this
body and of the General Assembly, is not implemented,
one that guarantees the right to a dignified and peaceful
life for all of the peoples of the region. Harmonious
cohabitation necessarily implies the right of the other
to existence, through the dismantling of the settlements
and the end of the occupation. That is the real
condition for genuine peace: allowing the Palestinians
to have sovereignty over a homogeneous and
uninterrupted territory.

It is certainly not with more repression,
blockading of Palestinian territory and measures of
collective punishment that peace will be further
consolidated. Indeed, these measures and practices can
only serve to exacerbate the frustrations and increased
feeling of dependence regarding the occupying power,
Israel.

In this situation, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference calls upon the international community to
act immediately and effectively to put an end to the
Israeli actions against the Palestinian people. The
onerous sacrifices made by that people are likely to be
nullified by the collapse of its economy and its fragile
infrastructure. Given the intransigence of the Israeli
Administration and its insistence on trying to place on
the Palestinians the responsibility for its policy of
provocation and rejection of commitments undertaken,
the situation in the region is thus a very serious one. It
is a real threat to peace in the region and even in the
world.

In accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and its past resolutions adopted on this subject,
the Security Council must try to provide for the
Palestinians the necessary protection that they hope for
and to lift unjust and repeated blockades. This is a
preliminary step to the establishment of a climate
conducive to the resumption of the peace process at the
point where it left off and on the basis of principles that
made it possible to begin in Madrid a decade ago,
namely, the respective resolutions of the Security
Council and the principles of right and of international
legality.

