Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): My delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution before us today.
We base our position on the assessment that the
ongoing Israeli-Palestinian military confrontation has
brought the situation in the Middle East to its most
critical stage in the past few decades. Like many
others, we are convinced that in current circumstances,
the presence of a third party, representing the
international community, on the ground, is critically
important to prevent the whole region from sliding into
an abyss of war. My delegation believes that action
today by the Security Council is indispensable to
address the situation in an appropriate manner. The
very fact of the adoption by the Security Council of a
draft resolution expressing its determination to
establish a United Nations force of military and police
observers in the Palestinian territory could contribute
to topping the continuing senseless bloodshed.

If adopted, today's draft resolution will contribute
to the ongoing diplomatic efforts aimed at stopping all
acts of violence and excessive use of force in the
Palestinian territory and Israel. The draft resolution
provides a strong encouragement to the parties to
implement the Sharm el-Sheikh understandings
faithfully and without further delay. In our judgement,
the main thrust of the draft is largely in line with the
positive signs that have emerged during the past few
days in terms of the resumption of peace talks between
the two sides. We look forward to the outcome of the
forthcoming talks in Washington.

While we are supportive of the current draft, it is
our understanding, however, that its practical
implementation would require additional time and
diplomatic efforts. As a contributor of troops to United
Nations peacekeeping operations for the past eight
years, Ukraine fully recognizes that the deployment
and functioning of a United Nations force in the
Palestinian territory will be impossible without the
cooperation of Israel.

It is important that draft requests the Secretary-
General to continue consultations with the parties on

the details of the acceptable composition and
modalities for this force in order to reach a
compromise solution and secure full cooperation.

Lastly, I would like to put on record that today's
vote by Ukraine is not prejudicial to one of the guiding
principles of United Nations peacekeeping, that is, the
consent of the conflicting parties to the deployment of
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

