Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Mr. President, my
delegation thanks you for having convened this
important debate. Violent extremism has emerged as
one of the most complex challenges of our time. It has
claimed innocent lives, caused wide-scale destruction
and disrupted social order as well as State structures.
Its scope, nature, causes and manifestations make
it a global phenomenon, and this requires a common
understanding and cooperative solutions.

A critical aspect ofthis challenge is the radicalization
of youth, which often leads them to commit violent acts.
But youth are also the key to building resilience against
this threat. We therefore welcome Jordan's initiative to
highlight the role of youth in addressing this challenge.

Throughout history, youth have been the engine
of change, for good or for bad. The energy of youth
can generate progress and prosperity but, equally,
it can exacerbate Violence and war. It is up to States
and societies to ensure that the energy and idealism
of youth is directed towards promoting peace and
progress rather than conflict and chaos. When young
people become alienated within societies, when they
perceive oppression and injustice, local or global, they
become susceptible to seduction by the ideologues of
extremism.

The rise of violent extremism has a direct
correlation with conflicts and disputes; foreign
intervention and occupation; religious, racial and ethnic
discrimination or persecution; and social and economic
exclusion. Extremists use such injustices to lure youth
into supporting their agenda. The radicalization of
youth in certain Western States flows from social
alienation, economic marginalization and the growing
phenomenon of Islamophobia. A major step to reverse
this is legislation to prohibit insults to religions and to
establish a clear distinction between free speech and
hate speech.

The Council, even as it considers the social and
economic dimensions of this phenomenon, has a vital
political role to play. It must intensify its efforts to
address long-standing conflicts and disputes.

The radicalization of youth cannot be understood,
much less addressed or curbed, shorn of its political,
social and economic context. Economic and political
exclusion and social injustice fuel disenchantment,
which drives young men and women towards
extremism, and that in turn assures terrorist groups
of a steady supply of recruits. We know only too well
how the youth bulge in several parts of the Middle
East has played a major role in the political upheavals
of recent years. The interplay between demographics,
lack of socioeconomic opportunity and radicalization
magnifies the challenge of Violent extremism.

When economic opportunity fails to keep pace
with demographics, young people become particularly
vulnerable to being attracted to extremist narratives.
Social frustration and economic deprivation thus
provide a breeding ground for Violent extremism. So
if violent extremists are to be defeated, the economic
empowerment of youth must be a major component
of a counter-radicalization strategy. Building
resilience in communities and societies is necessary
to evolve an effective strategy, because resilience
and cohesion are essential bulwarks against violent
extremism. This entails enlisting the support and
trust of local communities, particularly youth and
women. Educational programmes, as many others have
emphasized before me, can play a vital role in fostering
values of tolerance, harmony and respect for diversity.

The role of religious leaders is no less important,
because they can contribute to shaping young people's
attitudes and building their resilience. They can also
help to counter and delegitimize acts of violence,
regardless ofjustifications or motivations.

We in Pakistan are pursuing a comprehensive
approach that involves, in addition to law enforcement,
educational, social and economic measures.
Acknowledging the key importance of creating
economic opportunities for young people and
harnessing their potential to promote national progress,
Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif launched a special
youth programme last year. It is designed to provide
educational and vocational support and socioeconomic
opportunity in the form of special schemes for young
people.
As part of our national action plan to counter
terrorism, Pakistan has taken other steps to curb Violent
extremism. Those have included curbs on hate speech
and material, steps against religious persecution,
registration of religious schools and measures against
the use of social media for terrorism or its glorification.
We support the useful work of the United Nations Centre
for Counter-Terrorism in that area. Next month, with
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, my country will co-host in Islamabad a
skills development and needs assessment conference
focused on youth.

The United Nations with its expertise, on-the-ground
experience and unique convening power can play a
leading role in developing a comprehensive strategy.
Given the complexity and global dimensions of
Violent extremism, the General Assembly should
also be enabled to play a leading role in developing a
multifaceted strategy, building on resolution 68/127.
We hope that the September United Nations summit on
the issue will provide a clear direction towards that end.

