We thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, David Shearer, for his briefing on the situation in South Sudan. Russia supports the work of the Blue Helmets and Mr. Shearer's good offices, which are an important component of the international community's efforts to stabilize the situation in South Sudan. We are also grateful to the countries that are contributing troops and police to the United Nations Mission in South Sudan. We have taken note of the assessments of the humanitarian situation that Under-Secretary-General Lowcock shared with us today, as well as of the report of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015), concerning South Sudan (see S/2020/1225), and we would like to commend the careful work of the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam in his capacity as its Chair. The Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan is working, and the parties remain committed to implementing its arrangements. While we are seeing various problems with their full implementation, it is important that the South Sudanese demonstrate the political will necessary to find common ground. We are encouraged by the decisions taken on 9 December by the South Sudan presidency, composed of the Head of State and the Vice-Presidents, on a number of key issues, including the formation of nine state-level Governments, the confirmation of county-level governing bodies and the intention to start forming both chambers of a transitional parliament. We hope that the implementation of the interim arrangements, including those that have fallen behind schedule, will continue. Only by fully and completely implementing their commitments can the parties build mutual trust and avoid repeating past mistakes. We are seeing a steady trend among South Sudanese refugees and internally displaced persons returning to their permanent places of residence, primarily thanks to the implementation of confidence-building measures and contacts between the opposing parties on the ground. It is important to ensure that the ceasefire continues to be respected. We urge those who are not yet party to the Revitalized Agreement to join the State-building process. In that context, we commend the mediatory role of the Community of Sant' Egidio. There is no question that regional actors should play a leading role in sustaining the peace process in South Sudan. We welcome the efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the African Union, embodying the principle of African solutions to African problems. We would also like to highlight the normalization of relations between South Sudan and its neighbours, including through the restoration of economic ties, which ought to have a positive impact on stabilization in the entire East Africa subregion. In conclusion, we want to once again stress that progress in the South Sudanese peace process has been made thanks to the political will of the parties and the efforts of regional mediators rather than through the pressure of sanctions, to say nothing of unilateral restrictions. In accordance with resolution 2521 (2020), we expect to see benchmarks devised soon for reviewing the sanctions regime with the aim of adapting it to the realities on the ground.
