Mr. Patriota (Brazil): Let me express my
delegation's satisfaction, Sir, at having you preside
over our proceedings today. I thank you for organizing
this debate on an issue of such crucial importance to
a number of situations on the Council's agenda. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.

As recognized in the draft resolution to be adopted
today, the security sector is a fundamental element of
sustainable peace. If a national security sector fails in
its obligations to ensure protection to all citizens, even
for a hard realist as Hobbes the very legitimacy of the
State as a whole will be at stake. Therefore, unmet tasks
related to the establishment of a democratic, accountable
and stable security apparatus in post-conflict situations
are rightfully pointed out as a threat to durable peace
and stability.

Here at the United Nations, there is already a well-
established consensus on the importance of security
sector reform (SSR) for peace and development.
We commend all efforts to ensure that SSR-related
challenges are given due consideration in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding mandates, and that the United
Nations is well equipped to provide assistance in this
area. There is enough experience to show that the
development of a democratic security sector goes well
beyond strengthening its individual components. As we
focus on the challenges of implementation, however, it
is essential to recall some fundamental realities. I would
like to make five brief observations in that regard.

First, we must again recognize that SSR is both a
process in itself and a moment in a political continuum
that begins with peace processes, runs through
efforts related to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR), and should continue in tandem
with peacebuilding strategies into sustainable and
democratic development and the promotion of human
rights. In this context, the DDR-SSR link is a critical
one. It is essential to integrate SSR considerations early
into the peacemaking and reintegration efforts. We
fully concur with the recommendation of the Secretary-
General that "security sector reform needs to be better
linked to other critical practice areas" (S/2013/480, para.61 (h)). As important and interconnected as those
areas may be, the fundamental nexus between SSR and
DDR deserves special attention.

Secondly, being a fundamentally political process,
SSR implementation also requires a deep understanding
of the underlying sociological components of conflict,
which are likely to shape realities and different visions
on security. The United Nations needs to be equipped
to take those factors into account and to sharpen its
analytical tools so as to adequately inform the policy-
setting and decision-making processes. Again as
stressed by the Secretary-General, the Council can play
a key role in ensuring the practical application of the
central principle of national ownership by, inter alia,
taking additional steps to ensure that its mandates
incorporate the perspectives and needs of the countries
under consideration.

Thirdly, as we approach the turbulent political
environment surrounding SSR, we cannot simplify
notions such as political will. SSR entails complex,
difficult and sometimes very risky decisions. Painful
decisions on financing, on recruiting, on transitional
justice, and even on how to shape historical narratives
are intrinsic to SSR processes. An encompassing
strategy to bolster SSR implementation will benefit
from being fully informed by such political realities
and devise the best mechanisms to mitigate risks.

Furthermore, the importance of regional and
subregional contexts comes to the fore not only because
the regional and subregional components of conflict
continue to be determinant for peace, but also because
regional and subregional organizations can be effective
operative partners in articulating international support
into viable political strategies. For that to happen, of
course, strong coordination at those levels is essential.
We welcome in this regard the African Union resolve to
strengthen its capacities in SSR.

Finally, it is also crucial to think of SSR as a process
that should contribute to meaningful transformation
and stability through representative and inclusive
recruitment. In many societies, the authority and power
associated with weapons is viewed as an end in itself
and, in some circumstances, as a path to economic
gains. In such contexts, it is also critical to ensure that
SSR does not give rise to new classes of privilege to
replace old ones, but instead builds institutions that
serve the interests of all. This highlights the need for
SSR to go hand in hand with the promotion of equality
before the law, and with the exercise and protection of
social and economic rights through job creation, social
inclusion programmes, capacity-building and enhanced
opportunities for social mobility.

Let me conclude by stressing the important
contribution the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
can give to our reflections on SSR. The PBC is deeply
involved in the daily challenges of SSR. The experience
of country-specific configurations, combined with
the policy-setting platform of the Organizational
Committee, can provide a very adequate locus for a
discussion of those fundamental political dimensions
of SSR, attuned to the realities of its implementation on
the ground and understood as a process of democratic
development of the security sector. 1 invite the Security
Council to make further use of this resource, in line
with the draft resolution to be adopted later today.

