Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): My delegation thanks Ms. Ameerah Haq for
her briefing on the activities of the United Nations
Integration Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) during
the period from 21 January to 20 September 2010. We
are also grateful to the representative of Timor-Leste
for her important statement.

My statement will primarily address the political,
security and development aspects of the situation.

With regard to the political situation, Gabon
renews its support to the Government of Timor-Leste
in its efforts to safeguard national unity through
dialogue and consultation. We encourage the parties to
continue their collaboration with the Government in
the context of the "Road to peace and national unity"
initiative. I take this opportunity to welcome the
ongoing cooperation of the Alliance for a
Parliamentary Majority with other political parties with
a view to contributing to the establishment of a climate
of durable peace in Timor-Leste. The completion of
that dialogue will guarantee the long-term political and
institutional stability of the country.

Gabon welcomes the commitment of the
Government of Timor-Leste to organize credible and
transparent elections. In that regard, we commend the
technical assistance provided to the Government
jointly by UNMIT and the United Nations
Development Programme in election organization and
institutional capacity-building.

With regard to security, we would like first to
welcome the peaceful climate prevailing in the country.
The contribution made by civil society in that regard,
in particular religious organizations, is commendable.

My delegation appreciates the measures taken by
the Government with a view to strengthening the legal
system and the capacities of the national police force.
We welcome the role of UNMIT police in the process
of transferring policing responsibilities to the Timorese
police. We appeal for adequate financial resources
from the donor community to support the training
programmes for the Timorese police and to equip them
with appropriate operational resources.

We also support the partnership between UNMIT
police and the national police in the context of the
transition. In the same vein, it is important that the
Government define the areas of jurisdiction of the
army and the police in order to improve relations
between those two entities.

Given the important role that the Strategic
Development Plan will play in the future of the
country, we wish to commend the efforts of the Prime
Minister to take into account the aspirations of
communities throughout the country. My delegation
encourages the Government to continue in those efforts
of good governance, in particular with regard to the use
of income from the petroleum sector. We urge it too to
continue investing in human resources, which are so
necessary for its development.

I could not conclude my remarks without praising
the good-neighbourly relations that exist between
Timor-Leste and Indonesia, which are proof of the will
of the Timorese Government to work in close
cooperation with the countries of the region. We would
also like to reiterate our support of the Timorese
Government and people in their commitment to
stability and development of their young nation.
Likewise, we assure Ms. Haq of our full support, and
we wish to commend her vigorous leadership of
UNMIT.

