Mr. Valle (Brazil): I wish first of all to congratulate
you, Sir, on having presided over the Security Council
during this month of April with your well-known skills. At
the same time, we express our deep appreciation to your
predecessor, Ambassador Li of China.

The Brazilian Government has consistently and closely
followed events in the sister nation of El Salvador. We
have noted with satisfaction that during the unfolding of the
peace process both the Government of El Salvador and the
Frente Farabundo Marti para la Liberacion Nacional
(FMLN) have made determined efforts to strengthen
dialogue by putting aside specific demands that could have
jeopardized the course of the process. The United Nations
Observer Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL), to which
Brazil has contributed military and police observers, has,
since its establishment, reaffirmed its support for the
Salvadoran peace process and has undoubtedly been
instrumental in achieving progress in the consolidation of
peace in El Salvador.

We wish in this regard to express our gratitude for the
work of the Secretary-General; of his Special
Representative, Mr. ter Horst; and of the personnel of
ONUSAL, whose efforts for peace and national
reconciliation we recognize as a decisive factor.

The final report submitted by the Secretary-General on
ONUSAL was very realistic in recognizing that much
remains to be done before considering the Salvadoran peace
process as fully accomplished. Indeed, there is much reason
for satisfaction at what has been achieved by the
Salvadorans, but the fact that some commitments
undertaken at the peace accords still require implementation
constitutes a threat to the completion of the process as a
whole.

The proposal of the Secretary-General to maintain a
small team to perform the remaining verification and good-
offices responsibilities of the United Nations after the
termination of ONUSAL's mandate is a most meritorious
one. Brazil, which has been witnessing the evolution of the
Salvadoran peace process from its very inception, is thus
honoured by being invited to continue to take part in the
efforts of the United Nations towards El Salvador.

The Government of El Salvador and the groups
constituting the FMLN seem willing to continue to strive
for the implementation of the letter of the Chapultepec
agreement and the stabilization of democratic order.
Therefore, the international community has to keep
lending support to the Salvadoran efforts towards peace.
Of the utmost importance is the support of the
international community for development-related
activities, for we all know that poverty and
underdevelopment are at the root of unrest and political
instability.

In the words of the Secretary-General, ONUSAL is
paradigmatic, and we fully subscribe to this point of View.
Brazil believes that the peace process in El Salvador can
be regarded as an example of the meaningful contribution
the United Nations can make to a people's effort to solve
problems that could affect the security of a region. It is
undeniable that gigantic steps have been taken towards
democratic order. For all this, the hard-working people of
El Salvador continue to deserve our praise and
admiration.

