The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Lebanon.

Once again, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Abdurahman Ibrahim, First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister of Fisheries and Marine Resources of
Somalia, and thank him for his important statement. I
also thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, for his thorough
briefing.

Lebanon supports the Djibouti peace process and
welcomes recent positive political developments,
including the signing of an agreement between the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia and Ahlu
Sunna Wal Jama'a. We hope that the approach to the
situation in Somalia, where 43 per cent of the
population needs humanitarian assistance, will not be
limited to fighting rebellions and efforts in the area of
security, although these issues are very important, but
will also include the consolidation of institutions and
development aid.

We would like to make the following points. With
respect to security, we are very concerned by recent acts
of violence, militia attacks against the Government and
clashes among the insurgents themselves, which have
resulted in a number of innocent casualties. These
conflicts show that we need to equip and support the
regular army of Somalia as soon as possible in order to
extend State authority throughout Somali territory and
to reintegrate deserters and defectors from the army. We
welcome the Government's national security plan and
urge donors to approve assistance to build up the Somali
security services and to ensure that they are duly paid.

As to piracy, we condemn all acts of piracy and
armed robbery, which pose a serious threat to trade,
international navigation and the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. We affirm the importance of
resolution 1918 (2010) and thank the States that have
sent ships into the territorial waters of Somalia and the
Gulf of Aden. We hope that this increased international
presence will uncover new information on illegal
fishing and the dumping of industrial waste along the
Somali coast. We support Mr. Ould Abdallah's
proposal regarding fishing license fees. We reiterate
that addressing the underlying causes of piracy would
help to establish a firm and lasting foundation for
economic development and the elimination of poverty
in Somalia, and that comprehensive implementation of
the political process remains the key to resolving the
piracy issue.

On the issue of financial support, Lebanon thanks
the donors that have largely honoured the commitments
they made in Brussels in 2009 and calls on them to go
beyond that assistance in response to the 2010
humanitarian appeal.

On the humanitarian situation, Lebanon
condemns insurgent attacks on humanitarian workers.
We are concerned over the evidence of children
abducted by armed groups and especially alarmed by
the threats made against journalists.

On the issue of the three-phased incremental
approach, we support the early implementation of the
second phase of that process in order to strengthen the
United Nations presence in Somalia and thereby send a
strong message of support from the Security Council
for the Djibouti peace process.

With respect to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), in the absence of an international
presence we call on donors to contribute to financing
AMISOM, and we praise the contributions of the
African Union and of AMISOM. towards establishing
sustainable peace in Somalia. We thank Uganda and
Burundi for their contributions to that end and the
international community for its efforts.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Norway.

