Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
My delegation congratulates you, Madame, on your
country's leadership and proactive work since
assuming the presidency this month. There is no doubt
that today's debate will complement those we have
already held on the important issue of peacebuilding
and the ways and means of guaranteeing the building
or rebuilding of State institutions in order to maintain
peace in the post-conflict context.

While we associate ourselves with the statement
made by the representative of Bangladesh on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement, my delegation should like
to focus on the following points.

Since 1992, the total number of armed conflicts
has been reduced by 40 per cent. According to the
World Bank, the financial costs of ongoing conflicts
throughout the world, and in particular in Africa, are
estimated at some $54 billion. These figures
underscore the magnitude of the work that remains to
be done and the critical value of strengthening the
institutional capacities of States in the post-conflict
context. The emergence of lasting peace often involves
the management of the critical phase of transition
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding. In that
transition phase, rebuilding and strengthening the
institutional capacities of States emerging from conflict
is of particular importance, given the numerous
dangers of backsliding.

In that respect, coordination between local and
international stakeholders is critical to stabilizing the
host country. It has been noted, however, that one of
the main challenges to peacebuilding is ensuring the
consistency and coordination of the work of
international actors. Too often, the United Nations and
its international partners act without sufficiently
involving the authorities of the host country. A space
must be created in which the host country can take
ownership of the project in order to lay the foundations
of lasting peace.

These observations encourage us to focus our
collective thinking on the best way to take the existing
institutional capacities of the host country into
consideration and to strengthen them. We must not
misidentify our objectives. Peacebuilding missions
must support and not compete with national
institutional capacities. Thus, a United Nations post-
conflict presence must ensure that national strategies
are formulated with the host country with a focus on
priorities that include the strengthening of the
institutional capacities of the host, the restoration of
the rule of law, and reform of the security and judicial
sectors.

In the framework of such a vast undertaking, it is
critical that United Nations efforts be effectively
coordinated in order consistently to address the
establishment of peace, peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and development so that swift and effective action can
be taken immediately after a conflict. The
Peacebuilding Commission plays a key role in that
respect.

During the transition between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, the United Nations has a key role to
play in assisting national authorities from the very
outset in drafting a strategy to establish and strengthen
State institutional capacities. It goes without saying
that international partners must align their financial,
technical and political support with that strategy. The

Kingdom of Morocco stresses the importance for
national authorities to take ownership of peacebuilding
and to shoulder as soon as possible the responsibility
for rebuilding State institutions, restoring the rule of
law, revitalizing the economy and reforming the
security sector and the judiciary so as to ensure that
basic services are provided to meet the basic needs of
the people.

In that regard, an integrated approach to
peacebuilding must be developed by creating synergies
and necessary coordination between national and
international structures. Numerous lessons can be
drawn from the work of the various country
configurations of the Peacebuilding Commission, in
particular those linked to the implementation of
institutional capacity-building programmes. It should
be underscored that the establishment or
re-establishment of State institutions goes hand-in-
hand with economic revitalization. Socio-economic
activities have a quick impact and help to strengthen
State institutional capacities in the post-conflict period.
Emphasis should therefore be placed on such catalytic
areas as youth employment, infrastructure development
and the provision of such basic services in the areas of
sanitation, drinking water and health.

We cannot emphasize enough that the
peacebuilding phase is crucial to stabilizing a country.
Statistics indicate that 40 to 50 per cent of all conflicts
are the result of relapse. That points to the great
importance of peacebuilding, which is above all a
collective undertaking. The challenges it presents
cannot be overcome without the active involvement of
the international community in strengthening State
institutional capacity. That illustrates the crucial need
for arriving at a partnership approach to peacebuilding
between the host country, the United Nations and
donors. In that regard, we welcome the increased
coordination and coherence between the Peacebuilding
Support Office and the World Bank in the area of
peacebuilding, whose goal must of course be to
establish that same spirit of partnership.

Given that peacebuilding is above all more of a
civilian than a military endeavour, it is essential to
ensure necessary civilian capacities in critical areas of
host country institutional recovery, especially in the
areas of training, public administration and judicial and
good-governance capacity-building.
11-21335

In conclusion, peacebuilding cannot be effective
without establishing robust institutional capacities
based on the rule of law and good governance. The best
way to ensure that a State can move towards peace is to
develop its institutional architecture by consolidating
the rule of law and guaranteeing more effective and
inclusive public administration on behalf of the
population concerned.

