Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): We
have given careful consideration to the report of the
Committee of Experts, which has made
recommendations to the Security Council on how the
arms embargo and the closure of terrorist training
camps demanded in paragraphs 3 and 5 of resolution
1333 (2000) could be monitored. We also listened
carefully to the statement made by Ambassador
Valdivieso, in his capacity as Chairman of the
sanctions Committee, in which he summarized the
content of the report. Colombia concurs with many of
the recommendations contained in the report with
regard to setting up a monitoring mechanism.

I should like to highlight four preliminary issues
that are important to my delegation as starting points
for the discussions that will follow this meeting of the
Council. The first relates to the neighbouring countries.
It is essential for the Security Council to properly
involve all the countries neighbouring Afghanistan and
to obtain their cooperation in order to ensure that the
monitoring mechanism is effective. In this regard,
Colombia welcomes the willingness of all of those
countries to cooperate with this organ of the United
Nations. This is indispensable for ensuring the
effective monitoring of illicit activities taking place
along the borders. We believe that this is the right
approach - the recommendations should be aimed at
strengthening national capacities.

My second comment relates to the issue of
coordination - horizontal coordination among the
neighbouring countries and vertical coordination
among those countries, the Security Council and the
United Nations as a whole. This Organization could
contribute to establishing greater harmony,
coordination and compatibility among governmental
and security bodies in order to enhance both horizontal
and vertical coordination.

My third comment relates to border activities of
interest to the Security Council. In this respect, it is
important to have effective and comprehensive controls
on trafficking in arms and chemical precursors,
including acetic anhydride, on the smuggling of goods
and on other activities that might fuel or facilitate
terrorist activities.

My fourth comment relates to the peace process.
In its decisions, the Security Council must be careful to
avoid any incompatibility with the efforts of the
international community to contribute to peace and
stability in Afghanistan. At the appropriate time, when
the Security Council carries out a comprehensive
review of the situation in that country, we will have an
opportunity to highlight and test that necessary
compatibility.

In conclusion, Colombia will participate in the
scrupulous and detailed analysis of the
recommendations presented to the Council by the
Committee of Experts so as to ensure that appropriate
decisions are taken, including on the modalities of the
monitoring mechanism, its location, in either New York
or Vienna, and its funding.

This open meeting is the first step towards that
analysis and will enable us to hear the opinions of the
States concerned.

