The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Chile.

I welcome this opportunity to preside over this
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine. Chile is home to a large
colony of people of Palestinian origin, the largest
outside the Middle East, and a smaller but significant
Jewish community that is fully integrated into Chilean
society, living in peace and harmony. Chile recognized
the State of Israel early on; in addition, it was one of
the first South American countries to open a diplomatic
presence in Ramallah. In January 2011, we recognized
the State of Palestine and supported its full membership
in UNESCO the same year. In 2012, Chile was a
sponsor of the General Assembly resolution accepting
Palestine as a United Nations non-member observer
State (General Assembly resolution 67/19). We view
those actions as a contribution to the peace process,
strengthening the capacity of the Palestinian State and
creating the conditions for better institution-building.

A little more than two decades after the Oslo
Accords between the State of Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO), those provisional
dispositions have stood the test of time. Unfortunately,
after years both of progress and too many setbacks in
the negotiations, a two-State solution - in accordance
with United Nations resolutions and the terms of
reference we are all familiar with on the establishment
of an independent and sovereign Palestinian State,
living in peace and security side by side with the State
of Israel, within secure and internationally recognized
borders - is still not a reality.

It is discouraging that, for the first time in all these
years, there is no peace plan on the table. That sends
an extremely negative political signal. In 2014, for the
third time in six years, we witnessed new outbreaks of
armed violence between factions in the Gaza Strip. We
saw Hamas launching rockets indiscriminately against
Israel's civilian population, and disproportionate
military action against Palestinians, resulting in more
than 2,000 deaths, mostly of women and children,
and thousands of new internally displaced persons in
an already saturated region. Chile has condemned all
such actions threatening life, peace and security. The
West Bank and East Jerusalem have also been the scene
of tensions, fanning fears of a possible third intifada.
This shows that the status quo is unsustainable. A new
approach is needed, supported by at least a minimal
degree of political will.

First, the parties must build trust and strengthen
their dialogue. That requires continued action and
an end to unilateral acts and violent rhetoric. As we
stated at the recent Conference of High Contracting
Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention, most of
the international community is urging Israel, as the
occupying Power in the occupied Palestinian territory,
to abide by international standards for human rights
and international humanitarian law. Similarly,
unilateral acts such as the illegal settlement policy, the
actions of extremist settlers, the eviction of Palestinian
families from their homes and collective punishments
such as demolition of the houses of people presumed
to be involved in terrorist acts must cease. They
constitute extra-judicial measures incompatible with
the democratic character of the State of Israel.

The current situation does nothing to help
President Abbas or the leadership of the PLO. On the
contrary, it favours the position of radical elements.
The international community must continue to support
the Palestinian Authority and encourage it, through
a process of internal reconciliation, to emphatically
distance itself from the extremist narrative of groups
that only foster hatred and violence and do not recognize
Israel's right to exist.

Secondly, we need a more forceful international
approach. We appreciate the sustained effort of the
United States to advance the peace negotiations. That
is an important part of a broader political approach that
should involve the multilateral system as a whole. In
Chile's view, it is essential that the Security Council
define the parameters for the negotiations. The new
approach should provide for greater involvement of the
European Union, the League of Arab States and the
Middle East Quartet. Chile calls for a general dialogue
on the Arab Peace Initiative, based on the principle of
land for peace.

Lastly, I should like to reiterate that Chile will
continue to encourage Palestine and Israel to make
progress towards a just and lasting peace. We have a
hope, though a faint hope, that this is possible. The time
has come to restore trust, resume negotiations and end
this long and painful conflict.

Concerning the conflict in Syria, my country
reiterates that political dialogue is the only solution
to the conflict. In that regard, we support the work
of the Secretary-General's Special Envoy for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura. Chile also commends the efforts
of the Russian Government to convene a peace dialogue
to which various opposition groups have been invited.
We hope that representatives of all Syrian political
tendencies will participate and take the opportunity
to contribute to identifying points of convergence that
could point to a way out of the crisis.

Chile reiterates its condemnation of the violence
against civilians, especially women and children,
perpetrated by all the parties to the conflict. We
believe it is crucial that steps be taken to protect the
most vulnerable populations and hold the perpetrators
of such crimes accountable. In that regard, one priority
is for the parties to the conflict to allow access to the
humanitarian aid needed to mitigate the effects of the
violence.

It is clear that as long as there is no solution
to the conflict in Syria, its neighbours, especially
Lebanon, will continue to have to deal with a delicate
situation. Chile commends the Lebanese Government's
willingness to take in more than 1 million Syrian
nationals, despite the challenges that brings. We urge
that other countries in the region cooperate in order to
assist the thousands of Syrian families who are seeking
better living conditions. In that context, I can announce
that Chile is contemplating the possibility of taking in
more families of Syrian and Palestinian origin.

In view of the resurgence of numerous armed
groups along the border with Syria, Chile reiterates the
importance of respecting the principle of dissociation
outlined in the Baabda Declaration and preventing the
involvement there of other armed factions, especially
Hizbullah, which aggravates sectarian divisions. We
strongly condemn the double attack of 10 January in
Tripoli and recall the press statement issued by the
Council.
Finally, we View it as crucial to reaffirm the
importance of resolutions 2170 (2014), on threats to
international peace and security posed by terrorist
attacks, and 2178 (2014), on foreign terrorist fighters,
in keeping with the obligations on States under
international law.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.

