Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like first
of all to commend Assistant Secretary-General
Kalomoh for his very comprehensive briefing to the
Council this morning. I would also like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting in
such a timely manner.

I would like to say right at the outset that I
welcome the presence at this meeting of ministers from
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). As my colleague Gunter Pleuger said
earlier, it was thanks to very effective action by
ECOWAS that a crisis was averted.

Furthermore, I would like to welcome the
presence of His Excellency Jose Ramos Horta and to
thank him for his very comprehensive briefing. He was
in Guinea-Bissau as a special envoy of the Community
of Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP) just before
the coup, and has been monitoring the situation as a
special envoy appointed by his colleagues and
ministers for foreign affairs of the Portuguese-speaking
countries.

Both regional organizations - ECOWAS and the
CPLP - have responded in a timely manner to the
crisis, which once again illustrates the importance of
regional organizations and the regional dimension of
this crisis.

I would like to thank the international community
for responding to the situation; the meeting this
morning is a very good illustration of the importance
attached by the international community to the
situation in Guinea-Bissau.

The current state of affairs in Guinea-Bissau is an
example of a dangerous cycle in which a situation
could spiral out of control, requiring more resources in
the future if urgent action is not taken - by the people
of Guinea-Bissau themselves first and foremost, but
also by the international community. From the briefing
this morning we heard that action is effectively being
taken by the people of Guinea-Bissau and that they are
resolving the problems - the constitutional ones, at
least.

As we all are aware, the Council's objective in
convening this meeting was to assess the state of
preparation for the legislative elections in Guinea-
Bissau, which were supposed to take place next month.
Those elections were aimed at establishing the
institutional order, which is indispensable for dealing
with the economic reconstruction of the country. It is
therefore essential that everything be done to ensure
that the establishment of the transitional Government
take place in a smooth manner in order to bring the
country back to constitutional order as soon as
possible.

In this connection, it is also gratifying to note that
the people of Guinea-Bissau and the political leaders
have not abandoned dialogue as a way of resolving
their differences. We commend that very positive
posture on the part of the people of Guinea-Bissau, as
consensus on all outstanding issues provides the best
guarantee for the political stability of the country.

While we recognize the primacy of the role of the
people and the political leaders of Guinea-Bissau, it is
also important to stress the responsibility of the
international community. The Guinea-Bissau
authorities should take the necessary steps to enhance
donor confidence, while the donor community should
avoid a situation in which its response to the needs of
the country is attached to unrealistic conditionalities.
That could create a vicious circle and further penalize
the country and the people, prolonging the crisis and
having a potentially negative impact on the rest of the
region. An open mind is therefore necessary to deal
with the situation. Our goal should be to break this
unproductive cycle.

It is also important that the development
assistance stakeholders who have expressed
willingness to help Guinea-Bissau, as well as those
who have provided assistance to the country, maintain
their support, in order to free Guinea-Bissau from
political and social economic decline. In that
connection, we commend the very positive role played
by the United Nations Peace-building Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau and the Resident Representative of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). Mr.
Ramos Horta again spoke to us this morning of their
positive role in the country. It should be enhanced.
Holding a donor conference and contributions to the
Emergency Economic Management Fund set up by
UNDP could be ways to facilitate the transfer of
support to the country.

To deal effectively with the Guinea-Bissau crisis,
the support of the Security Council for the efforts of
the regional actors is key. ECOWAS, CPLP and the
African Union have been playing an important role to
avoid further deterioration of the political situation.
We, therefore, welcome the decision by ECOWAS and
the CPLP to appoint representatives in the country in
order to follow up on the situation. We also welcome
the appointment by the African Union of a Special
Envoy to Guinea-Bissau.

The Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau
of the Economic and Social Council, the Group of
Friends of Guinea-Bissau and the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Security Council on Conflict Prevention
and Resolution in Africa continue to be important tools
in promoting peace and in dealing with this crisis.
Therefore, the recommendations made by the Security
Council and those groups need to be implemented.
I would like to take this opportunity to recall that
Guinea-Bissau has valuable human resources. They
should be brought into play. They should be able to
play a role. I am referring to the diaspora of Guinea-
Bissau.

In conclusion, the situation in Guinea-Bissau is
one of an emergency. The Security Council needs to
address it as such, before it deteriorates into wider
conflict with implications that could be much more
difficult by far.

