The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of November, I should
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Security Council, to His Excellency Sir Emyr
Jones Parry, Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom to the United Nations, for his service as
President for the month of October 2004. I am sure I
speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Sir Emyr for the great diplomatic
skill with which he conducted the Council's business
last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Guinea-Bissau in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cabral
(Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern at developments in Guinea-Bissau that
led to the killings, on 6 October 2004, of the
Armed Forces Chief of Staff, General Verissimo
Correia Seabra, and of the Chief of Human
Resources, Colonel Domingos de Barros. The
Council condemns in the strongest terms such use

of force to settle differences or address
grievances and, bearing in mind the position of
the African Union on unconstitutional changes of
government, as stated in the 1999 Algiers
Decision and the 2000 Lome Declaration, calls
upon the Guinean-Bissau parties to refrain from
attempting to seize power in Guinea-Bissau by
force.

"The Security Council takes note of the
signature of a Memorandum of Understanding, in
Bissau, on 10 October, 2004, and of the
establishment of a commission to monitor its
implementation, and underlines that the
Government of Guinea-Bissau and national
authorities must remain committed to the
promotion of the rule of law and to the fight
against impunity, including when considering
ways of implementing the above mentioned
agreement.

"The Security Council urges all political
parties to continue working, in good faith, with
national authorities to complete the
implementation of the Transitional Charter before
the holding of presidential elections by April
2005.

"The Security Council reaffirms that peace
and stability in Guinea-Bissau are critical for
peace and security in the West African subregion.
As the Government of Guinea-Bissau tackles the
military, political, institutional and economic
problems that are responsible for recurrent
political turmoil and instability in Guinea-Bissau,
the Council underlines the importance of
addressing their root causes as well as finding
immediate solutions to improve the situation in
the short term.

"The Security Council stresses the need for
urgent measures by the international community
to assist the Government of Guinea-Bissau to
overcome the present crisis, in particular to
reinforce the capacity of legitimate authorities to
maintain political stability and to determine
sound solutions to the country's most urgent and
fundamental challenges, particularly the
restructuring of the Armed Forces, strengthening
of the state and its institutions and promotion of
social and economic development.

"The Security Council welcomes the timely
financial support already provided by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and its members to the Government
of Guinea-Bissau towards the payment of salary
arrears due to military personnel. The Council
calls upon international donors to contribute
urgently to the Government of Guinea-Bissau's
budget for civil service and military salaries and
also encourages them to contribute to the
Emergency Economic Management Fund for
Guinea-Bissau, managed by the UNDP.

"The Security Council also takes note, with
appreciation, of the recent visit of a Community
of Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP) fact-
finding mission to Guinea-Bissau.

"The Security Council reiterates its call on
the international community to maintain its
confidence in the process of democratic
consolidation in Guinea-Bissau and to uphold its
commitments to development in that country,
particularly through its active preparation and
participation in the Round Table Conference
scheduled to take place next December, in
Brussels.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support for the Representative of the Secretary-
General in Guinea-Bissau and indicates its
intention to consider suitable ways of improving
the role of the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) in
the promotion of peace and security, as well as in
the coordination of efforts aiming at social and
economic development in the country.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to submit to the United
Nations, in his next report on UNOGBIS and the
situation in Guinea-Bissau, suggestions on what
contribution the United Nations could make
towards an active and coordinated international
effort to assist Guinea-Bissau."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2004/4l.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.43 p.m.

