Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): Malaysia joins other
Council members in warmly welcoming you,
Mr. President, and other high-level dignitaries to the
Council and to today's meeting. We commend you
and the delegation of France for having convened this
important open debate at this crucial juncture for all the
communities in the Middle East.

My delegation takes this opportunity to express
appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
the Secretary-General, and to His Highness Mr. Zeid
Ra'ad Al Hussein, United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, for sharing their perspectives and
insights on the topic at hand.

We also thank His Beatitude Louis Raphael I
Sako, Patriarch of Babylon of the Chaldeans, and The
Honourable Mrs. Vian Dakhil, member of the Iraqi
Parliament, for being with us today and for bringing
their perspectives as victims directly affected by the
wave of violent extremism in the Middle East today. We
are humbled by their fortitude in the face of such trying
circumstances.

The landscape of threats to international peace
and security has evolved significantly since the
establishment of the Council. Accordingly, the
Council's responses must continue to evolve and take
into account the changing nature of the threats faced.
The scourge of terrorism and violent extremism stands
out as one of the most prominent and challenging
threats we face today. In that connection, Malaysia
recalls Council resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014) and
2199 (2015), which are among the most recent responses
by the Council and reaffirm its commitment to their
implementation and that of other relevant resolutions.

We are pleased to note the Secretary-General's
proposal on the plan of action to combat fanaticism and
violent extremism, and we welcome France's leadership
in taking this proposal forward through the proposed
international conference.

It is tragic and disconcerting that the deadly
consequences of the twin scourges of terrorism and
Violent extremism, fuelled by the fires of radicalization
and hatred, have spread and seemingly become
entrenched in the Middle East, a region known as the
cradle of civilization.

Malaysia condemns in the strongest possible terms
the outrageous and senseless acts perpetrated by violent
extremists against ethnic or religious minorities,
wherever and whenever they occur. We denounce and
reject totally the ideology propagated by the likes of
Al-Qaida, Boko Haram, Daesh, Ansar Al-Sharia, the
Al-Nusra Front and other groups or individuals of
similar persuasion. We especially reject their claims
that their heinous and barbaric acts of Violence are
carried out in the name of Islam, a religion of peace.

To the Victims, we can but attempt to assuage their
grief and despair by reaffirming and reassuring them
of our continuing strong commitment to combat those
scourges, including through the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

Malaysia wishes to reaffirm its commitment to
continue working in a coordinated and concerted
manner with all partners and stakeholders in combating
terrorism and violent extremism in the framework of
the United Nations and other relevant international and
regional organizations.

The current wave of extremist violence in the
Middle East, particularly in Iraq and Syria and
other parts of Middle East, affects all communities
irrespective of creed or ethnicity, whether Christian,
Yazidi, Kurd, Shia or Sunni. These are communities
which have for the most part lived in peace, side by side
with one another, for centuries, if not millennia.

The advent of violent extremists and their
particular brand has resulted in deep fractures among
those communities from which they may never recover.
As such, while it may seem an impossible task at this
particular juncture, we must remain mindful of the
need to maintain and strengthen the common ties and
linkages between them in order to build a better future
for the next generation.

At the same time, we also wish to highlight the
situation of the Palestinian-Arab citizens of Israel. The
Palestinian minority in Israel has suffered continuously
from racial discrimination and inequality, much of it
officially legislated and sanctioned by the Government.
At least 40 different laws are currently in place that
in essence discriminate against the Israeli Palestinian
population, whether Muslim or Christian, affecting
schools, communities, land ownership and other rights.
Palestinians in Israel are relegated to the status of
second-class citizens and are Victims of segregation
and displacement.

Impunity, wherever it may occur, breeds hatred
and vengeance. In this regard, we echo the appeal made
by earlier speakers that efforts and initiatives aimed
at establishing accountability must be fully supported
by the international community. The perpetrators
of extremist Violence must realize that there will be
consequences for their despicable actions.

Malaysia reaffirms the primary responsibility
of Governments to ensure the safety and security
of their citizens and the promotion and protection of
the human rights and fundamental freedoms of their
peoples, including minorities. We realize that for
certain countries, especially those just emerging from
conflict or in a transition process, the key challenges
they face include establishing and maintaining strong
governance and law-enforcement institutions that will
enable them to ensure their peoples' safety and security
regardless of creed or ethnicity. At the same time,
those institutions should be able to foster conditions
conducive to people's socioeconomic development and
the promotion and protection of their human rights.
We believe that the international community, and the
United Nations in particular, has a critical supporting
role to play in that regard.

As a multi-ethnic, multicultural and multi-faith
society, Malaysia is keenly aware that it has to carefully
balance the exercise of certain rights and freedoms
with its responsibility for maintaining peaceful and
harmonious relations among its various communities.
While today we generally have peace and harmony
among Malaysia's various communities, that has not
always been the case, since inter-ethnic relations, and
intercommunal divisions on such issues as wages,
income inequality and socioeconomic status, were
acutely sharp and divisive in the years immediately
following our independence.

In the light of our own experience, we would like
to take this opportunity to underscore the importance
of certain key values, principles and approaches that
must be preserved and nurtured in pluralistic societies.
They include, first, tolerance and inclusiveness among
communities, which pluralist societies must foster
and strengthen over time; secondly, an understanding
of diversity as a source of strength and unity must
also be fostered, through Government-led efforts,
where appropriate; thirdly, applying the principle
of moderation as a general approach to guiding and
framing the parameters for inter-communal relations,
cooperation and understanding; and fourthly,
ensuring that certain rights and freedoms of minority
communities, where appropriate, enjoy legal protection
and sanction. It is equally important that promoting
and protecting minority rights be seen to be balanced,
especially when measured against the legitimate
concerns of the majority.

Against the rising tide of violent extremists and
their narrative, the need for broad-based cooperation
aimed at fostering understanding and building bridges
between communities, including through sustained
interfaith dialogue, among other things, must be
pursued in earnest. For its part, Malaysia stands ready to
participate and contribute in the fight against terrorism
and violent extremism, including by combating their
destructive narrative and agenda.

