Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): The delegation of Poland
is going to vote in favour of the draft resolution
establishing the United Nations Support Mission in Haiti
(UNSMIH). We strongly believe that the international
community has an obligation to assist the Government
and the people of Haiti in their struggle for stability and
normalcy in that country.

With the United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH)
nearing its conclusion, the Polish delegation would like to
pay tribute to all those who contributed to its success,
with special emphasis on the particularly generous
contribution of the Governments of Canada and the
United States. We would like to pay tribute to all the men
and women of UNMIH. Their work was crucial for laying
the foundations for the democratic future of Haiti.

Now, as we enter a new phase in that country's life,
it is time to assess, together with the authorities of Haiti,
what has to be done in order to consolidate democratic
changes in Haiti and, as stressed in the draft resolution, to
support the commitment of the Government of Haiti to
maintain the secure and stable environment established by
the Multinational Force in Haiti and extended with the
assistance of the United Nations Mission in Haiti.

From this standpoint, the further strengthening of the
rule of law is indeed of paramount importance. The
United Nations Support Mission in Haiti, which the
Security Council is about to establish, will be mandated
to assist the Government of Haiti in dealing with one of
the essential problems that Government is faced with,
namely the professionalization of the police and the
creation and training of an effective national police force.
These are tasks crucial for the consolidation of democracy
and the revitalization of Haiti's system of justice. The
draft resolution recognizes the link between peace and
security. It is aimed at creating an environment conducive
to further involvement by the international community
and by international financial institutions in the
development of Haiti. This is necessary for the economic
rehabilitation and reconstruction of the country, whose
progress towards the consolidation of democracy deserves
our full support.

