The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Maurer
for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait.

It is my pleasure to participate today in this
meeting on the important humanitarian issue of missing
persons in armed conflict. I welcome the adoption of
resolution 2474 (2019), drafted and submitted by the
State of Kuwait. The resolution has human and humane
significance because it addresses an issue that is close
to the hearts of the people of Kuwait. It is aimed at
promoting international efforts to address the issue
of missing persons in armed conflict. I also thank all
members for supporting us during the negotiations on
the resolution.

The resolution has important human and
humanitarian aspects. It seeks to promote the
institutional and normative framework for protecting
civilians, as well as international efforts to address the
issue of missing persons in armed conflict. This is in
line with the attention that the Council has focused on
the issue of protecting civilians over the past 20 years
and with the humanitarian resolutions it has adopted,
free of political considerations. The most recent of
these is the resolution we have adopted today with the
aim of preventing any persons from going missing as a
result of conflict.

I commend the briefings by the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
Mr. Peter Maurer, and the Director for Operations
and Advocacy of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Reena
Ghelani, which have enriched today's discussion.

We meet today as the international arena is
confronting increasing challenges that threaten
international peace and security. Those challenges
have become more complexed and intertwined over
the years. Countless civilians are impacted by conflict
and other forms of violence that affect civilians and
have dangerous humanitarian implications that require
comprehensive and sustainable solutions, the absence
of which may prolong conflict and represent an obstacle
to security and stability.
One of the humanitarian challenges addressed in
international norms and laws is the issue of missing
persons in armed conflict, which has a tragic effect on
the lives of affected civilians and their families. We are
totally convinced that its many important dimensions
require the attention of the international community
and should be dealt with at all stages of a conflict and
beyond through clear and tested practices.

International human rights law and international
humanitarian law have identified the tools that we need
to use in order to protect communities and civilians, as
well as to ensure all their rights and a life of freedom
and dignity, free of violations and humanitarian
suffering. These tools include the identification of
solutions pertaining to the issue of missing persons in
armed conflict.

Missing persons are the main victims of any war
or conflict. We must commit to using these tools and
practices in all negotiations in order to build trust in
the political process after a conflict, leading to peace
agreements, peacebuilding and lasting peace. Parties
to a conflict must therefore provide all necessary
information on the fate of missing persons in order to
ensure family reunification or to determine the location
of their remains, in line with agreed international
and humanitarian norms. Furthermore, impunity is
prohibited and those responsible for causing persons to
go missing, for hiding related evidence or for covering
for the perpetrators of crimes against humanity must be
held to account.

Committing to international humanitarian
law will pave the way for peace. The resolution
adopted today by the Council will contribute to
raising international awareness and to bridging
the gaps in the issue of missing persons in armed
conflict. It encourages relevant national, regional and
international humanitarian organizations to take the
necessary measures to facilitate search operations and
appropriately manage relevant information on missing
persons in order to determine their fate, while ensuring
the necessary political will and cooperation among all
parties to a conflict.

The State ofKuwait has tragic experience regarding
this humanitarian issue. We are pursuing our efforts to
determine the fate of our missing nationals since the
war that liberated Kuwait from the Iraqi invasion in
1991. The fate of 236 of 605 missing persons has been
determined. We commend the Council for following up
on this issue, in line with its relevant resolutions. We also
commend the Iraqi Government for its cooperation and
serious efforts to finalize this issue in the framework
of the meetings held by the Tripartite Commission
and its Technical Subcommittee, chaired by the ICRC.
We thank the ICRC for its efforts, determination and
assistance to all parties in order to ascertain the fate
of missing persons and alleviate the suffering of their
families and relatives.

We renew our commitment to doing our best to
strengthen the efforts of the international community to
maintain international peace and security and support
peacebuilding and comprehensive development in the
context of preventive diplomacy. We will contribute to
joint humanitarian action, in line with the established
and steadfast foreign policy of the State of Kuwait, as
a tool for conflict prevention and for helping to anchor
the foundations of stability, dialogue and mediation by
addressing all current and emerging crises and global
instability. We will be guided by international law and
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as international resolutions.

Fulfilling our international obligations based on
responsibility, partnership and international solidarity
is the best way to tackle all the challenges that we face.
We commend all parties and organizations for the role
they play in mitigating conflict-related threats and
building peace among countries and parties to conflicts.

The State of Kuwait will use all of its capacities
and make every effort to support those endeavours in
order to promote international cooperation and build
the capacities of other countries to protect civilians
and alleviate humanitarian suffering. In that regard, I
once again express my thanks and appreciation to all
those who cooperated and helped us in adopting today's
resolution, which ensures that Kuwait and the rest of
the world will not forget the issue of missing persons in
armed conflict.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor those other members of the
Council who wish to make statements

