Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
expressing on behalf of all the members of the Council
the feelings of respect, friendship and esteem that we all
have for Ambassador Owada. I readily join in the wishes
you have just expressed for the success of his future
endeavours. I think it is quite appropriate that we should
be invited by you to adopt a presidential statement on a
subject to which the Permanent Representative of Japan
himself has devoted a great deal of time and thought.

 

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
the very good report he has submitted on protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations, following the debate we had last year. This
report contains recommendations which stem from
experience and deserve the full attention of the Council. We
hope that the report of the Secretary-General will mark the
beginning of comprehensive thinking on the means
available to us to cope with the deterioration of the
situation of civilian populations in conflicts and of the
conditions in which humanitarian personnel are working in
the field.

Civilian populations, and women and children in
particular, have become not only the principal victims but
also the targets of current conflicts. Massive displacements
of people are occurring on a daily basis. Civilians are being
massacred. Children, caught up in the spiral of war, are
being slaughtered. Humanitarian personnel are taken
hostage and threatened, and they must work in constant fear
for their lives.

The Security Council cannot remain indifferent in the
face of this situation. It must, in carrying out its mandate,
take greater account of the humanitarian dimensions of
conflicts, anticipate them and provide for them in its
statements and resolutions. The Council has instruments at
its disposal that might help to protect humanitarian
assistance. It must therefore muster the resolve to put these
into effect.

We have had failures in recent years, which should
compel us better to shoulder our responsibilities. There was
Somalia, which had a regrettable impact on the opinions of
some, though we know that in humanitarian terms some
good work was done in that country. That experience made
us aware of the importance of not disassociating
humanitarian activities from the general social, political and
economic context of a conflict.

In this connection, I should like to commend the
efforts of Under-Secretary-General Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello, who endeavours regularly to inform the Security
Council of developments in the humanitarian situation of
the conflicts of which the Security Council is seized.

The experience of the United Nations Protection
Force, with which Mr. Vieira de Mello is deeply familiar,
has taught us that when the Security Council decides to
deploy United Nations contingents to support humanitarian
activities, it should define in a clear, precise and realistic
mandate the respective responsibilities of their military and
humanitarian components. In the field, this should be
reflected in a close coordination among the political and
military components on the one hand and the
humanitarian components on the other, while bearing in
mind the particular nature of their respective tasks. This
is an ongoing problem that is not always resolved in an
entirely satisfactory manner. We are aware that
humanitarian personnel often have to carry out tasks that
are viewed by the local civilian population to a certain
extent as alibis for our inability to settle the conflict
militarily or politically.

Hence the risk to humanitarian personnel, and the
caution we must therefore exercise often leads to paralysis
in the Council and an inability to live up to our
responsibilities. In Central Africa in November 1996, in
spite of a decision taken by the Security Council to set up
a multinational force to ensure the safe delivery of
humanitarian relief to hundreds of thousands of people -
women and children - in dire circumstances, that
operation was not deployed and a very serious
humanitarian disaster ensued.
Today the same consideration should make us
doubly careful regarding the situation in Kosovo. We all
understand the need for caution, but once again the
Security Council must shoulder its responsibilities in
order to avoid another humanitarian catastrophe - and
fortunately it began to show evidence of this last week.

Monitoring respect for the norms and principles of
international law is crucial. The creation of an
International Criminal Court is a major step forward in
our fight against the impunity of war criminals. Our
country was among the first to sign the treaty in Rome,
and we hope that those countries that have done yet done
so will join us. We wish to contribute to making the
Criminal Court a credible and effective instrument in the
service of human rights and humankind.

As we said earlier, we are concerned at the
deterioration of the working conditions of humanitarian
personnel. Increasingly they are used as targets by parties
to conflicts. In this regard I cannot but recall with sadness
that since January 1998 one of our fellow countrymen,
Mr. Vincent Cochetel, who worked for the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in North
Ossetia, has been held hostage by his captors for nine
months now.

We should therefore do everything in our power to
ensure conditions of safety that are satisfactory for

 

humanitarian workers. The 1994 Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel is a legal
instrument to which we attach great importance. We have
signed it, and the ratification process is under way in the
French Parliament. Obviously we hope that many States
will do likewise. But that instrument is not enough. The
Convention is not enough, because it does not cover all
categories of humanitarian personnel and is therefore
unlikely to resolve complex problems with multiple causes.

We have tried to come up with ways of improving this
state of affairs. Last February France organized a national
meeting with non-governmental organizations in order to
determine how better to protect humanitarian personnel. We
shall consider the proposals made this morning by the
United States. I believe that above and beyond general
considerations - welcome as they are - we must devise
practical measures.

The most important thing is to make governing circles
and authorities aware of the need to provide for the
protection of humanitarian staff and civilian populations.
Gradually the United Nations is trying to propagate this
belief, and today our hope is that the statement we are
about to adopt will help us progress towards the objectives
proposed to us.

