Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Djinnit for his dedicated service ofnearly
five years. His efforts have been deeply appreciated, and
we wish him every success in his future endeavours.

We are all aware not only of the enormous potential
of the countries of the Great Lakes region but also of
the history of conflict there that has destroyed millions
of lives and deepened the distress that has endured
for decades. Since 2013, the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region has provided a road map
for rebuilding confidence and mutual respect at the
State level. Reviewing many of the commitments made
six years ago, such as to respecting the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of neighbouring countries and
strengthening regional economic integration, we see
this agreement as every bit as relevant today. In fact, it
may have new importance in the Great Lakes.

In the Democratic Republic of Congo, President
Tshilombo Tshisekedi is providing new hope that
the status quo of insecurity and impunity will cease
and that the Democratic Republic of the Congo will
keep its commitments to further reconciliation,
tolerance and democratization. The United States
welcomes President Tshisekedi's announcements on
key Congolese commitments in the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework, including security-
sector reform, the consolidation of State authority and
economic development. We are committed to working
with the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to seize this once-in-a-generation opportunity to
replace conflict with commerce and help permanently
transform the Great Lakes region into an interconnected
hub of prosperity.

Now is the time for regional leaders who are
also parties to the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework to live up to their commitment to adhering
to the principles of non-interference in the internal
affairs of neighbouring countries and denying support
or safe harbour to armed groups. Working together,
the countries of the region can use the tools at their
disposal, with the support of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Security Council and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to tighten their grip on destabilizing actors,
not simply to protect civilians or provide humanitarian
aid, but to eliminate conflict from the Great Lakes
region altogether.

Recent examples suggest that such outreach is
already paying dividends. For example, the December
agreement, highlighted in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2019/229), between military officials from
Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
conduct joint border patrols in insecure areas along
their shared border, could serve as a new beginning for
constructive cross-border cooperation. The repatriation
of combatants from the Forces Democratiques de
Liberation du Rwanda and the Mouvement du 23 mars
is an additional positive example of intra-regional
cooperation made possible by support from United
Nations missions. New opportunities for regional
economic integration and foreign direct investment
could also be in sight. Regulators will need to tackle
endemic corruption, particularly in the mining sector,
to help stop the financing that fuels armed groups and
makes peace so hard to achieve.

At previous Council meetings this year the
United States carefully described the threat of rising
tensions in the Great Lakes region. I will not rehash
them now, but it is important to remember that despite
those challenges, a remarkable opportunity has been
presented to the people of the Great Lakes, the United
Nations missions working in the region and the Council.
Let us build trust and confidence, and let us seize this
opportunity for peace together.

