The President: Pursuant to the decision taken at
the 6218th meeting of the Security Council, I invite the
representative of Iraq to participate in the consideration
of the item on the agenda, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/5 85 , which contains the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of
resolution 1883 (2009).

After consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the independence, sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of Iraq, and
emphasizes the importance of the stability and
security of Iraq for its people, the region and the
international community.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ad Melkert, and the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in
advising, supporting and assisting the Iraqi
people and Government to strengthen democratic
institutions, advance inclusive political dialogue
and national reconciliation, facilitate regional
dialogue, aid vulnerable groups, strengthen
gender equality, promote the protection of human
rights, including through the work of the
Independent High Commission for Human
2

Rights, promote the protection of children and
promote judicial and legal reform.

"The Security Council encourages
UNAMI'S continued work, in coordination with
the Government of Iraq, to help create conditions
conducive to voluntary, safe, dignified and
sustainable return of Iraqi refugees and internally
displaced persons, and welcomes further attention
to this issue by all concerned.

"The Security Council underscores
UNAMI's important role in supporting the Iraqi
people and Government to promote dialogue,
ease tension, and develop a just and fair solution
for the nation's disputed internal boundaries, and
calls upon all the relevant parties to participate in
an inclusive dialogue to this end.

"The Security Council welcomes the
agreement reached on 8 November in the Iraqi
Council of Representatives on amendments to the
electoral law of Iraq, which will allow for
parliamentary elections to take place in January
2010, as stipulated by the Constitutional Court of
Iraq. The Security Council emphasizes UNAMI'S
efforts to assist the Iraqi Government and the
Independent High Electoral Commission in the
development of processes for holding elections.
The Security Council strongly endorses
UNAMI'S continued assistance to the Iraqi people
and Government in preparation for the Iraqi
national parliamentary elections planned for
January 2010. The Security Council endorses the
Secretary-General's appeal to all political blocs
and their leaders in Iraq to demonstrate true
statesmanship during the election campaign and
participate in a spirit of national unity.

"The Security Council underlines its
condemnation in the strongest terms of the series
of terrorist attacks that occurred on 19 August
and 25 October 2009 in Baghdad, which caused
numerous deaths, injuries and damage, including
to Iraqi Government institutions. The Security
Council reiterates its deep condolences to the
families of the victims and reaffirms its support
for the people and the Government of Iraq, and
its commitment to Iraq's security. The Security
Council reaffirms the need to combat threats to
international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts by all means, in accordance with the
09-60865
Charter of the United Nations, ensuring that
measures taken to combat terrorism fully comply
with all obligations under international law, in
particular international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law.

"The Security Council welcomes the recent
visit of United Nations officials to Iraq for
preliminary consultations related to Iraq's
security and sovereignty. The Council encourages
the Secretary-General's efforts in this regard,
including the possibility of facilitating technical
09-60865
assistance through the United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED)."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2009/30.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.05 pm.
