Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Members of the
Security Council were confronted today with a peculiar
situation. They had to cast two consecutive votes on
two draft resolutions on the same issue - the cessation
of hostilities in Syria.

First and foremost, we would like to state our deep
distress about the current humanitarian situation in
Aleppo, which has left the vast majority of the city's
population without access to basic necessities and
life-saving assistance, while the horrific bloodshed,
particularly in eastern Aleppo, has caused far too many
deaths and injuries among the civilian population.

In Aleppo, we are witnessing destruction of truly
historical proportions to which we in the Council can
put a stop if we act constructively and decisively. The
bombing of hospitals is unacceptable and we strongly
condemn such actions. However, the regional and
international stakeholders that have directly involved
themselves in the conflict by supplying weapons and
logistic support to belligerents guilty of grave human
rights violations, bear the greatest responsibility for
resolving this grave issue. We expect the permanent
members of the Council, whose special responsibility
lies in the maintenance of peace and security, to set
the example by putting aside strategic interests and
mobilizing all possible political action for the sake of
the Syrian civilians whom we are called upon to protect.

Even though the brave and dedicated Members of
the United Nations and other humanitarian agencies
continue to operate in Syria, the reality is that the latest
wave of fighting in Aleppo has caused the destruction
of essential infrastructure, such as schools, hospitals
and ambulances, and depleted the ranks of medical
staff able to provide much-needed care and assistance.
The numbers of casualties, wounded and displaced are
absolutely overwhelming.

We have voted here today on two draft resolutions
that, in our opinion, contain constructive proposals.
We find the inability to make progress on a single
resolution addressing the most pressing concerns - the
protection of civilians, the cessation of hostilities and
the establishment of a political process conducive to
lasting peace in Syria - to be most unfortunate.

Angola abstained in the voting on the two
resolutions. The draft resolution submitted by France
and Spain (S/2016/846), in our view, does not address
the fundamental issue of reviving the process conducive
to a meaningful cessation ofhostilities. On the contrary,
it seeks to feed the acrimonious and dangerous debate
among the main players in the conflict, permanent
members of the Security Council and it most probably
will represent the burial of the International Syrian
Support Group (ISSG).

While the Russian proposal (S/2016/847) contains
some positive elements with a view to relaunching
a process conducive to the cessation of hostilities,
Angola decided to abstain in the voting in order to
avoid being dragged into the unfortunate prevailing
acrimony among the members of the Council that bear
the main responsibility for the conflict and the duty to
find solutions to it.

I support Special Envoy De Mistura's efforts
and his permanent commitment to relaunching an
agreement on the cessation of hostilities, guaranteeing
safe and unrestricted humanitarian access, resuming
the repairs of Aleppo's damaged water and power
facilities and allowing medical evacuation for urgent
cases in and around the city. Surely that effort depends
on the cooperation between the Russian Federation and
the United States of America. We deeply regret the
suspension of bilateral discussions on the cessation of
hostilities between the co-Chairs of the ISSG Ceasefire
Task Force. We sincerely hope that the respective
Governments will be able to agree on the importance
of maintaining open lines of dialogue and renewing
cooperation in the search for peace and the fight against
terrorism, and easing the plight of the Syrian civilians
who bear the heaviest burden of the conflict.

In conclusion, after the show of unity of the
Security Council on the recommendation for the next
Secretary-General, today's events are a very negative
signal regarding the Council's ability to contribute
meaningfully to international peace and security, which
we deeply regret. Angola reiterates its determination to
remain engaged in the search for peace and to save lives
in Syria by advancing the political process through
negotiations and dialogue involving, above all, Syrians.

