Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the briefers for their
comprehensive presentations.

The successful conclusion of an electoral cycle
in Somalia, including the election of a new bicameral
Parliament and a President, are an important milestone
in the history of the country. We expect that the new
authorities will very quickly focus their attention on
ensuringthat Somalia continues to move towards national
reconciliation, restoring statehood, strengthening the
security sector and socioeconomic development.

The first steps undertaken by the new President,
namely, declaring a state of emergency and a 60-day
amnesty for fighters who have laid down their weapons,
make clear the dedication and commitment of the head
of State.

We also welcome the signing, on April 17, as an
outcome of negotiations among representatives of
the states, of the agreement on the national security
architecture. In line with the latter, the National Security
Council was established, which has the potential of
becoming a promising forum for developing collective
decisions by the Somali authorities. We believe that
that represents a movement in the right direction and
a significant contribution to strengthening national
capacities in the area of security.

Against that background, we are still seriously
concerned about the security situation in Somalia, as
it remains far from stable. The main reason for that
involves the relentless attacks by Al-Shabaab. We
also note the increasing activity of that group outside
the country. In particular, we note that members of
Al-Shabaab coordinate their activities with other
terrorist groups in the subregion, thereby undermining
security in the Horn of Africa.

Another concern is the worsening return of the
issue of piracy in the Gulf of Aden and the north-west
area of the Indian Ocean. According to the most recent
report (S/2017/408) of the Secretary-General, in March
and April alone, pirates carried out five successful
attacks. Such incidents had previously not been
recorded since 2012.

It is obvious that the causes leading to the
phenomenon of piracy in the region have not yet been
eliminated. There is an obvious connection between
it and the drastic deterioration of the socioeconomic
situation in the country because of the effects of the
drought, while the Somali factions concerned have
maintained considerable potential. We therefore note
that we need to continue coordinating international
anti-piracy efforts, including through the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. We are in
favour of maintaining that entity, which has shown its
effectiveness. We intend to actively participate in the
twentieth plenary session of the Contact Group, to be
held in Mauritius in June.

In that context, we believe that it is very important
to ensure that the steps undertaken by the international
community aimed at improving the capacity of the
Somali army and those of the peacekeeping forces of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) be
coordinated. We believe that the review of AMISOM's
mandate, which is currently being carried out jointly
by the United Nations and the African Union, should
lead to the further enhancement of the effectiveness of
the work carried out by the African peacekeepers. We
agree with the Secretary-General's assessment that the
premature withdrawal of the Mission from the Somalia
could lead to the collapse of the security situation in
the country.

Our close attention needs to be focused on the dire
humanitarian situation in Somalia that has been caused
by a combination of the catastrophic consequences
of the drought and domestic instability. Millions of
Somalis are on the brink of starvation. The forecasts for
the near future are far from hopeful. The international
community must provide humanitarian assistance to
the country as soon as possible and provide its people
with the basic necessities of water, food and medicine.

We attach great importance to the arms and
coal embargo against Somalia. We note that those
restrictions have proved to be a very effective tool for
cutting off the channels fuelling extremist and terrorist
forces. We call for further enhancing the effectiveness
of restrictive measures. The practice of partially lifting
arms embargoes on supplies to the Somali armed
security forces has shown itself to be effective.

In the future, Russia intends to continue to take
an active part in the development of concerted steps to
resolve the crisis and provide assistance to Mogadishu.
Our country regularly provides humanitarian assistance
to the Federal Government, as well as to Somali
refugees in neighbouring countries, through targeted
contributions to the relevant funds within the United
Nations system. We will also continue to provide free
training to Somali civilian cadres.

