Mr. Navarrete (Mexico) (Spoke in Spanish): I
wish to extend my delegation's thanks to you,
Mr. Minister, for personally presiding over this open
debate of the Security Council on the day that Ireland
is ending its successful presidency of the Council for
this month, during which your country has
demonstrated its commitment to transparency in the
work of this body.

Being, it seems, the last speaker in a long list of
speakers, I shall be as brief as possible.

The events in East Timor in the last two years,
and in particular those since the elections held on 30
August this year, attest to the positive effects that
concerted action can have when the goal is the
consolidation of peace. Mexico supports the concerted
efforts of the United Nations with the representatives
of the Transitional Government, headed by Mr. Mari
Alkatiri, Chief Minister of the Second Transitional
Government, whose presence at this debate we
welcome.

My country shares the idea expressed in this
debate by, among others, the representatives of the
Philippines and Brazil, that no one deserves more
recognition than the people of East Timor for their
bravery and determination in the face of formidable
challenges. We likewise express our gratitude for the
constructive position assumed by the new Government
of Indonesia, for we are convinced that political
dialogue between the principal players has proved to be
an essential element in the progress that has been
made. We hope that the channels of communication
and cooperation between the authorities of Indonesia
and East Timor will be strengthened.

The presence in the Chamber of Mr. Sergio Vieira
de Mello, who has distinguished himself by his
excellent work as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET),
reflects the importance the Organization has attached to
the question of this emerging nation.

We express our support for the recommendations
of the Secretary-General in his report for the period
from 25 July to 15 October 2001, which is before the
Council. We support in particular the recommendations
regarding the successor mission and, as almost every
participant in this debate has done, those concerning
the period after independence. We believe that it is
essential to maintain the United Nations presence in
order to consolidate the progress made, as well as to be
able to respond to the needs of the Timorese people and
to be in a position to carry out a smooth and seamless
transition in the post-independence phase. The real
challenge will be to maintain the conditions necessary
for lasting peace and the establishment of an
environment conducive to East Timor's sustainable
development. We think it necessary for the Security
Council to continue to carry out a periodic review of
the situation.

We support the plan to establish an integrated
peacekeeping mission under the leadership of a special
representative of the Secretary-General in order to
guarantee the security of East Timor and the viability
and stability of its governmental structures. The
military, civilian and civilian police components will
be crucial to a gradual assumption of responsibility by
the authorities of East Timor within an overall
framework of effective administration of the territory.

We call on the international community to
support these efforts by making timely payment of their
assessments to the Special Account for UNTAET.
Those resources are necessary for UNTAET to be able
to fulfil fully the mandate given to it by the Security
Council in resolutions 1272 (1999) and 1338 (2001). In
this context, the future participation of the international
financial institutions, the funds and programmes of the
United Nations and, of course, bilateral donors will be
essential.

