Mr. Fulci (Italy): The unity of intent and action of the
international community in facing the Albanian crisis has
been, in our opinion, exemplary. That is what made it
possible to contain a rapidly deteriorating situation that
could have threatened the long-term stability of the country.
By taking quick and effective action, the international
community also prevented a dangerous spill-over into
neighbouring countries.

To get an idea of how difficult a task this was,
consider the number of bodies involved: the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the
European Union, the Department of Humanitarians Affairs
of the United Nations and the Western European Union.
Under its then President, Ambassador Wlosowicz of
Poland, the Security Council approved resolution 1101
(1997) in record time, on 28 March, only one day after it
had been submitted. Thanks to this swift action, 11
European countries - Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France,
Greece, Italy, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia, Spain and
Turkey - established the force led by Italy. In a matter of
days - I repeat, days, not weeks - this force was
deployed on Albanian territory, in the framework of a peace
operation code-named "Alba".

The mandate contained in the original resolution
expires on 28 June. The new draft resolution before the
Council accepts the request that the mandate be extended
for another six weeks. In so doing, the draft resolution also
rightly underlines the fact that the mandate of the force has
been carried out and implemented, in close cooperation
with the Albanian authorities, in a neutral and impartial
way and, I would add, with the utmost precision. The
multinational protection force has conformed in every
respect and detail to the dispositions contained in resolution
1101 (1997). Six comprehensive and detailed bi-monthly
reports were punctually submitted to the Council and
examined by it.

Thanks to the multinational contingent's constant
presence and patrolling activity throughout almost all of
Albania, the force has had the greatest possible visibility
and mobility. These two elements were crucial to
achieving the goals contained in the mandate: in
humanitarian terms, the return to a situation of normalcy;
in security terms, first, as I said earlier, the containment
of a rapidly deteriorating situation, and secondly, a steady,
gradual return to law and order, allowing international
organizations to carry on their operations in Albania.

The multinational protection force has been a
constant and highly visible point of reference for
Albanian institutions and for all the citizens of Albania,
helping to restore a climate of greater trust. Judging from
other crisis areas where the international community was
unable to respond with equal speed and determination, it
is not hard to imagine what the Albanian situation might
have been today if the Council and the force had not
promptly intervened.

For Italy, Operation Alba represented an
extraordinary commitment of men and resources. Our
leadership of a force of 6,115 men, our contingents in
other parts of the Balkans, and the initiatives that my
country supported and will continue to support are
testimony to our commitment to both the security of a
nation with whom we have ties of friendship and history,
and the stability of the entire region.

Operation Alba will hopefully be concluded in six
weeks. We welcome the OSCE'S decision of yesterday,
18 June, to support the Albanian decision to hold new
parliamentary elections on 29 June. We are confident that
these elections will be a crucial step on the road out of
the Albanian crisis and towards a period of rehabilitation
and reconstruction. In short, it will be the Albanian
people's first step towards taking charge, once again, of
their own destiny.

Of course, the achievement of this goal will not
mean the end of either the economic emergency or the
need for a sustained international commitment in Albania.
The country will still be faced with a number of
economic, financial and social difficulties that will need
to be addressed in order to put the country safely back on
the road to peace, development and progress.

A preparatory meeting for a donor conference took
place in Rome on 26 May, under the chairmanship of the
Italian Minister of Foreign Affairs, Lamberto Dini. A
ministerial conference will be convened, again in Rome,

 

after the Albanian elections to assess the progress in
Albania and provide guidance for future international
action. Needless to say, this will have to include the
mobilization of resources from the donor community and
close coordination between the donors, the international
financial institutions and the Albanian authorities.

The key to effectiveness and early response in this
crisis has been intense and in-depth consultation and
coordination. The initial decision to create a Steering
Committee in Rome, in which all the countries contributing
to the force and the international organizations involved
could interact and make common decisions in real time,
once a week, was a tool contributing to the success of the
entire operation. We believe it provides an example to be
followed for similar occurrences in the future.

I conclude, Mr. President, by expressing my warmest
thanks to you personally and to all the members of the
Council for the positive and swift decisions made both on
28 March and today, proving how effective this body can
be in promoting peace and stability in the world, in line
with the noble principles and ideals envisioned in the
Charter. I also wish to thank in particular the Permanent
Representative of France, Ambassador Alain Dejammet, for
having so ably and so eloquently presented to the Security
Council the views and the needs of the countries
participating in the multinational protection force. I also
wish to commend the actions of the Permanent
Representative of Albania, Ambassador Kulla, who has
worked tirelessly in and around this Chamber to alleviate
the plight of his country in these trying times.

Needless to say, I express the sincere thanks of the
Government and people of Italy to all the countries that
have joined in this action of good will, and to all their
soldiers on the ground. Without the soldiers and their daily
commitment and sacrifice, the concept of international
solidarity in emergencies such as this would remain empty
words.

