Mr. Pascoe: I appreciate the opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the inter-agency assessment
mission dispatched by the Secretary-General to look
into the impact of the Libyan crisis on the Sahel
region.

The mission, led by Mr. Sam Ibok, Deputy
Director of the Africa II Division of the Department of
Political Affairs - who is seated right behind me -
took place from 7 to 23 December. It included
representatives of the African Union, the International
Organization for Migration and United Nations entities
working in the humanitarian, development, political,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding, counter-narcotics and
counter-terrorism fields.

The mission had working sessions in Mali, Niger,
Chad and Mauritania. It also visited Abuja, Nigeria,
where it met with senior officials of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and
with Nigeria's Minister of Defence to discuss regional
efforts to counter terrorism. The team also made stops
in Dakar, Senegal, for guidance and debriefing with the
2
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa, Mr. Said Djinnit.

The mission found, especially among the civil
and political leaders of the region, a remarkable
openness to engage on the nature and enormity of the
challenges confronting the countries. It was clear
throughout that most of the challenges pre-dated the
Libyan conflict. On the question of returnees from
Libya, the topmost priority for the countries visited
was to feed and to reintegrate the vulnerable returnees
and to help the affected communities cope with the loss
of remittances.

Underlying structural challenges and a looming
food crisis in the area compound those immediate
problems. There were strong appeals for the United
Nations, working in tandem with the African Union
and others, as well as with the new authorities in
Libya, to find a mutually satisfactory framework for
rebuilding relationships between the Sahel region and
the countries of transit and destination.

The mission also found that the leaders of the
Sahel region understood the need to protect the rights
of both the migrants and the host communities,
especially in the light of recent abuses. It held
extensive consultations on how to promote the security,
economic and employment conditions for managing
labour and migration issues within the region.

The mission also recognized that greater efforts
needed to be made to identify the criminal and militia
elements that are reigniting the embers of past
rebellions, using weapons that had been smuggled into
the region from Al-Qadhafi's arsenal during the
fighting in Libya. The Council will recall that Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ian Martin
informed the Council yesterday that there is little
evidence so far that man-portable air defence systems,
or some of the other heavy weaponry, have been
smuggled out of Libya in significant numbers to the
subregion (see S/PV.6707).

The recommendations of Mr. Ibok's mission fall
into three categories.

The first is support and capacity-building for
ongoing national initiatives to address the immediate
humanitarian, socio-economic and security challenges
in the region, as well as for enhanced efforts by the
United Nations country teams, especially in building a
12-21580
more coherent approach for the implementation of
humanitarian and development programmes.

The second is support for existing regional
mechanisms, including capacity-building and enhanced
coordination arrangements, on issues related to the
control of borders and information-sharing on cross-
border activity, such as the smuggling of weapons and
human trafficking. This would include regional
mechanisms to address the growing activities of
terrorist organizations that are building networks that
reach out from the Maghreb and the Sahel zone to
terrorist groups like Boko Haram that are not
traditionally part of the region.

The third is support at the international level. The
United Nations, in cooperation with the African Union,
needs to mobilize greater international support for the
Sahel region to address the challenges of human
insecurity and underdevelopment, as well as terrorist
and security issues. Regional actors have made clear
that there is an urgent need to deal with the upsurge in
terrorist groups and the growing threat they pose.
However, in their View, it is critically necessary to also
address the socio-economic situation, including youth
unemployment, the food security crisis looming over
the horizon and underdevelopment. They have called
for more comprehensive efforts to address the problem
of drugs and weapons-smuggling, as well as the
smuggling of other products, such as petroleum
foodstuffs, to fund terrorist organizations.

Recent developments in the region reinforce the
concerns consistently expressed to the mission by its
interlocutors. The security situation in Mali has
significantly worsened following heavy fighting on
17 and 18 January between Government forces and
Tuareg militias in northern Mali in an area close to the
borders with Niger and Algeria. The Tuareg fighters,
members of the self-proclaimed Azawad National
Liberation Movement, assert that they are seeking to
drive the Government out of several towns in the North
where Tuareg communities are dominant. The attacks
come at a particularly sensitive time for Mali, with the
approach of presidential and legislative elections and a
major constitutional reform referendum. This is further
complicated by the drought throughout the region and
the worsening food situation currently affecting Mali,
Niger and Chad.

In neighbouring Niger, President Mahamadou
Issoufou voiced concern on 22 January over the danger
12-21580
of similar violence occurring in his country, and
affirmed his Government's determination to avert the
spread of Tuareg attacks to Niger. Although no recent
attacks have been reported, there is growing concern
that the resurgent Tuareg rebellion in Mali could in fact
spread to Niger. The security equilibrium in the
northern regions of Niger and Mali is especially
volatile due to the enhanced presence and heightened
activity there of the Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb
group and other criminal networks that use these vast,
poorly guarded and largely desert territories as safe
havens and training grounds for their illicit operations.

If we are to be able to deal with the challenges in
the Sahel region and to have a comprehensive, long-
lasting impact, we will need to put in place a
mechanism that would bring together all the affected
countries and major outside actors in a coordinated
manner to discuss the issues and devise solutions.
Other countries in the neighbourhood outside the Sahel
region certainly need to be brought into the security
and development discourse.

As we all know, one of the obstacles to increased
cooperation is structural. African and United Nations
efforts to deal with the problems of the region are
spread over many groupings and organizations. For
example, Nigeria and Niger belong to ECOWAS, Chad
is a member of the Economic Community of Central
African States, and Mauritania and Algeria are in the
Arab-Maghreb Union. In addition, none of the existing
United Nations presences in the region - the United
Nations Office for West Africa, the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa and the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya - has a mandate
that covers the broad region of the Sahel and the
multiple challenges confronted by the countries
concerned. Despite these limitations, we have been
encouraged by the readiness of all the countries inside
and outside the region, as well as regional
organizations and the United Nations system, to work
together to develop a more comprehensive and
coherent approach.

Let me conclude by emphasizing the urgency of
the deteriorating security and humanitarian situation in
the Sahel. It is critical that the international community
respond to the strong and consistent calls of the
concerned countries to support ongoing initiatives. As I
have noted, some of the problems are directly related
to the fall of the Al-Qadhafi regime in Libya, but the
mission's interlocutors emphasized that most of the
problems are long-standing ones, and current draught
conditions make it obvious that the overall situation
could deteriorate quickly. On 29 January, at the African
Union summit, a ministerial-level meeting is planned
to review this situation and to develop approaches to
deal with the many problems of the region. The report
of the December mission will be discussed at that
meeting. We will endeavour to keep the Council
informed of developments in the region as time
progresses.

