Mr. Pascoe: We meet today at a critical moment
for Somalia. This is a time when the response of the
international community to an embattled Government's
pleas for help could make the difference between
consolidating hopeful steps towards peace and a
descent once again into anarchy and hopelessness.

Since our last briefing to the Council, and despite
the heavy fighting of the past few days, we have
witnessed in recent months new-found reasons to hope.
The Somalia peace process, facilitated by the
Secretary-General's Special Representative,
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, has produced a broad-
based Somali Government, led by President Sheikh
Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, which enjoys the support of
large segments of the population and States members
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.

More importantly, the new Government is
actively reaching out to opposition groups to forge
national reconciliation. Negotiation, persuasion and
inclusion are at the core of the Government's strategy
to achieve a lasting political settlement in Somalia. As
a result, the Somali people have the best chance in two
decades to end their suffering and move towards a
better and more stable future. And we, the international
community, have a unique opportunity to support
Somali leaders who have shown a commitment to
building peace. This opportunity must not be lost.

In order to assist Somalia to consolidate its still-
fragile peace process and lay the foundation for
sustainable peace, reconstruction and development, the
Secretary-General has elaborated a political strategy
aimed at, first, importing the peace process from
Djibouti into Somalia; secondly, assisting the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) to enhance
dialogue with opposition forces and build a critical
mass in support of the peace process; and, thirdly,
consolidating the Transitional Federal Institutions.

In this connection, the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia (UNPOS) and the United Nations
country team paid three high-level Visits to Mogadishu
to hold consultations with the Government at the most
09-33564
senior levels. These consultations focused on the
preparations for the Brussels donors' conference and
follow-up on the implementation of proposals
presented in the conference of the International Contact
Group on Somalia held in Brussels in February.

UNPOS has also worked with the Government of
Kenya in organizing training for senior civil servants.
Discussions have been held in Nairobi with
Government representatives on the establishment of the
Joint Security Committee. We anticipate agreement on
the future workings of the committee in additional
missions of UNPOS to Mogadishu.

For the Government to succeed in its efforts to
consolidate peace, it has to deal with the continuing
security challenge. The Government must be backed by
a credible security force that can help it to negotiate
from a position of strength and contain hard-line
elements bent on undermining it. The Government
must also be able to deliver security and demonstrate
clear dividends of peace and national reconciliation to
Somali communities.

The efforts to strengthen the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and build Somalia's
security institutions respond to these needs and are part
and parcel of the broader United Nations political
strategy I mentioned a moment ago. Success in these
efforts will give peace a chance to take root as well as
create the conditions for a dramatic improvement in the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and early recovery
and development activities.

It is in support of this political strategy and these
peacemaking efforts that the Secretary-General has
proposed, in his latest report to the Council
(S/2009/210), a three-phased approach to addressing
the ongoing security challenge: first, by supporting the
establishment of Somali security institutions and
strengthening AMISOM; secondly, by establishing a
United Nations light footprint in Somalia; and thirdly,
by deploying, at an appropriate time, a United Nations
peacekeeping operation.

The Brussels donors' conference on 23 April was
organized with the aim of mobilizing international
support for the first phase, that is, the strengthening of
Somali security institutions and AMISOM. forces. I
would like to take this opportunity to thank our
partners - including the Government of Somalia, the
African Union and the European Union - in making
the conference a success. The next urgent step is to
09-33564
ensure the full receipt of the pledged amount of $213
million. It is expected that AMISOM. will receive $160
million and Somali security institutions $66 million in
both cash and in kind pledges.

AMISOM. continues to play a critical role in
Somalia. We thank the Governments of Uganda and
Burundi for their continued commitment in the country.
We are also pleased with the offer of a battalion from
Sierra Leone, which would raise the strength of the
force to more than 5,000 troops.

Let me turn now to the dangers of the current
moment. On 9 May, there was an attempt to overthrow
the legitimate Government and take power in
Mogadishu by force. This attempted coup was, we
understand, led by Sheikh Hassan Dahir Aweys and
included Al-Shabaab fighters. While the Government
has been able to repel these forces so far, the situation
remains quite fragile. Media reports indicate that at
least 120 people have been killed in heavy fighting
around Mogadishu and that thousands of civilians have
fled to other parts of Somalia. It is noteworthy that the
reports indicate that the attacking forces include an
increasing number of foreign fighters. In fact, an
Al-Shabaab spokesman openly embraced and admitted
the presence of the foreign fighters only a few days
ago. The Government's capacities, on its side, have a
limit, because ofa lack of resources.

Through these last few days, the Government has
continued with some success to negotiate a resolution
to the conflict. Yesterday, religious leaders called for a
ceasefire and condemned the fighting. While the
ceasefire was initially accepted by all sides, it would
seem that, this afternoon, Al-Shabaab resumed attacks.
It is not clear whether the attacking forces are as
cohesive as they were prior to the call for ceasefire
from the religious leaders.

A point of interest in the report is that the trained
TFG forces seem to have constituted the backbone of
the Government's defence. This is an encouraging sign
of the emergence of a nascent national force. This
latest surge in violence is clearly a response to the
Government's strategy to reach out and build a critical
mass in support of peace. As the Government gains
success in its strategy of negotiation, persuasion and
inclusion, radical elements within the opposition feel
threatened and increase the level of violence.

International support for the Government of
President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed is particularly
3
crucial now. The success of the Brussels conference
convened by the Secretary-General gives ground for
hope in this regard. The imperative now is, as I said, to
ensure that the assistance reaches President Sheikh
Sharif Sheikh Ahmed's Government and AMISOM
quickly in order to limit the ability of hardliners to
threaten once again the ongoing efforts to build a
Somali State.

Such practical support can help the Government
strengthen its ability to address the security challenge,
become more cohesive, carry out reconstruction and
development planning, and generate and collect
revenue. The Government is committed to moving
forward and we should give it credit for the progress it
has made in three short months. The Government has
formulated a budget linked to the payment of security
forces, public investment and civil service wages. It is
collecting revenue from Mogadishu port and airport. It
has worked with UNPOS and members of the
international community to establish the Joint Security
Committee in Mogadishu, to carry out a security sector
assessment, and to develop a security sector
framework.

Establishing effective governance inside Somalia
is one of the keys to bringing law and order to the
waters off its coast. A strong Somali State would not
only curb the problem of piracy in the short term, but
would also address the underlying long-term social and
economic causes. It is important to understand that
piracy is turning into a business that, if left unchecked,
will create localized criminal economies with leaders
increasingly able to resist efforts to integrate them into
a broader national structure. That having been said, the
efforts of the international maritime forces are having a
significant effect. As a result of these operations, the
cost to pirates of their actions is steadily increasing as
they have to travel further to capture ships.

I want to take this opportunity to acknowledge
the contributions being made by the various naval
forces to deal with this problem. Their operations are
an integral part of a wider effort that includes assisting
local communities to undertake alternative forms of
employment, tracking the flow of money to identify
those benefiting from piracy, prosecuting those
responsible, and creating a coastal security force.

We welcome the establishment of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. Following
the working group meeting of the Contact Group held
in Cairo on 16 and 17 March, the United Nations was
requested by the Contact Group to propose a number of
counter-piracy initiatives on land. These initiatives will
be presented to the next Contact Group meeting in
May. In order to ensure greater coherence between the
different components in response to piracy, a
coordination mechanism is being established under the
leadership of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. This architecture brings together
efforts to address the piracy challenge on the high seas,
on land, in the region and internationally.

In conclusion, it is evident that the only lasting
solution for Somalia will be one that is created and led
by the Somalis themselves. The Government's efforts
at building a consensus for reconciliation are slowly
gaining ground, despite the serious challenge by well-
funded radicals. The international community must
make a vital investment at this time to nurture the
fragile peace process, help the Government establish
its authority throughout the country and build its
security and rule of law institutions. Now is not the
time to analyse and discuss, but to provide concrete
help while it can still make a difference.

We must continue to engage in a credible and
practical manner. We cannot afford to miss this
opportunity to bring stability to that long-troubled
country and its people. The consequences of inaction
would be borne not only by Somalis, but by the region
and the world at large.

