Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank Ambassador Nishida for his first
briefing as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), and
welcome him to that position. We have full confidence
that, under his leadership, the Committee will continue
to fulfil its important mandate. The Committee's role
will be of critical importance as we pursue the dual-
track strategy to resolve the Iranian nuclear issue.

This briefing comes just days after the release of
the latest report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) on Iran. The report reinforces the
strong messages contained in successive reports that
Iran continues to defy multiple United Nations
resolutions and is failing to cooperate fully with the
Agency.

The report makes clear that Iran has not
suspended its enrichment-related activities or work on
its heavy water-related projects. It indicates that Iran
has produced 2,803 kilograms of low-enriched uranium
enriched to less than 5 per cent. The report also states
that Iran has produced 22 kilograms of low-enriched
uranium enriched to just under 20 per cent. This is a
significant step towards the ability to enrich to
weapons-grade levels, and Iran has no credible civilian
application for this level of enriched uranium.

The report again makes clear that, in the case of
two facilities, Iran did not notify the Agency in a
timely manner of its decision to construct or authorize
their construction, and that this is inconsistent with
Iran's obligations under the subsidiary arrangements of
its safeguards agreement.

Once again, the report states that Iran has not
discussed possible military dimensions of its
programme with the Agency since August 2008. The
Agency therefore

"remains concerned about the possible existence
in Iran of past or current undisclosed nuclear
related activities involving military related
organizations, including activities related to the
development of a nuclear payload for a missile"
(5/2010/465, annex, enclosure, para. 39))

In summary, the report states that

"while the Agency continues to verify the non-
diversion of declared nuclear material in Iran,
Iran has not provided the necessary cooperation
to permit the Agency to confirm that all nuclear
material in Iran is in peaceful activities" (Ibid., para. 41).

I would also like to highlight our concern over
Iran's engagement in activities related to ballistic
missiles that are capable of delivering nuclear
weapons, including a launch reported in the Iranian
media last month that used ballistic missile technology.
Paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010) prohibits such
activities. The Security Council and the 1737
Committee will need to consider an appropriate
response to Iran's actions.

We remain deeply concerned both about Iran's
nuclear programme and about its serial violation of the
resolutions of this Council, which is why we supported
resolution 1929 (2010), which introduced further
sanctions against Iran. The additional measures
imposed by that resolution have now been in force for
three months, so it is a good moment to take stock of
the implementation of the additional measures imposed
on Iran and the new obligations of all United Nations
Member States.

While many States have acted promptly to adjust
their laws and procedures, we would remind those
States that have yet to report to the 1737 Committee on
the measures taken to do so as soon as possible. If the
dual-track strategy is to succeed, the effective and
rigorous implementation by States of all these
measures and those in the Council's previous
resolutions will be a vital part of the dual-track policy.
The 1737 Committee will have a key and growing role
in ensuring this implementation, both by monitoring
implementation and advising States where necessary.

We were therefore pleased to see a rigorous and
specific work programme submitted to the Council on
23 July. We also look forward to the early appointment
of a professional and dedicated Panel of Experts. The
Panel will be essential to the effective delivery of that
work programme. The Panel will also provide an
additional level of scrutiny directly to the Council on
the implementation of measures, making
recommendations where necessary. I would urge the
Committee and the Secretariat to make every effort to
operationalize the Panel as soon as possible.

We remain ready to resume the talks on Iran's
nuclear programme we started in Geneva on 1 October
2009. We believe that such talks can lead to a solution
if they are purposeful, discuss both sides' concerns and
make swift progress. In again extending our hand, we
show our determination to resolve these matters
through dialogue and diplomacy.

