Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to thank and congratulate you,
Madam President, for presiding over this open debate.
I also thank the Secretary-General, the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission and Ms. Bouchamaoui for
their briefings.

I will focus on four points: first, security and
sustainable development; secondly, the prevention
of conflicts and their root causes; thirdly, the
comprehensive responses and the building of resilient
societies; and fourthly, a series of comments on the role
of the Security Council.

On the first point, it is clear that the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), unlike the Millennium Development
Goals, was designed as a transformative vision for
the entire international community. For the first time,
a development agenda adopted by the international
community includes a goal - Goal 16 of the
Sustainable Development Goals - on the challenges to
peace, security, good governance and justice. We have
adopted the 17 Sustainable Development Goals that can
be reached within a generation, but what I want to point
out is that if the international commitment to meeting
those Goals were strengthened, the risk of extremist
aberrations would diminish radically. In them we are
committed to an international community with citizens
whose basic political and socioeconomic needs are
satisfied. We have no doubt about that. Long-term
sustainable security is strongly linked to inclusive,
sustainable development. Our responsibilities in that
regard are shared, not separate.

Conflict prevention one of the key elements to
achieving the goal of peaceful societies, and to prevent
conflicts it is essential first and foremost is to analyse
their root causes. I am referring not just to internal
causes, such as institutional fragility, corruption and
social exclusion, but also to external causes, such as
illegal trafficking, terrorism, violent extremism and
climate change. Let us recall that at the Arria Formula
meeting on climate change that the Security Council
held on 30 June, it was suggested that the Secretary-
General needed to update his 2009 report entitled
"Climate change and its possible implications for
security" (A/64/350), which for the first time defined
climate change as a threat multiplier for global security.
All such internal and external factors can sever the
relationship of trust that citizens should have with their
States.

On the third point, citizens have issued a call on the
international community and their own Governments
to offer consistent responses with a multidimensional
focus and the clear objective of building resilient
societies based on trust and accountability. Sustainable
societies must have such cross-cutting elements as
respect for human rights and the inclusion of women
as active participants in all phases of peacebuilding,
pursuant to resolution 2242 (2015) on women and peace
and security. This multidimensional focus must apply
not only to policies, but also to those who implement
them. It fundamentally calls for efforts to overcome the
fragmentation of the United Nations system, and thus
the importance of today's debate.

I would like to conclude with four comments on the
role the Security Council should assume in that regard.

First, there is prevention. In the matter of preventing
conflict, the Council should strive to ensure that early
warning systems with analytical capacities lead to
early action. More and better use should be made of
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations and of
the provisions of Article 99 on the relationship of the
Secretary-General with the Council.

Secondly, it is also important for the Council
to demonstrate flexibility in its interinstitutional
relationships. That flexibility should be seen in the
efforts of the Council through, for example, the
adaptation of the mandates of peacekeeping operations
and special political missions, depending on the
circumstances and individual needs of the moment and,
when appropriate, incorporating the multidimensional
approach to which I referred earlier. In that regard,
quick-impact projects would make it possible to bridge
the gap between stabilization and development.

Thirdly, it is essential to improve the relationship
between the Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
Let us not forget that this instrument encompasses three
key elements for preventing conflicts: peace, security
and development.

Finally, we must keep in mind that in certain
contexts, neither the United Nations nor the Council are
the only actors, much less the most suitable ones. That is
particularly relevant to Africa, a continent where peace,
security and development are closely interlinked, and
that has an organization - the African Union - that
is resolved to assume those responsibilities. Spain
believes it essential to take concrete measures to enable
a more effective, operative relationship between the
Security Council and the African Union and its Peace
and Security Council.

