Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Judge Meron, Judge Joensen, Mr. Brammertz and
Mr. Jallow for their reports.

The prevention of mass atrocities and genocide
is both a core national security interest and a moral
responsibility of the United States. The prosecution
of perpetrators of heinous crimes is essential not only
for the sake of justice and accountability but also to
facilitate transitions from conflict to stability and
to deter those who would commit atrocities. Thus,
the United States has strongly supported the work of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) since they began to fulfil
the dual goals ofjustice and prevention.

In the 20 years since the Security Council
established the ICTY, the Tribunal has made a significant
contribution to international justice. The body of work
of both the ICTY and the ICTR, established a year
later, reflects the bedrock principle of providing fair
trials for the accused and the opportunity for every
defendant to have his day in court. That has been a
hallmark of international justice since the Nuremberg
trials and remains critical to advancing the rule of law
internationally. While no system of justice is perfect,
the United States has always respected the rulings of
the ICTY and the ICTR and celebrates the progress
that both Tribunals have made towards completing
their work. Only three ICTY trials are expected to
continue past the end of this year, all of which are for
the late-arrested accused.

We look forward to the 1 July opening of The Hague
branch of the Residual Mechanism for International
Criminal Tribunals, which will handle any ICTY appeals
after this month. The Arusha branch of the Mechanism
has been open for almost a year and has taken some
consequential steps, including ordering the transfers of
three high-level accused to the courts of Rwanda when
they are apprehended. We appreciate the considerable
work by both Tribunals to share resources with the
Mechanism to reduce costs. We look forward to further
measures to streamline operations while maintaining
the highest standards of justice. At the same time, we
recognize that budgets for the next few years must
support new premises for the Mechanism's Arusha
branch, archives for both Tribunals, accommodations
for victims and witnesses, outreach activities focusing
on reconciliation, and judicial proceedings that may
arise.

As a measure of our support for the ICTR and
the countries of the Great Lakes, as Judge Meron
and Prosecutor Jallow graciously noted, the United
States recently announced an expansion of our reward
programme for fugitives. Under the War Crimes
Rewards Program, the United States now offers rewards
ofup to $5 million for information leading to the arrest,
transfer or conviction of the nine ICTR fugitives, as
well as designated foreign nationals accused of crimes
against humanity, genocide or war crimes by any
international, mixed or hybrid criminal tribunal. The
list of rewards subjects now includes Joseph Kony,
two other leaders of the Lord's Resistance Army, and
Sylvestre Mudacumura, sought by the International
Criminal Court for crimes allegedly committed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also note the
importance of resolving the issue of the relocation of
acquitted and released persons in Tanzania and to that
end welcome the ICTR's new strategic plan.

What we have supported these past 20 years is
a system of justice that aims to hold accountable
those responsible for some of the most monstrous
crimes known to humankind and to prevent them
from recurring. The Tribunals continue to play an
indispensable role in establishing global respect for the
rule of law. The United States' commitment to working
with the international community towards peace and
justice remains steadfast.

