Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Yamamoto for his briefing and for the work of the
team of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in supporting the restoration of
peace, reconciliation and development in Afghanistan.

I also thank Ambassador Saikal and Ms. Samar for
being with us here today.

The United States joins in the strong condemnation
of the deadly attack on an Afghan National Army
hospital in Kabul on 8 March. Deliberately targeting a
medical facility that provides care for the brave Afghans
working to protect their fellow citizens has no possible
justification. We extend our deepest and most heartfelt
condolences to the families, friends and colleagues of
the victims of that senseless and cowardly act.

Since we last met to discuss Afghanistan in
December (see S/PV.7844), we have been encouraged by
progress towards the goal that we all share of ensuring
a secure, inclusive and democratic Afghanistan for all
Afghan people. President Ghani and Chief Executive
Abdullah continue to work together to strengthen the
National Unity Government, establish mechanisms for
determining Government appointments, and combat
corruption. Election reform is making steady progress,
as demonstrated by the transparent and consultative
process to select and install commissioners, as well
as President Ghani's appointment of Mohammad
Warimach as Chief Electoral Officer on 1 March.

We commend the Afghan Government for its
continued commitment to an inclusive, Afghan-led
peace process, in spite of the continuing attacks. The
progress made in implementing the peace agreement
with Hizb-i Islami gives us hope for similar progress
towards a peaceful resolution of the conflict with the
Taliban. The United States calls upon the Taliban to
enter into negotiations with the Afghan Government.
We also call on Afghanistan's neighbours and the
international community to increase pressure on the
Taliban to come to the table for talks with the Afghan
Government. A political settlement between the Taliban
and the Afghan Government remains the best way to
end violence and to bring stability to the region.
However, despite those positive developments,
Afghanistan continues to face challenges that would
test even the strongest Government. Regrettably,
those challenges are not new; we have discussed them
repeatedly in the Council. But they are within the power
of Afghanistan, its neighbours and the international
community to address. The Taliban, including the
Haqqani Network, affiliates of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham and other armed groups are increasing
their attacks, resulting in the death and injury of
thousands of Afghans and delaying the progress that
Afghanistan so badly needs. The internal displacement
of citizens fleeing insecurity presents a humanitarian
challenge that is exacerbated by the return of more
than 850,000 refugees and undocumented migrants
from neighbouring countries. And while development
assistance remains robust, a precipitous decrease
in domestic and foreign investment has stalled the
private-sector-led growth that Afghanistan requires
to employ its youth, reduce poverty and provide hope
to communities.

In that challenging environment, UNAMA is an
essential partner for the people and the Government
of Afghanistan and for the international community.
The United States therefore strongly supports the
renewal of UNAMA's mandate for an additional year.
UNAMA plays a critical role in supporting peace and
reconciliation, empowering women's voices, defending
the human rights of all Afghan citizens and coordinating
humanitarian assistance. I also want to highlight that
UNAMA's 12 provincial offices are in many places
the only permanent international presence outside of
Kabul. Those offices are critical in engaging Afghan
citizens outside of the capital as well. In conclusion, we
look forward to working with all members on finding
ways to maximize UNAMA's very important efforts.

