Mr. Ibn Chambas (Economic Community of West African States): I wish to join Hon. Nana Akufo-
Addo, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ghana, in
expressing our appreciation to you, Mr. President, and
to the other members of the Security Council for
granting us another opportunity to address you on the
crisis in C6te d'Ivoire, a matter of grave concern to
peoples of the West African subregion.

I wish to underscore the economic consequences
of the war for Cote d'Ivoire and the other countries of
the subregion, and particularly the social and economic
dimension of the dangers posed if the crisis continues.

Since the outbreak of the crisis on 19 September
2002, the economic and social situation in Cote
d'Ivoire and the neighbouring countries has continued
to deteriorate. The gross domestic product (GDP)
growth of Cote d'Ivoire, Mali, Burkina Faso and Niger
has fallen as trade amongst those countries has been
disrupted. The economy of Cote d'Ivoire, which is the
second largest in the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) subregion after Nigeria,
represents approximately 13 per cent of the GDP of
West Africa. The country has a population of about
16.6 million, with a 27 per cent immigrant component
originating mainly from neighbouring countries. cote
d'Ivoire exports agricultural, agro-industrial and
manufactured goods to its neighbours and is a major
destination for livestock products from the countries of
the Sahel. It is the leading world producer of cocoa and
one of the major producers of coffee, hevea and palm
oil.

At 30 per cent of the total volume of trade with
ECOWAS countries, Cote d'Ivoire dominates intra-
regional trade. In 2001, exports to other ECOWAS
countries represented 33 per cent of total export
figures, while imports represented 27 per cent. This is
in comparison to an average intra-ECOWAS trade of
about 15 per cent. Its port network of infrastructure and
geographical position have combined to make Cote
d'Ivoire a transit corridor for goods and travellers
within the West African subregion. The country also
plays host to a substantial number of West African
workers and traders, who transfer a considerable
volume of funds to their home countries.

These are compelling reasons why the restoration
of peace and stability to Cote d'Ivoire is a sine qua non
for the stability and development of the rest of the
subregion, and in particular the consolidation of the
fledgling democracies in West Africa. The continuing
unrest in Cote d'Ivoire is a cause for legitimate concern
to both the leaders and peoples of the West African
subregion.

Despite the considerable efforts deployed within
the subregion by ECOWAS, the fact remains that the
crisis rumbles on and, indeed, there are troubling signs
that the situation is deteriorating. The existence of
bands of armed groups, whose activities extend beyond
the Ivorian borders and threaten the successful efforts
of the international community to bring peace to Sierra
Leone, Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire, should galvanize us
all to act decisively to curtail their activities.

There is, therefore, a need to secure Cote
d'Ivoire, Liberia and Sierra Leone as a single
undertaking. We should adopt a comprehensive
regional approach to the crisis in those countries.
ECOWAS is therefore calling on the Security Council
to work with us in a concerted effort to restore peace
and stability to Cote d'Ivoire, thereby consolidating the
gains made in Sierra Leone and, lately, in Liberia. For
this, we need to back political action by the presence of
a robust peacekeeping force in order to create an
enabling environment for dialogue, national
reconciliation and the speedy and full implementation
of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement, which remains for
us the sole framework for the resolution of the crisis.

ECOWAS is confident that it can, as usual, rely
on the support of the Security Council in its efforts to
secure a lasting peace in Cote d'Ivoire and will
appreciate any initiatives that the Council might wish
to take in order to revive the peace process in Cote
d'Ivoire.

Peace in Cote d'Ivoire is inextricably linked to
lasting peace in Sierra Leone, Liberia and, indeed, all
of West Africa. Once again, we thank the Council for
its deep interest in the preservation of peace and
security in West Africa and for the honour done us in
giving us the opportunity to address this body.

