Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
The drums of war are getting louder. Threats and
warnings have become deafening. The omens of
terrifying conflagration and mass destruction are
thickening on the horizon. We are standing at the
threshold of overwhelming disaster despite all the good
intentions and genuine efforts made by peace-loving
States and peoples. These States and peoples are
seeking a peaceful solution to the Iraqi issue, seeking
to dispel the clouds of war and spare Iraq and its
brotherly people, as well as the region, this scourge
that could have many unpredictable consequences.

We listened very carefully to the reports of Mr.
Blix and Mr. ElBaradei, and we earlier followed their
various statements. These all bolster the possibility of a
peaceful solution and stress the need to give the
international inspection teams the necessary time to
complete their mission and achieve the results that
were foreseen in Security Council resolutions, the
latest being resolution 1441 (2002).

War is a serious matter. If it solves one problem,
it may bring many others, with destructive
consequences. Whatever the basic reason for war, the
results would be disastrous at all levels -
humanitarian, economic, political, legal and moral. The
reason for justifying a war against Iraq must be the
most consistent reason for preventing war, through
increasing and intensifying inspections and continuing
political efforts and diplomatic contacts, while
stressing that Iraqi authorities must actively cooperate
with the international inspectors. This can be done by
demanding that Iraq take measures and provide
information for the inspectors to complete their
mission, resolve the problem of missing persons and
Kuwaiti prisoners, as well as third country nationals
detained in Iraq, and return all Kuwaiti property, in
accordance with international legality. This should be
done so that the Iraqi question can be resolved
comprehensively in all its aspects.

The possibility that there are weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq is the best reason for the
international inspectors to complete their task in order
that any such weapons can be destroyed and their use
prevented in any military confrontation, which would
have grave humanitarian and environmental results

The Security Council today faces a major test in
the way it discharges its responsibilities for
maintaining international peace and security. Since the
Council acts on behalf of all United Nations Members,
it represents the entire international community.
Therefore, the Council cannot take lightly international
objections to war on Iraq as long as the possibility
exists to achieve the requirements of international
legitimacy by peaceful means. It is more important and
urgent for the Council to seek peaceful solutions in
order to act for international stability. That cannot be
accomplished except by maintaining the security,
stability and territorial integrity of all countries,
including Iraq.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia seeks to spare Iraq
and the region war and its destructive consequences.
We call for a solution to the question of Iraq through
the United Nations. The solution must be to implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions while
maintaining the unity and territorial integrity of Iraq
and avoiding its fragmentation under all circumstances.

Insisting on the open use of force would weaken
the credibility of the United Nations. It would create
doubts about the fairness and strength of international
law. It would send human society back into dangerous
chaos at a time when the means of force and
destruction are available to all. The use of such force
has become possible in the absence of a central
authority for the international community and through
disrespect for international law.

Even if all means available to implement the
resolution are exhausted and the principle of war is
accepted, the extent of military action must be limited.
Its objective must not be to punish the brotherly people
of Iraq, who have suffered for a very long time,
through two devastating wars. Only God knows what a
third war would lead to.

We support all efforts to destroy weapons of mass
destruction, whether in Iraq or in any other State. The
call for disarmament of weapons of mass destruction in
Iraq must be accompanied by a call to destroy all
weapons of mass destruction in Israel, which is the
only country in the Middle East to stockpile nuclear
and proscribed weapons. It is the only State in the
region that refuses to accede to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. It is the only State in
the region that refuses to submit its nuclear
installations to international supervision.

Israel's advocates justify that situation, saying
that Israel has never used nuclear or other weapons of
mass destruction. That argument is to be rejected
because Israel does in fact carry out mass destruction
in the occupied Palestinian territories by killing people,
razing homes, destroying the economic infrastructure,
imposing a suffocating economic embargo, sabotaging
farms, bulldozing fields, uprooting trees, assassinating
Palestinian political activists, restricting the freedom of
movement of Palestinians by closing checkpoints,
expanding settlements and flouting the human rights of
the Palestinian people under international humanitarian
laws and norms.

Israel has been able to use such excessive force
while it holds the most lethal and destructive weapons,
thanks to the unlimited assistance which is provided to
it and denied to others. Israel does not need to use
weapons of mass destruction, but it does threaten the
States and peoples of the region with such weapons.
The issue is not the kind of weapon used; the issue is
the results of a policy of premeditated and programmed
destruction aimed at annihilating the Palestinian cause,
at sowing despair in the hearts of Palestinians and at
intimidating Arabs and Muslims.

It has been said that one of the objectives of the
war against Iraq is to fight terrorism. The fight against
terrorism cannot ignore terror's main roots in the
region: the Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab
lands since 1967. Violence and extremism in the region
are not a reason to give up the search for a solution to
the question of Palestine; it is precisely because this
issue has not been resolved justly and fairly, in
accordance with international legitimacy and the
principle of land for peace, that the current situation
exists.

Double standards are one cause of the extremism
and violence in the region. They cause hatred and
division among States. Injustice breeds extremism, and
oppression leads to explosion. The worst oppression is
indignity and the desecration of beliefs and all that is
holy. Colonialism is the worst form of injustice. No
matter how long and dark the night of injustice is, it
will be followed by the dawn of freedom. The sun of
freedom will shine; dawn is near.

Peace and security are an indivisible whole.
Abiding by international legitimacy is the
responsibility of all. No exceptions can be admitted,
whatever pretext is used, whatever fait accompli is
presented. What we seek and look forward to the
principle of "right is might" and not of "might is right".

