Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Nestor Osorio for
his briefing this morning and his work as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737

(2006).
(spoke in French)

I also wish to extend my thanks to the Panel of
Experts established pursuant to resolution 1929 (2010)
for the level its expertise made available to the
Committee. We encourage the Panel to continue its
monitoring action of the Committee and its
participation in the various conferences and meetings
pursuant to the Committee's mandate, in particular its
dialogue with Member States, especially through visits
organized to countries at their request.

The Committee continues to consider the cases of
which it has been notified, and we hope that it will
enjoy all the necessary support of Member States, just
as we remain confident that it can continue to count on
the professionalism and impartiality of the Panel of
Experts. We also hope that the Committee will
continue its consideration of the Panel of Experts' final
report of 2011 in a constructive spirit that will enable it
to reach a consensus on the publication of that report as
soon as possible.

In the same spirit, my delegation supports the

intention of the Chair to organize a briefing for all

States Members of the United Nations in the very near

future in order to provide greater transparency to the
work of the Council and its subsidiary bodies.

The latest report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) (S/2012/114, annex) shows
that outstanding issues of the Iranian nuclear
programme have still not been resolved. It is crucial
that the dialogue between Iran and the P5+1 group
resume as soon as possible. We remain convinced that
dialogue and the diplomatic channel are the only way
to find a solution to the issue. The success of such a
dialogue requires a clear and sustained commitment in
good faith and the avoidance of any action that could
complicate the situation.

We also believe that resolving the issue means
compliance with Security Council resolutions and the
requests of the International Atomic Energy Agency in
the context of Iran meeting its international
obligations. We remain convinced of the impartiality
and integrity of the IAEA as the sole competent body
in that area and that, as a result, it should enjoy all
necessary cooperation, including the required
information and access.

Here, we reiterate that the non-proliferation
regime should not be weakened and that all States
should scrupulously respect their safeguards
obligations. The goal of nuclear disarmament, which
my country values, continues to be put to the test if
freely undertaken non-proliferation commitments are
not respected. At the same time, we wish to underscore
that that regime is based on a fundamental balance
between the rights and obligations of States that no
State may avoid.

In conclusion, allow me to express the hope that
the intended dialogue will take place and that Iran and
the P5+1 swiftly return to the negotiating table.

