Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, China congratulates Kazakhstan on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and welcomes the new members of the
Security Council.

I thank Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for
his briefing.

The topic on today's agenda is the situation of
the Middle East. I wish to express China's principled
position on this item. Recent developments in certain
parts of the Middle East are worrying. Some countries
are going through wars and conflicts; hotspot issues are
complicated, intertwined and influence one another;
terrorist forces are rampant and spreading - all of
which pose serious challenges to international peace
and security. China hopes that countries of the region
will work concertedly with the international community
to improve the situation in the Middle East as quickly
as possible and seek a fundamental solution to achieve
regional peace, stability and development.

First, we call for a political solution to the hotspot
issues in the region. All sides should play constructive
roles and persistently promote dialogue and consultation
to reach a sustainable solution that takes into account
the interests of all parties.

Secondly, we should resolutely combat terrorism,
while applying uniform standards and employing
all means possible to eliminate the root causes that
breed terrorism.

Thirdly, the purpose and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and other basic rules governing
international relations should be respected, and the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the countries of the region should be respected.

Fourthly, the countries of the region should
be encouraged to strengthen dialogue, deepen
understanding and build trust.

The question of Palestine is at the core of the
situation in the Middle East. The international
community should adhere to the two-State solution,
work to restart the Israeli-Palestinian negotiations
and achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting solution
to the Palestinian issue as swiftly as possible. The
international community should continue to seek a
political solution to the situation in Syria as a matter
of priority, continue to count on the United Nations
as the main channel for mediation and work towards
the comprehensive, just and careful resolution of the
situation in Syrian as soon as possible.

Pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations,
the Council bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Security Council, therefore, should not discuss the
internal affairs of any country, nor is it the venue for any
discussion of the human rights situation in a country.

China takes note of the recent domestic
developments in Iran. China hopes and trusts that, with
the efforts of the Iranian Government and its people,
Iran will remain stable and achieve development.
The Iranian situation does not pose any threat to
international peace or security, nor is it on the agenda
ofthe Security Council. The Council's discussion ofthe
domestic situation of Iran is a practice that is not in line
with the Council's responsibilities as outlined in the
Charter of the United Nations, nor does it help resolve
the domestic issues within Iran.

