Major General Lollesgaard: Mr. President, I
thank you for all the support from the members of the
Council and for the questions posed; I will try to be
brief in my responses.

First, with respect to the question posed by
the representative of Chad, on how we can prevent
asymmetric threats, I think that that is a very difficult
question. I do not think that we are capable, with this
mandate, of preventing it, but we can deter it through the
effective use of our forces; with increased cooperation
with Operation Barkhane, which is working in the area;
and, of course, with the help of the local security forces
from Mali. So that is what we will be stepping up after
the signing of the peace agreement. I have given my
guidance for the next quarter, and clearly the focus is
on northern Mali.

I think that the issue regarding the intervention
brigade is a very complex one, because we would step
that up and then get the anti-terrorist mandate, which
would make things extremely complicated for the
Mission. I do not think we are set up for that or that
we are ready for that. We do not have the intelligence,
the equipment or the mobility to do that. I believe that
having this mandate and having an intervention brigade
under us would complicate things. So, again, I think
that this issue need to be dealt with in closer cooperation
with Barkhane and the security forces of Mali.

In terms of minimizing the risk, yes, we are
doing that; we are doing everything we can. We are
improving all of the bases now with a shorter timeline
than originally envisaged. I am also happy to learn that
Chad is bringing in more protective vehicles for their
forces.

The representative of Chile asked a question about
intelligence. I think that the sharing of intelligence
is extremely important, and I look forward to the
upcoming report on intelligence. Intelligence-sharing
in United Nations missions is complicated. We know
from previous experience that even in smaller alliances,
intelligence-sharing is complicated, and it is even more
complicated in the United Nations. I think we need
to find a good way to approach this issue, and I look
forward to the report, which may be able to help us in
that respect.

Has the availability of intelligence increased
security? Yes, definitely. I can cite several situations in
which we have saved lives by having good intelligence.
I can also cite several cases in which we lost civilian
lives because we did not have the necessary intelligence.
I think, therefore, that we need to do more.

In answer to the United States representative's
question on what we can do with respect to the issue of
casualty evacuations, the answer is: more helicopters.
That is quite easy. We are quite limited; we have limited
night capability for casualty evacuations. In connection
with the the issue of caveats, certain Member States now
actually request that their forces be within a one-hour
reach of a helicopter. This puts a lot of pressure on my
helicopter capabilities before I can put certain troops on
the ground. So, definitely, more helicopters with night
capabilities is the best way of mitigating this issue.

To the representative of New Zealand, I would say a
few things about the information campaign. I think that
on the conceptual level and on the Force level, I am in a
good position. With the assistance that I have now, the
staff can provide me with the necessary input for my
information operations. I need to train and teach within
my organization; we are working on that, and I have
asked a few experts to devise a concept for us. But I
might come back, maybe, with additional requirements
in that respect.

When it comes to the protection of vehicles, I
have made it a rule in the Mission that we do not drive
through a village without stopping and talking to
civilians. This is a common operational tactic. This is
very easy, because in Mali it always 100 kilometres to
the nearest place; so you drive 100 kilometres and stop
in the village and talk to the people. Then you drive
another 100 kilometres and so on. This is a bit of an
exaggeration, of course. But this is the way we are
doing it, so as to get out of these armoured boxes.

In terms of the many issues relating to training, I
think that we need to step up training. I think that the
training programme provided by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations is rather good, but perhaps
we need to align it more with the thinking of the troop-
contributing countries (TCCs). I think that we should
also be more receptive of actually having evaluation
teams coming into the TCCs to look at the final
training and verify that it is scenario-based and also
that we are taking the right approach and understand
the environment in which we are going to work.

In response to the French representative, let me
say that I will provide some lessons learned on what
I believe my particular Mission needs in terms of
training. We will develop that during the next couple
of months, so that information will be shared with both
the Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries.

There are many questions on the issue of the
caveats, and I asked what the Council could do. We
need to encourage contributors not to set too many
caveats. I understand, however, that there are national
issues related to operations in such environments. I
can live with caveats, as long as I know what they are
and they do not come up the day after I have issued
a task call. If they are fully clear and we know about
them beforehand, we can work around them. Of course,
it would be preferable if countries did not insist on
caveats.

That was a quick run-through, although there is
much more to say. Lunch hour is drawing near. I will
conclude here on the lessons learned, and I fully agree
with France. And I also apologize for my poor French,
among other things, but I am trying to improve. That is
also a lesson learned.

