Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltenman, for his briefing and the
delegations of the United States, Japan and the Republic
of Korea for having convened this open meeting.

Once again, we find ourselves here in the face of the
threat from North Korea, which persists in its obstinate
behaviour of flaunting its increasingly developed
nuclear programme and its capacity to launch nuclear
weapons. Uruguay reiterates its severest condemnation
ofthe latest launch ofan intercontinental ballistic missile
by North Korea yesterday. All these tests are reckless,
irresponsible and unacceptable. Uruguay reiterates its
call on North Korea to abandon its existing nuclear
programmes in a complete, verifiable and irreversible
manner, and immediately to cease all related activities,
including launches using ballistic missile technology
and other acts of provocation.

Three missile launches this year have threatened
Japan, constituting an immediate threat to that country
and its population. We reiterate that incidents such
as these are a serious threat to international peace
and security and constitute a flagrant Violation of
international law. We reiterate that North Korea must
respect all the resolutions of the Security Council, set
aside its nuclear intentions and return to the path of
dialogue, whose ultimate goal must be denuclearization.

However, the repeated reiteration of all these
demands is simply not working. Without prejudice
to maintaining and improving an effective sanctions
regime, it is necessary to break the current vicious
cycle in which North Korea systematically violates the
resolutions ofthe Security Council, which then imposes
a posteriori sanctions and issues communications that
fail to change the situation in any way. We cannot
continue in this manner. We must coordinate strategies
that lead to a solution to this situation with the North
Korean regime, which is betting on an escalation of
tensions whose consequences could be disastrous for
the region and beyond.

Uruguay reiterates its call for dialogue, since we
see no solution to the North Korean issue other than
through the peaceful pursuit of talks, negotiation and
political compromise between the parties. It is time
to change the current pattern of developments on the
matter before it is too late and we have a catastrophe of
unimaginable proportions on our hands.

Uruguay is nearing the end of its mandate and
participation as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council. In these two years, we have witnessed
a major increase in the number of meetings at which
the situation of North Korea has been considered.
My country participated in the adoption of five of the
harshest and most meaningful resolutions, as well as
presidential statements and statements to the press.
Nevertheless, North Korea's pattern of behaviour has
not changed.

A way out of this delicate situation is possible
only through diplomacy, as part of an international
strategy that enjoys the resolute commitment of all
countries, especially those with influence in the
Korean peninsula. The provocative actions will not
stop unless the situation is redirected towards the path
of dialogue and negotiation. In that regard, Uruguay
reiterates its commitment to continue to work towards
a peaceful, diplomatic and political solution for the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.

