Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): First I should like to
welcome you, Mr. President, most warmly to this Council
meeting. The United Kingdom very much appreciates and
supports Canada's initiative in arranging this briefing and
the commitment that you personally have given to it. 1999
marks the fiftieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions
and the centenary of the first Hague Peace Conference. It
is timely for the Council to consider what more can be
done to ensure that existing humanitarian law is fully and
effectively implemented. We also welcome the fact that this
briefing is held at a meeting of the Council, in public and
under your chairmanship, which is another step forward
towards transparency in our procedures. I should like to
thank Mr. Sommaruga, Ms. Bellamy and Mr. Otunnu for
their most valuable and interesting contributions today.

Most of the conflicts which now come before the
Security Council are internal armed conflicts.
Increasingly, civilians bear the brunt of suffering or are
even deliberately targeted. The protection of civilians has
become more difficult because the dividing line between
civilians and combatants and between peacekeepers and
humanitarian personnel is often blurred. Many of the
perpetrators of the attacks on civilians are not under the
control of a State or part of a chain of command. The
fundamental and disturbing problem is the collapse of the
rule of law, both international and internal, in a number
of the conflicts with which the Council has to deal.

This collapse of law is compounded by the brutal
and frankly anarchic nature of contemporary conflict, so
graphically described to the Council last month by the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
here again today. So what policy conclusions should we
draw?

The main conclusion we must draw is the
importance of conflict prevention, as Ambassador Tiirk
has just said. The best way to protect civilians is to try to
prevent violent conflict in the first place by promoting
economic and social development, as Special
Representative Otunnu has advocated, good governance
and respect for human rights. We need to recognize the
vital importance of conflict prevention and post-conflict
peace-building in breaking the cycle of violence which
leads to the disintegration of States. In this respect we
very much welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General
to improve coordination between the key United Nations
actors involved.

We must also redouble our efforts to curb illicit
trafficking in weapons and support universal participation
in, and implementation of, the Ottawa Convention on
anti-personnel landmines. We must help vulnerable States
to develop responsible and well-trained military and
police forces under civilian control. This means
continuing to build conflict prevention into our longer-
term development programmes and paying increased
attention to the security sector.

But we must also work to mitigate the effect of
violent conflict on civilians, so graphically described this
morning. There is already a large body of international
human rights and humanitarian law. Our objective should

 

be to ensure that this is respected and implemented
conscientiously.

We must also find practical ways of reducing the risks
and confusion on the ground, ways which will survive the
breakdown of the rule of law. We hope that the Secretary-
General's forthcoming report will particularly focus on this
aspect of the problem. I would like to highlight six areas.

First, we need to put more effort into education and
training. We should lay the foundations for the protection
of civilians in armed conflict by disseminating knowledge
of human rights obligations and international humanitarian
law among security forces so that the individual soldier
understands in clear and simple terms what his
responsibilities are. This is an area where the ICRC is
already doing excellent work in many countries and
deserves our full support. It is obviously just as important
to ensure that United Nations peacekeepers themselves are
properly trained in human rights and humanitarian law.

Secondly, we need to tackle the question of
monitoring and enforcement. Education is an important first
step. But what can we do if international humanitarian law
is still being flouted? The problem of internally displaced
persons is a case in point. Some excellent work has been
done in codifying the principles governing the handling of
internally displaced persons. But there is no mechanism to
ensure that these principles are being observed. This
problem should be addressed.

Thirdly, as Ms. Bellamy and Special Representative
Otunnu have said, we should do more to tackle the root
causes of the problem. One of these is the recruitment of
child soldiers. It is pointless to expect a 12-year-old to
understand, remember and observe detailed provisions of
international humanitarian law. The international
community must redouble its efforts to ensure that children
are not used as soldiers in war. As Ms. Bellamy has said,
once fighting has stopped, demobilized child soldiers -
and for that matter, other former combatants - must be
given the assistance they need to play a positive role in
their communities.

Fourthly, we must tackle the problem of small arms,
since if former combatants still have access to personal
weapons once the fighting is over, they are at great risk of
being drawn back into violent ways of life.

Fifthly, the Council should consider whether it could
do more to ensure that the needs of civilians are
systematically taken into account when designing new
peacekeeping mandates, particularly in areas such as
human rights and humanitarian issues, including
demining. We also need to give further thought to
ensuring a smooth transition from peacekeeping to peace-
building and to the importance of rebuilding local
capacity and civil society.

Finally, as all of our briefers have said, we need to
consider what more can be done to enhance the safety of
humanitarian personnel on the ground, particularly in
cases where there is limited consent from the warring
parties and the security situation is volatile. We must
make sure the United Nations security machinery has the
resources it needs to do its job. We need to look at
practical measures, such as the regular sharing of vital
security information among United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations.

Many of the issues we are discussing today go
beyond the immediate remit of the Security Council and
are also under discussion in other forums. But that is no
reason why the Council should not consider this important
matter or have its discussions informed by the views of
other actors, and vice versa. We think the Council should
operate in coordination with, not in isolation from, the
rest of the United Nations system. It also needs to look
beyond the symptoms to the causes of conflict.

Accordingly, we hope the Secretary-General's report
will take a broad View of this subject, based on
discussions with a wide range of other actors both within
and outside the United Nations system. We hope it will
come up with concrete recommendations so that follow-
up to this debate will make a real difference and sustained
difference.

