The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Cote
d'Ivoire.

My delegation welcomes the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Aleksandar Vueic', President of the
Republic of Serbia, at this briefing on the recent
developments in the situation in Kosovo. We also
welcome the presence of President Hashim Thaci. We
also thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his briefing.

The vote on 14 December on three draft laws
aimed at transforming the Kosovo Security Force
into a national army has provoked a response from
the international community. However, that initiative,
which falls within the sovereign right of Kosovo, could
have implications for the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and the
Kosovo Force. In fact, the implementation of those laws
could be incompatible with the provisions of resolution
1244 (1999), which is the only legal framework for the
presence of those international forces in Kosovo.

That decision takes place in the context of a
stalemate in the negotiations led by Mrs. Federica
Mogherini, High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, with a view to
normalizing relations between Serbia and Kosovo.

My country therefore calls on all parties to
exercise restraint and to avoid unilateral acts that could
exacerbate the already visible tensions in the region.
We urge them to swiftly return to the negotiating
table in order to ease the tensions resulting from the
recent initiatives and to create conditions conducive to
resolving all disputed issues between the two parties.
In the light ofits experience, C6te d'Ivoire is convinced
that the pursuit of peace through dialogue is the
only viable way to restore lasting stability and good-
neighbourly relations in the Balkans.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire calls on all stakeholders
to engage in the European Union-facilitated negotiations
in good faith and without conditions in order to give
peace a chance.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

Mr. Vucic', President of the Republic of Serbia, has
asked for the floor to make a further statement

