Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, and the European Free Trade
Association (EFTA) country Norway, member of the
European Economic Area, as well as Ukraine and
Armenia, align themselves with this declaration.

At the outset, let me congratulate you, Sir, upon
your assumption of the presidency for the month of
May. I would also like to thank South Africa for its
stewardship of the Council in the previous month.

The European Union is pleased to participate in
today's debate. Due to time limitations, the EU will
shorten its statement. The full version is being
distributed and constitutes our official statement.

We welcome the briefings from the Chairmen of
the three Committees. These Committees play an
important role in the work of the United Nations in
countering the terrorist threat. We appreciate the
opportunity to hear more about their work as part of an
open and transparent debate.

Terrorism is a global threat that requires a global
and comprehensive response. The EU reiterates once
again that terrorism constitutes one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security, and that any
acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable. The EU
is convinced that any measures taken to fight this
scourge must be in accordance with obligations under
international law in particular international human
rights law, refugee law, and international humanitarian
law. Effective counter-terrorism measures and the
protection of human rights are not conflicting, but
rather complementary and mutually reinforcing, goals.
Our action must be firmly based on due process and the
rule of law.

The EU would like to welcome efforts by the
three Security Council Committees and their expert
groups to enhance coherence and avoid duplication.
Further, the EU would highly encourage the expert
bodies of the Security Council Committees to continue
enhancing their mutual cooperation. A coordinated
approach will not only prevent duplication of work but
also help maximize resources and ensure synergy in
Security Council counter-terrorism work.

We commend the 1267 Committee for the
considerable progress made with regard to improving
the effectiveness of the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
regime. In doing so, the Committee was supported in
an effective manner by the Monitoring Team. We
welcome the issuance of the seventh report of the
Monitoring Team as an official United Nations
document (see S/2007/677) containing relevant
analysis and recommendations that will further
improve the effectiveness of the Committee's work. We
also look forward to receiving the eighth report of the
Monitoring Team.

The EU welcomes the continued determination of
the Committee to improve procedures for listing,
notification and de-listing of individuals and entities,
to keep the consolidated list updated and to enhance
public outreach and the efforts undertaken to
implement these objectives. The EU has always
emphasized the need to strengthen fair and clear
procedures for placing individuals and entities on
sanctions lists and for removing them, in order to
enhance the effectiveness of targeted sanctions.

In addition, the EU welcomes the decision of the
1267 Committee to address the problems in
implementing the sanctions regime due to a lack of
identifiers. Addressing these problems and providing
additional identifiers will enhance the accuracy and
quality of the list itself, thereby strengthening the
effectiveness and credibility of the sanctions regime.

In this regard, we welcome the decision of the
Committee to continue to review and update the list
and to consider which elements of its methodology
could be improved. The Committee's decision to
update a number of the tools and documents related to
the consolidated list and to enhance dialogue between
the Committee and States by creating a tool for
voluntary, informal reporting will further improve its
work.

The EU recognizes the need to bring the
consolidated list to wider attention, in particular to the
attention of financial institutions. We believe that, in
doing so, it would be useful to add more information to
the list as to the primary reason for listing. We
welcome the decision of the Committee to separate
section E of the list from the rest of the list.

We note that the Monitoring Team has reported
some cases of non-compliance with the obligations
under the sanctions regimes. In this respect, the EU
welcomes the fact that the Committee has developed a
methodology to identify possible cases of
non-compliance and to address them in the most
appropriate way. We look forward to the development
of specific and general recommendations on what can
be done to prevent the occurrence of such cases.

As regards the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), the EU welcomes the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1805 (2008), which
extended the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). The
European Union recognizes the crucial role of CTED
in supporting the CTC in the fulfilment of its mandate.
The effective continuation of CTED's work of
facilitating capacity-building and advising the CTC on
issues of implementation, including legal and technical
issues, will enhance the CTC's ability to monitor
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005).

The European Union welcomes and fully supports
the organizational plan for CTED prepared by its
Executive Director, approved by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and endorsed by the Security Council in its
resolution 1805 (2008). The EU believes that the
revised organizational plan provides an excellent basis
for CTED's future work.

The EU supports additional briefings to States
and further visits to selected States, with their consent.
These briefings and visits provide a means of direct
communication and of listening to the suggestions and
concerns of States. They also provide for better
understanding of all that sanctions regimes can offer to
assist States in their fight against terrorism.

The EU welcomes the work put forward by the
Committee in preparing the Preliminary
Implementation Assessments within the framework of
resolution 1373 (2001). We welcome the decision of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee to reassess the status
of implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by all
States and to report its findings to the Council. We look
forward to seeing the results of the global survey of
implementation, which will provide valuable
information for the further work in the fight against
terrorism.

The EU welcomes the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1810 (2008) and is encouraged by
the extension of the mandate of the 1540 Committee
until April 2011, as well as by its enhancement. The
EU commends the work of the 1540 Committee and its
role in addressing the threat to international peace and
security posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. At the same time, the EU believes that the
efforts to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, including to non-State actors, must be
strengthened and intensified.

The EU is keen to see the Committee strengthen
its role as a clearing house for facilitating technical
assistance to help countries achieve full
implementation of all aspects of Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004). The EU also believes that a
longer, three-year mandate will be key to ensuring
better planning and funding of assistance. Country-
specific outreach events, now explicitly authorized
under the resolution, are also a promising development.

The EU remains fully committed to lending its
full support to the work of the 1540 Committee in
order to promote the universal implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). We are in the process of
preparing a new Joint Action, within the framework of
the implementation of the EU Strategy against the
Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction, to
support the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
which will reflect the new tasks and priorities
identified in resolution 1810 (2008).

In that respect, the EU believes that making
better and broader use of voluntary funding for the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is essential,
and we look forward to the forthcoming proposals of
the 1540 Committee in that regard. The EU looks
forward to the 1540 Committee's presentation of a
comprehensive report to the Security Council no later
than 31 July 2008, as requested in resolution 1810
(2008).

To conclude, I would like once again to thank the
Chairmen of the three Committees for their work. The
EU will continue to promote universal adherence to the
conventions and protocols forming the legal basis for
the work of the United Nations in countering the
terrorist threat, and we will continue to support their
global implementation. We commend the work of the
Security Council as a vital component in the efforts of
the United Nations to combat the terrorist scourge,
which is a threat to all States and to all peoples.

