Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
first to express our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
your initiative in convening a formal meeting to discuss
international terrorism. This question is closely related to
that of civilian protection, which a few weeks ago was the
subject of an open debate in the Council. We hope that this
represents the starting point for greater participation by the
Security Council in the fight against international terrorism.

As a consequence of the grave terrorist attack
suffered by Buenos Aires in July 1994, Argentina turned
to this organ, which agreed to consider the question in the
framework of an informal meeting. On that occasion, our
Foreign Minister expressed the conviction of the
Argentine Government that the action of the United
Nations in its struggle against terrorism should be as
intense as that in the struggle against other grave
international crimes, and appealed to the Security Council
to include the question on its agenda. It seems to us that
those ideas remain completely relevant today.

The work of the United Nations was for many years
conditioned by the ideological confrontation of the cold
war. This prevented both an unequivocal condemnation of
international terrorism and the drawing up of drastic
measures to combat it. The thrust of the new initiatives,
facilitated by the present context, is an encouraging sign
and augurs well for a more effective future response.

Terrorism is always criminal and unjustifiable,
because it deliberately and indiscriminately attacks the
civilian population. The terrorism that has afflicted the
post-cold-war period is also increasingly linked to drug
trafficking and other forms of organized crime. There has
been a geometric increase in its transnational potential
and its capacity to inflict lethal harm because of
technological advances.

In recent years resolutions and agreements have been
adopted at the United Nations reflecting the growing will
of the international community to regard any terrorist act
as a criminal act. Among other examples, in 1997 the
Assembly adopted the International Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings. The resolutions and
conventions adopted have outlined a range of concrete
measures and norms that have encouraged judicial and
police cooperation, criminalized many acts of terrorism
and embodied the principle that all States have a duty to
prosecute and punish those responsible.

In this respect, we wish to express our particular
satisfaction at the conclusion last week of negotiations on
the convention for the suppression of the financing of
international terrorism. We congratulate the Government
of France on this instrument, which we hope can be
adopted during this session of the General Assembly.

My delegation is also prepared to contribute in every
way possible to the conclusion of the draft convention
submitted by the Russian Federation to suppress acts of
nuclear terrorism.

 

These and other initiatives are of great importance.
However, it is obvious that a great deal remains to be done,
in particular to ensure the observance and effective
implementation of all these measures. The Security Council,
within the framework of its responsibilities, can and must
play an important role in strengthening their practical
application. This is shown by resolution 1267 (1999)
adopted by the Council last Friday.
In this respect, it also seems to us necessary to take
into account the attacks to which United Nations personnel
have fallen victim. States must investigate these crimes, and
the guilty must be prosecuted. For this reason, treatment of
this issue by the Security Council must not be considered
to be incompatible with the work done in other forums.
Rather, it should be considered as a way of complementing
and strengthening that work.

This meeting and the resolution which we will adopt
contain a message that can be summarized in three points.
First, all acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation. States must cooperate to
combat them and to prosecute those responsible. Secondly,
the Security Council recognizes that certain acts of
terrorism, because of their nature and gravity, can threaten
international peace. Thirdly, the United Nations, by its
universal and global nature, is called upon to play a key
role in combating international terrorism. Within the United
Nations, the Security Council is prepared to assume its
responsibilities in accordance with the Charter.

This is a clear political message, which Argentina
supports.

