Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank the
briefers - Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. David Shearer; Assistant Secretary-
General, Mr. Andrew Gilmour; and Ms. Lydia
Minagano - for the information they have shared with
us today.

Poland takes note of the extension of the
pre-transition period in South Sudan. We continue to
believe that the implementation of the provisions of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan is crucial for durable
peace and long-term stability in South Sudan. We call
on all signatories to make good use of these additional
months and spare no effort to step up preparations for a
successful transition. The issue of transitional security
arrangements is ofparticular importance in this regard.

We remain convinced that there can be no durable
peace without inclusiveness and believe that the
participation of women in the political process in
South Sudan is indispensable. We also see a need for
the genuine inclusion of youth and South Sudanese
civil society in the peace process. It is our strong belief
that only if its inclusivity is ensured will the transition
be credible to the citizens of South Sudan and stand a
chance of leading to sustainable peace.

Poland welcomes the fact that the permanent
ceasefire continued to be widely respected throughout
South Sudan and that the parties to the Agreement
continued with their confidence-building measures.
At the same time, we remain deeply concerned about
the increased levels of intercommunal violence
and persisting tensions. We believe that particular
emphasis should be placed on reconciliatory efforts and
supporting the intercommunal dialogue.

The human rights situation in South Sudan is
also alarming. Serious human rights violations and
abuses, as well as serious violations of international
humanitarian law, persist and their perpetrators enjoy
impunity. High levels of sexual violence against women
and girls also continue to be an issue of grave concern.
We call on the Government of South Sudan to spare no
effort in bringing the perpetrators to justice and to fulfil
its obligations with regard to the protection of civilians.

The dire humanitarian situation in South Sudan
needs our full attention. Millions of South Sudanese
are displaced and more than half of the population
is suffering from food insecurity. There is no doubt
that the people of South Sudan are in critical need of
stability and State institutions that care for their citizens
and provide basic services. We are convinced that this
should be the end goal of the transition in South Sudan.

Poland believes that regional engagement remains
critical to the sustainability of peace in South Sudan
and considers that the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and its member States, as well as the
African Union, have a key role to play in terms of the
enforcement and monitoring of the implementation of
the agreement. We believe that the Security Council
should stand ready to support these efforts. Only the
collective and unified approach of the international
community can help to maintain this positive
momentum in the peace process.

Let me conclude by thanking UNMISS for its
tireless efforts to ensure the protection of civilians and
a conducive environment for humanitarian actors to
deliver their assistance and support the implementation
of the revitalized peace agreement. We are glad that, in
the third quarter of this year, Poland will contribute to
the efforts of UNMISS.

