Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to commend you,
Mr. President, for your initiative to organize this debate
on the Security Council's working methods. Clearly,
this is one of the most important issues on our agenda.

I should also like to thank Ambassador Ivan Barbalie
of Bosnia and Herzegovina for the competency with
which he leads the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
Lastly, I would like to emphasize that the contribution
of previous chairs of the Group, including Japan,
should also be acknowledged.

The issue before us has to do with the very
functioning of this body and, beyond that, with global
governance itself, in particular when it comes to
international peace and security. In order to grasp the
full scope of the issue, it would be useful to consider
the Council's working methods in the context of the
letter and spirit of the Charter of the United Nations,
which confers important responsibilities and
competencies on the Security Council.

The work of the General Assembly Open-ended
Working Group on the Question of Equitable
Representation on and Increase in the Membership of
the Security Council and Other Matters Related to the
Security Council serves as a framework for the
deliberations of Member States on the issue of the
Council's working methods. Moreover, the Informal
Working Group on Documentation has made it possible
to consolidate the momentum on internal reform with a
View to achieving greater transparency and
participation in the Council's work for States that are
not members of the Council.

Effectiveness in carrying out the Security
Council's mission calls for establishing a more open
and collegial relationship in the Council and between
its members and the membership of the Organization
as a whole.

My delegation welcomes the considerable
progress that has been made over the years in
improving the working methods of the Council. That
progress reflects the Council's outstanding ability to
adapt to the sweeping changes in our world with the
emergence of new State and non-State actors on the
international stage and the growing role of regional and
subregional organizations in conflict resolution and
peacekeeping.

I wish to make two observations in that respect.
The first concerns the need for closer cooperation
between the Council and regional and subregional
organizations in the management of crises and armed
conflicts. Sending timely high-level missions of
Council members to countries facing unstable

situations that could threaten international peace and
security could be a powerful mechanism for crisis
management and the prevention of armed conflict,
assuming, of course, the full cooperation of the States
in question and of subregional institutions. Such
actions could be initiated either by the Council by
direct recommendation of the Secretary-General, or by
invitation of the Governments concerned. That would
give greater visibility to the Security Council's role in
crisis management well before such situations explode
into violent armed conflicts that often require onerous
peacekeeping operations.

My second remark concerns the need to increase
the number of consultations between the Security
Council and subregional organizations that play an
active role in crisis resolution and the settlement of
armed conflicts, such as the African Union, above all
when the Council acts under Article VI of the Charter.
That would enhance coordination with the relevant
bodies of the African Union and guarantee more
effective short-, medium- and long-term action with
respect to lasting solutions to crises.

In that spirit, we call for greater interaction with
troop-contributing countries, not only once a
peacekeeping mission is under way, but from the
earliest stage of its conception. The role of troop-
contributing countries is therefore indispensable to
assuring the success of peace missions authorized by
the Council. It not only enables the Council to better
respond to the wishes of a host country, but also
guarantees closer adherence to the principle of good
conduct by troops on the ground serving under United
Nations mandate.

It would also be useful to encourage the regular
exchange of information between the Security Council
and other bodies of this Organization, in particular
between the Council and the General Assembly and the
Peacebuilding Commission. That would contribute to
increasing transparency and confidence in the
Council's actions.

Another important evolution in the Council's
work can be seen in the thematic debates organized by
the Council's rotating presidencies. Those debates,
which are often open to the entire membership of our
Organization, make a significant contribution to our
consideration of the multiple challenges to
international peace and security. It is nonetheless
important to clearly define their focus so as not to
encroach on the competencies of each organ. Taken as
a whole, such measures also highlight the importance
of the Council acting with a degree of flexibility in
order to make them more effective.

Before concluding, I would like briefly to
emphasize the need for greater transparency in the
process of negotiations on certain resolutions. All
resolutions, along with many other documents, should
be subject to a broad process of consultation well in
advance of their submission for discussion. That would
guarantee greater transparency and cohesion, as well as
greater unity within the Council. Such an approach
should also prevail in the designation of the leadership
of the organs and subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council.

