Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): First of all, let
me join others in extending to you personally, Mr.
President, a welcome here this afternoon.

Before beginning my prepared statement I should
like on behalf of the British Government to welcome the
latest action by the Stabilization Force (SFOR), acting
under authority contained in the relevant Security Council
resolutions, to detain two Bosnian Croats indicted for war
crimes. We congratulate SFOR troops on a brave and
successful operation. Other war crimes indictees still at
large are hereby put on notice that they too remain
accountable. They should surrender themselves to the
International Criminal Tribunal without delay. And all the
parties to the Peace Agreement should comply fully with
their commitment to transfer those indicted for war crimes
to The Hague. Justice is indispensable for true peace and
reconciliation in Bosnia. Last night's action by SFOR
underscores this.
The Bonn Peace Implementation Council set an
accelerated agenda for civilian implementation for next
year. It reaffirmed that the only way forward is a unified

 

State of Bosnia and Herzegovina with two multi-ethnic
entities, sovereign and secure within its existing borders.

The United Kingdom is determined to put its whole
weight behind the peace process. We strongly support the
High Representative's intention to use his full authority
under Dayton to drive implementation forward. Bonn
reaffirmed the full backing of the international community
for his efforts.

Our goal, like that of all the international community,
is a democratic and prosperous Bosnia taking its place as a
modern nation in Europe. The international community is
putting enormous effort into this, and members of the
United Nations and other international organizations
engaged in Bosnia, especially Carlos Westendorp and Kai
Eide and their teams, deserve our praise and support for
their considerable achievements in the two years since
Dayton. The tragic loss of 12 international personnel in a
helicopter crash in Bosnia on 17 September bears witness
to the courage and commitment of those who are trying to
bring peace to this troubled country.

We have kept our side of the bargain. It is now time
for Bosnia's leaders to deliver theirs. The Bonn Peace
Implementation Conference made this very clear. We
expect action from the Bosnian authorities on media
freedoms. We expect action to allow refugees and displaced
persons to return home and for property laws to be changed
so that they are fair. We expect progress on consolidating
the central institutions and on introducing good government
practices, particularly in the area of transparency in public
accounts. We hope that the new Republika Srpska
Assembly and Government will meet soon and emphasize
that all political institutions throughout Bosnia will be held
to internationally accepted standards of democratization and
accountability.

And, as I said a moment ago, we expect action from
the authorities in Bosnia and its neighbours to surrender
those indicted for war crimes to the International Tribunal
in The Hague, as they have committed themselves to do.

We also expect the deadlines set at Bonn to be
followed. We regret that the parties fell at the first fence by
failing to adopt the citizenship law. We welcome the move
by the High Representative to have the law applied on an
interim basis until passed by the parliamentary Assembly.
The United Kingdom has welcomed the readiness this
year to use SFOR directly to support civilian
implementation. Continued success in this area will depend
on maintaining a secure environment. Following the
meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) on 16 December, NATO is
now examining possible options for a follow-on force to
succeed SFOR when the latter's mandate expires in June
of next year.

British troops have been on the ground in Bosnia
since the beginning of the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR) and remain the largest European
contingent. British Ministers have made it clear that they
are ready to stay for the foreseeable future if others are.

We warmly welcome therefore President Clinton's
commitment in principle to contribute United States
troops and United States command to a follow-on force.
This will help to ensure the success of a post-SFOR
mission and to consolidate SFOR's considerable
achievements in advancing civilian implementation. We
look forward to the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia, including the International
Police Task Force (IPTF). The commitment and
professionalism of the IPTF's members is a major force
for change in Bosnia. The United Kingdom is a firm
supporter of the strengthened role envisaged for them at
Bonn, notably in training the Entity police forces so that
these can serve their communities in a professional and
non-discriminatory way in maintaining the rule of law.
The United Kingdom is delighted that a British Deputy
Chief Constable, Mr. Richard Monk, has been appointed
as the new IPT F Commissioner. We shall give him every
support in his important task.

We believe that the extension of the IPTF mandate
for six months - on a renewable basis to bring it in line
with SFOR's mandate - is strategically coherent while
offering the best way of meeting operational
requirements. We hope that this extension will be agreed
without difficulty.

We all want to see Bosnia regain normality. No one
expects it is going to be rebuilt in a day, and the United
Kingdom is prepared to stay the course if others do. We
have invested over £1 billion so far financially and
militarily. I said at the beginning of my remarks that our
goal was to see Bosnia participate fully in Europe. But
that and the lasting peace which would underpin such a
role is not in the international community's gift, however
hard we work in Bosnia. Ultimately, it is the action of
Bosnia's leaders that will determine how Bosnia meets
the twenty-first century. They are accountable to history,
to the international community and to their own people.

 

