Ms. Rice (United States of America): I would like
to thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, for his briefing.

The terrorist attacks in the desert of Algeria, the
threat posed by Iran and its nuclear programme and the
internal challenges with which Arab societies today are
grappling to make their Governments more democratic
and more responsive to the needs of their people, all
make the Middle East a region that must command our
enduring attention and active engagement. Today I will
focus on the Palestinian question and the Syrian crisis.

The current financial crisis in the Palestinian
territories is severe, and the recent news of Saudi
Arabia's generous $100 million donation to the
Palestinian Authority is welcome. We have made
enormous investments in the Palestinian Authority and
the Palestinian people that we wish to be sustained,
including through the immediate resumption of
regular-clearance revenue transfers. Over the years,
no Government has invested more in assistance to
the Palestinians than the United States. We remain
committed to supporting the Palestinian people.

Yet, as we all know, the vote on 29 November 2012
in the General Assembly (resolution 67/19) has not
brought the Palestinians any closer to our common goal
ofachieving a State. As we have said repeatedly, the only
way to establish a real Palestinian State is through the
painstaking work of direct negotiations on final status
issues, without preconditions, between the Israelis and
Palestinians. General Assembly resolution 67/ 19 cannot
be viewed as establishing terms of reference or as
prejudging any final status issues, notably with respect
to territory. These are simply inescapable facts.

The United States therefoer remains fully
committed to direct negotiations, and we will continue
to work vigorously towards that end. We are consulting
with the parties and international partners on the way
forward, and we are underscoring that every step taken
must aim to reduce tensions and create a climate for
peace. The Quartet envoys met earlier this month in
Jordan to discuss the measures necessary to create a
positive atmosphere conducive to future negotiations.
That meeting followed United States Special Envoy
David Hale's engagement with Israeli, Palestinian,
Jordanian, Egyptian and Arab League leaders to
advance Middle East peace and security, including by
maintaining and strengthening the Gaza ceasefire.

Throughout our engagement, we have reiterated
our long-standing opposition to Israel's West Bank
settlement activity and to construction in East Jerusalem,
which run counter to the cause of peace. Construction
in the E-l area would be especially damaging to efforts
to achieve a two-State solution, and we have urged
Israeli leaders to reconsider those unilateral decisions
and to exercise restraint. For decades, the United
States has not accepted the legitimacy of continued
Israeli settlement activity, and we oppose any efforts
to legalize outposts. We will continue to urge leaders
on both sides to avoid unilateral steps and provocations
that make peace negotiations harder to resume.

The position of the United States regarding
Palestinian status, including as reflected in our
explanation of vote in connection with the adoption
of Assembly resolution 67/19 (A/67/PV.44, page 13), remains unchanged. The United States does
not consider that the resolution bestows Palestinian
statehood or recognition. Only direct negotiations
to settle final status issues will lead to that outcome.
In our View, therefore, any references to the State of
Palestine in the United Nations, including the use ofthe
term "State of Palestine" on the placard in the Security
Council, or the use of the term "State of Palestine" in
the invitation to this meeting or in other arrangements
for participation in this meeting, do not reflect our
acquiescence to the view that Palestine is a State. That
statement of our position shall apply to Palestinian
participation in meetings of the Security Council or
other United Nations meetings, regardless of whether
the United States specifically intervenes on this matter
in the future.

Let me now turn to Syria, where the situation is
dire and deteriorating. We have seen a sharp increase
in indiscriminate attacks in the past month. In a small
village outside Homs, regime militia reportedly killed
more than 100 people last week, including entire families
and numerous children. The regime's air strikes near
the University ofAleppo killed 87, and attacks on health
clinics and hospitals across the country have made it
impossible for wounded civilians to seek help. In the
face of those mounting atrocities, we reiterate our utter
condemnation of any attack directed against unarmed
civilians. At all levels, those responsible for atrocities,
no matter what their allegiance, will be identified and
held accountable.

As the transition proceeds, we stand ready to assist
Syria's new leaders in their efforts to address issues
of accountability and reconciliation. For that purpose,
the United States will continue to support Syrian and
international efforts to document evidence of atrocities
committed by all sides, for use in future accountability
processes. The international community should
also play a role in ensuring that any future domestic
accountability processes have the expertise they need
to meet international standards.

On the political and diplomatic front, I underscore
my Government's strong support and gratitude for
Joint Special Representative Brahimi's efforts to find
a durable solution to this crisis. Every member of the
Council knows that a political transition would be
the fastest and most effective way to end the horrific
bloodshed. The United States will therefore continue to
engage with our partners, both on and off the Council,
to support a meaningful political transition that meets
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. In that
regard, I reaffirm our commitment to the principles
outlined in the Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex), including a transitional body with full executive
powers formed on the basis of mutual consent.

At the same time, we are continuing our efforts
to support the Syrian opposition coalition as it works
towards a more unified opposition that is able to start
addressing the needs of the Syrian people now. We
are supporting the coalition's assistance coordination
unit, so that increased assistance gets to local councils
providing basic services. In addition to more than
$210 million in humanitarian assistance, the United
States has contributed more than $50 million to bolster
Syrian civil society, including its emerging leaders, in
order to help them communicate, organize and prepare
for an eventual political transition.

The burden is on all of us to help the millions of
people displaced and in urgent need of lifesaving
assistance. There is no doubt that the tireless work of
many United Nations agencies in delivering such aid,
including the support of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
has saved countless lives. We look forward to the United
Nations pledging conference in Kuwait on 30 January
and encourage States to increase their contributions
to the two combined United Nations appeals. We also
encourage United Nations agencies and donors to seek
more opportunities for cross-border assistance, to help
Syrians in underserved areas and to work with the
Syrian opposition coalition's assistance coordination
unit to respond to needs on the ground.

We will continue to help Syria's neighbours,
including Lebanon, Turkey, Iraq and Jordan, to
respond to the influx of refugees. We appreciate their
generosity in affording shelter and services to nearly
630,000 refugees - a number sure to rise as long as
Al-Assad's forces continue their assault. We commend
the Lebanese Government's recent approval of a
refugee response plan and encourage all neighbouring
Governments to maintain open borders to those fleeing
Al-Assad's brutality.

Difficult days lie ahead, especially as long as
Al-Assad remains in power. We continue to support
all Syrians, within and outside the Government, who
aim to bring an end to the bloody Al-Assad regime
and build a democratic and unified Syria in which the
rule of law is respected. We will continue to seek the
valuable contributions of the international community
to that end.

