Mr. Feltman: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to introduce the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2014/740) on piracy and armed robbery
at sea off the coast of Somalia, which was submitted
pursuant to resolution 2125 (2013) of 18 November
2013, and to brief the Security Council on this subject.

The Secretary-General welcomes the substantial
gains made by Somalia and the international community
in addressing piracy off the coast of Somalia. However,
he recognizes that without the deterrence provided
by the continued support of the international naval
presence and the self-protection measures adopted
by the shipping industry, and until such time as
capacity-building efforts ashore have sufficient effect,
large-scale piracy may potentially return.

Since the adoption of the first Security Council
resolution on piracy off the coast of Somalia in June
2008 (resolution 1816 (2008)), some of our most
urgent responses have revolved around the twin
axes of deterring pirate attacks and prosecuting and
sanctioning pirates. Thanks to coordinated efforts by
Member States, organizations and maritime industry,
the incidents ofpiracy reported off the coast of Somalia
are at their lowest levels in recent years. Indeed, the last
time a large commercial vessel was hijacked was more
than two years ago.

However, that progress is fragile and reversible. We
still see pirates attempting to attack vessels and capture
them for ransom. We still have to do more to ensure that
commercial vessels can navigate the waters offthe coast
of Somalia without incidents and that the international
community can benefit from uninterrupted global trade
in the twenty-first century.

The decline in pirate attacks provides an
opportunity to review current international efforts and
to take a long-term perspective on how best to contain
Somali piracy. We should ask not only what more needs
to be done to ensure that the scourge does not return, but
also what kind of support could be provided to Somalia
so that the country would be able to respond to the
threat of piracy without depending on the continuous
support of international navies. We should address the
underlying conditions conducive to the continuation of
piracy, including political instability and the lack of
alternative livelihoods.

Piracy off the coast of Somalia is also one of the
manifestations of a political problem requiring a
political solution. State collapse in Somalia and other
political challenges lie at the root of the problem. That
has been as much as acknowledged by the Security
Council in relevant resolutions, including the most
recent resolution 2125 (2013) on the subject, in which
the Council recognized that the ongoing instability in
Somalia is one of the underlying causes of the problem
of piracy. Security efforts can momentarily mitigate the
impact of piracy, but they do not address the underlying
causes. A sustainable response to piracy requires the
presence of effective governance in Somalia that will
provide basic services to its people and guarantee
their rights. That is a daunting but unavoidable task,
for it will enable Somalia to effectively address and
ultimately defeat piracy.

That leads to the second point that I wish to
emphasize. State-building and inclusive governance
efforts in Somalia must be led and owned by Somalis
themselves. While counter-piracy measures continue
to prove effective, the international community must
continue to support the Somali Government in its
efforts to deliver on its commitments, as outlined in
Vision 2016 and the Somali Compact. That will require
concentrated and coordinated assistance to Somalia to
build its institutional capacity to undertake effective
law enforcement and promote inclusive and sustainable
development.

As the United Nations helps strengthen the capacity
of Somalia and other States in the region to prosecute
individuals suspected of piracy and to sanction those
convicted, in accordance with international standards,
it is imperative that more nations criminalize piracy on
the basis of international law, as reflected in the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. They must
also take steps to deter and suppress the financing of
piracy and the laundering of ransom money.

We should not forget that the actions of any one
State to apprehend and prosecute pirates will benefit
all States whose vessels, trade and seafarers are at risk.
If the burden of prosecuting pirates is shouldered only
by States that apprehend them, then countries may
be reluctant to act, especially if pirates do not target
the apprehending country's vessels. In that regard, we
welcome the increased willingness of many of Somalia's
neighbours to prosecute individuals suspected ofpiracy.
It is equally critical that the international community
continue to support Somalia and its neighbours in their
efforts to share the burden of piracy prosecutions.

We strongly encourage the international community
to support regional efforts to implement the 2050
Africa's Integrated Maritime Strategy, adopted by
the African Union; the Djibouti Code of Conduct; the
maritime initiatives of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development; and the Maritime Security Strategy of
the Southern African Development Community, so that
countries in the region bordering the Gulf of Aden and
western Indian Ocean develop their capacity to address
piracy and develop their maritime domain.

Somali pirates are still holding 37 seafarers. That
is a matter of serious international concern. It is crucial
that every effort be made to secure the safe and prompt
release of all hostages. Of equal importance is the need
to have post-release measures in place to guarantee their
health and well-being. Our successful efforts to combat
piracy off the coast of Somalia show that hard work
and effective collaboration, with a solution-oriented
approach, can yield results.

Let me conclude by reiterating that counter-
piracy efforts should be an integral part of Somalia's
State-building process. The international community
should continue to address piracy across broader fronts,
addressing institutional failures and building capacity.

