The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Roux
for his briefing.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President (spoke in Arabic): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2370 (2017).

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Egypt.

First of all, I would like to express my appreciation
to all those who participated in a constructive and
positive manner in the negotiations that led to the
adoption today of the important resolution 2370
(2017), especially as it is the first resolution of its
kind to address in detail the problemterrorists from
acquiring weapons. The importance of this issue made
the Egyptian chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee eager to organize a briefing on the subject
within the framework of the CTC in May 2017, with
the participation of all United Nations Members and
the relevant organizations. Based on the conclusions of
that briefing, the Egyptian Mission was able to develop
the first version of the resolution that was just adopted,
withEgypt's commitment to taking into account
the opinions and recommendations of every State,
including those that are not members of the Security
Council, while designing policies on counter-terrorism
under its auspices.

Arming terrorists and terrorist groups is an
extremely serious issue. I would even say that it involves
a crime that is no less horrible than the terrorist act in
and of itself. Providing terrorists with weapons means
directly supplying them with the means that they will
use to kill, destroy and terrorize populations, including
women and children. It is therefore necessary for the
international community, represented by the United
Nations, to face up to this issue in earnest and decisively,
and hold to account all of those who supply weapons to
terrorists and terrorist groups. In that regard, resolution
2370 (2017), just adopted, contains very important
provisions at the national and international levels.
Indeed, the resolution reaffirms the commitment of

all States to preventing the provision of weapons to
terrorists and, in that respect, it emphasizesthe need to
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.

The resolution stipulates that the Council will
address cases of failure to implement its resolutions.
Furthermore, it reiterates the need to prevent and avoid
the smuggling of arms to terrorists in conflict zones. It
reaffirms the importance of strengthening cooperation
to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons via the
Internet or social networks.

The resolution stresses the importance of
international judicial cooperation and law enforcement
to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons. The
resolution requests that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate, as well as the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team concerning the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant/Al-Qaida, each within its
respective areas of competence, to give the necessary
priority and focus to the issue of preventing terrorists
from acquiring weapons.

We take this opportunity to restate what we have
often said in the past regarding the need for the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions, in
particular those on counter-terrorism. We reiterate the
need for the Security Council to hold those States that
do not comply with the relevant resolutions accountable.
All Council members should work to develop the
political will within the Council to ensure that rogue
States are held accountable when they expressly violate
its resolutions.

In the past as now, Egypt has suffered, directly and
indirectly, at the hands of certain States that support,
arm and finance terrorists. That is what has led Egypt,
in addition to its ongoing counter-terrorism efforts, to
present the comprehensive and multidimensional vision
of the counter-terrorism issue that was laid out in the
statement delivered by President Al Sisi at the Riyadh
Summit in May. Egypt also stresses the need for all
States to comply with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, which request the international community
and individual States to fight terrorism and the regimes
that support it by all means compatible with the Charter
of the United Nations and international law.

In conclusion, I can assure Council members that
Egypt will remain committed to being at the vanguard
of international efforts to fight and defeat terrorism,
while respecting international law, human rights and
the rule of law.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the other members of the Council
who wish to make statements.


