Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to endorse the statement made on behalf of the European
Union on this matter.

World public opinion is appalled and horrified by
the barbarity unfolding in East Timor and, rejecting it, is
continually asking the question: how is it possible that the
international community and the United Nations, on the
threshold of the twenty-first century, can allow these
atrocities to take place and permit the derailing of a
process in which they are actively involved? How can the
international community or the United Nations - the
terms are synonymous - have lost control of events in
East Timor, with such barbarous and lamentable results?

The answer can be provided by the Government of
Indonesia: ending the violence and the accumulation of
acts of vandalism depends upon it, and on it depends the
restoration of the prestige of Indonesia, which we desire.
The restoration of credibility to the United Nations also
depends upon it. It is not mere rhetoric to say that in East
Timor part of the future of this Organization is at stake.

There can be no delay. Many of the principles
underlying our Organization are being rudely trampled
underfoot in East Timor today. The argument that gangs
of uncontrolled militia are responsible is untenable. It is

 

macabre and ironic to claim that "the situation is under
control".

The Indonesian authorities have an obligation
resolutely to impose law and order, and to do it now. If
they do not, they must accept the international offer being
made to them, and they must do so immediately. My
Government will lend its support.

Peace and security in the area, the reputation of
Indonesia, whose stability and integrity are exceedingly
important to us, and the dignity of the United Nations are
all at stake. It is for the Indonesian authorities, and for
them alone, to make the next move.

I should like to conclude by expressing the gratitude
of my Government to the personnel of the United Nations
Mission in East Timor for their courage and self-sacrifice.

