Mr. Kolby (Norway): I would also like to join in
welcoming Special Representative Kamalesh Sharma
and thank him for his presentation. We also welcome
the report of the Secretary-General on the activities of
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) and the substantial progress that has been
reported in Timor-Leste. It is clear that the
Government, under President Xanana Gusmao, has
taken office and is working hard to promote its goal of
a broad-based democracy. We welcome in particular its
willingness to seek dialogue with interest groups that
have political views different from those of the
Government. It is a position that shows maturity and
true commitment to the principle of pluralism.

Norway also welcomes the progress made in the
bilateral relationship between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia. The participation of the President of
Indonesia in the independence celebrations in Timor-
Leste and the subsequent visit of President Gusmao to
Jakarta on 2 July 2002 showed their common
commitment towards establishing strong bilateral
bonds. The decision by the Joint Ministerial
Commission for Bilateral Cooperation to maintain the
Joint Border Committee equally signalled the wish to
address issues of mutual concern.

As indicated in the Secretary-General's report, a
durable solution to the refugee problem remains a
prerequisite to ensure long-term stability in Timor-
Leste. More than 35,000 refugees still remain in West
Timor. It is indicated that this group will lose its
refugee status by the end of the year, when the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
closes down its operations in the area. We therefore
hope that President Gusmao's recent appeals to the
refugees will encourage increased return to Timor-
Leste.
We have taken due note of the concerns voiced by
the High Commissioner for Human Rights with regard
to the verdicts delivered in August by the Indonesian
ad hoc tribunal, and we urge Indonesia to address those
issues carefully. In this context, we welcome, however,
the continued assistance offered by UNMISET to the
witnesses travelling to Jakarta - an undertaking
deemed to be crucial to progress in the process aimed
at bringing to justice those responsible for serious
crimes in 1999.

The Special Representative notes that insufficient
technical and substantive capacity poses significant
challenges within the public administration in Timor-
Leste. This also relates to the justice system. The fact
that the lack of resources results in detentions without
legal basis is a matter of concern. Norway therefore
supports and encourages the Government's continued
efforts towards the establishment of a well-functioning
court system based fully on the principle of the rule of
law.

Allow me to end by expressing our satisfaction
with the fact that UNMISET is progressing according
to the schedule set out by this Council. Moreover, I
would like to fully endorse the Secretary-General's
highlighting of the need to complement UNMISET's
implementation plan with sufficient bilateral assistance
in a number of key areas crucial to the ongoing nation-
building. In this regard, Timor-Leste can continue to
count on the full support of the Norwegian
Government.

