Mr. Chandra (Sri Lanka): I join previous
speakers in expressing appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening today's open debate. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2009/277).

The Secretary-General's report provides useful
information and analysis for us, the Member States, to
address the complex but essential issue of protecting
civilians in armed conflict. As noted by the report
itself, the protection task cannot be understood and
addressed in humanitarian terms alone, as it requires
focus and action on a multiplicity of different areas,
ranging from politics to human rights to disarmament.

While the report correctly outlines a framework
of core challenges in this field and notes that the
Council has reflected several of these complexities in
some of its resolutions, albeit inconsistently, the report
itself suffers from selectivity of language and
situations in dealing with different countries. It must
also be noted that the synthesis in the report cannot be
looked at in isolation as a set of all-purpose guidelines
that can be applied regardless of the circumstances.

The recent situation in my country, which is also
referred to in the report with considerable factual
inaccuracies in some places, was one where a terrorist
group took a large number of civilians hostage and
used them as a human shield. The children of those
civilians were forcibly conscripted, suicide attacks
were launched on civilians who exercised their
legitimate right to seek protection by leaving the area
of conflict, adults were used for forced labour and a
large portion of the food and medicine delivered to
those civilians by the Government and agencies
including the United Nations were forcibly taken by
this terrorist group. All appeals of the international
community to the terrorists to release the civilians went
unheeded.

In those circumstances, security forces had to
facilitate the rescue of the civilians from the
unsustainable hostage situation created by the terrorists
and to bring an end to the conflict that would have
otherwise prolonged the suffering. It is necessary,
therefore, to recognize the extraordinary challenges
and new situations that constantly confront elected
Governments in dealing with such unrelenting groups
and to find new ways to address those challenges from
the lessons learned.

Our recent experience showed how non-State
actors taking cover in civilian garb used schools and
hospitals for terrorist operations in order to deceive the
world by blurring the distinction between civilian and
military targets. Non-State actors pay scant attention to
international norms and standards and do not feel
bound by any legal framework. The country, the region
and the international community have recognized and
acknowledged that by bringing the conflict in Sri
Lanka to an end, further loss of lives and prolongation
of suffering have been prevented for our people.

As in most conflicts - especially those involving
a ruthless and unrelenting terrorist group such as the
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) - the ending
of the conflict inevitably had its cost in terms of loss of
life, property and national wealth. But the Government

is gratified that, due to the professionalism and
sacrifices of the soldiers, there was no cataclysmic
scenario, as some had predicted. We need to recognize
that this effort by the security forces succeeded in
bringing to safety hundreds of thousands of civilians
from a terrible hostage situation and a human shield
created by that terror group, the LTTE.

Member States also need to address the causes of
the escalation of armed conflict. The proliferation of
illicit arms has contributed to the spread of violence
and terrorism everywhere. Unless we are able to stop
such proliferation, as agreed in Council resolution
1612 (2005), civilian safety will remain at stake and
our best efforts to deal with the humanitarian
consequences of conflicts will soon exceed existing
capacities and available resources. While measures can
be imposed, albeit selectively, on States legitimately
engaged in protecting their civilian population from
terrorists, non-State actors such as terrorist groups, on
the other hand, can have relatively easy access to illicit
weapons. This is because there is no dedicated
international regime to conduct surveillance, let alone
interdict such illicit arms trafficking.

On the other hand, external actors such as
diaspora communities openly fund arms purchases
aimed at destabilizing States, while receiving support
and protection in their host countries; and their
criminal agents cross international boundaries at will,
unchecked. The smuggling of arms in international
waters and across boundaries continues rendering
regimes such as Council resolution 1373 (2001), rather
ineffective in this area.

There is also a need to recognize the legitimate
role of the military in civilian protection, although we
can agree that it is not an exclusive role. It is
noteworthy that protective responsibilities are part of
the mandate of United Nations peacekeeping forces,
and their valuable contribution in that regard has been
noted.
The role of Governments in civilian protection
should be respected, as it is their primary responsibility
to protect their own citizens, especially in times of
armed conflict. United Nations and other humanitarian
agencies must support and assist Governments and in
doing so be sensitive to ground realities including
respect for the sovereignty of States. The principle of
unimpeded access for humanitarian personnel must be
respected, but one cannot disregard the State's
responsibility to ensure the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel, as terrorists do not distinguish
between military and humanitarian personnel in their
attacks.

It must never be overlooked that the military,
often at huge cost to its personnel, must brave the
dangers of suicide terrorism to bring civilians out of
harm's way. Therefore, military and humanitarian
personnel must seek to work in partnership, and their
responsibilities towards civilians must be addressed
through regular dialogue and consultation in places
where civilian protection is at stake.

Therefore, we should look at measures to build
the capacity of military personnel and peacekeeping
forces to deal with civilian protection activities. This
becomes particularly pertinent given that we are
dealing increasingly with internal conflicts.

Another inevitable consequence of armed conflict
is internal displacement. The Secretary-General's
report brings out the concern that internal displacement
is on the rise globally. Council resolution 1674 (2006)
addresses this issue. Internal displacement poses
several challenges. Key among them is that armed
groups use displacement to exploit civilian
populations, sometimes by masquerading among them.
In that context, civilians have a right to be protected,
and the State has the primary responsibility not only to
provide for the welfare of displaced civilians in terms
of food, clothing, medical care and shelter, but also to
ensure their safety and to take necessary measures in
that regard.

Unfortunately, these ground realities are not
understood or considered by those who look at civilian
protection in isolation and who apply generalizations
regardless of the specific circumstances. That would
also apply to resettlement, where, in some situations,
uncharted mine fields laid by armed groups,
unexploded ordnance and booby traps have to be
cleared - quite apart from the reconstruction activities
that create conditions conducive to resettlement in
secure surroundings.

The cost of armed conflict for civilians is a
matter of concern to all democratic and elected
Governments. Quite often, and quite naturally, the
focus on civilian casualties is centred on the loss of life
and property damage caused in military operations,
while insufficient consideration is given to the
thousands of lives lost in suicide attacks on civilian
targets by non-State actors.

In my country, over a period of 26 years, many
lives were senselessly lost due to suicide terrorist
attacks on our Central Bank, the central bus station,
passenger trains and other public places. From the
standpoint of civilian protection efforts, efforts to end
prolonged conflicts which have resulted in massive
casualty tolls and where so many lives could be saved
should be recognized as a priority. It is agreed that
more attention needs to be paid to the issue of making
armed groups compliant. In this regard, our
Government would welcome more openness on the part
of United Nations agencies with regard to sharing
outcomes from the monitoring of compliance by armed
groups to ensure that appropriate measures are taken by
the Government to protect civilians from armed
groups.

However, United Nations agencies seeking
compliance by concluding instruments with non-State
armed groups should do so with the concurrence of
Governments and be cautious of terrorist groups
seeking legitimacy. Censure of armed groups should
not be confined to rhetoric. Experience tells us that the
measures suggested to engage such terrorist groups are
less effective than targeted measures, taken bilaterally,
that compel the key diaspora figures of such groups to
move away from promoting and funding extremism. It
is also agreed that more in-depth consideration of this
issue is needed. However, it would not be useful to
conduct such a discussion in limited forums without
involving the larger membership, given the geographic
spread of such groups and their networking in the
diaspora.

My delegation hopes that the Council's debate on
protection of civilians will facilitate practical decisions
based on realities on the ground. The challenges facing
us are primarily of a practical nature, requiring more
international cooperation and greater coordination
between the United Nations bodies and Member States.
It is for this reason that my delegation has sought to
share our experience and for all of us to invest greater
efforts in preventing conflicts and their recurrence and
to respond practically and proportionately to situations
affecting civilian populations.

For Sri Lanka, one of the longest-standing
democracies in our subregion, this period was also
extremely difficult and, in a way, defining. We
appreciate the Council's concerns because they are also
our shared concerns. We have endeavoured to
cooperate constructively with the Secretary-General
and the Council without being divisive or
confrontational while the Government dealt with the
complex challenge of countering a ruthless terrorist
group that shunned and sabotaged all genuine attempts
at negotiations for over 25 years and brought harm and
suffering to the very people whom it said it was
seeking to represent. On Sri Lanka's part, the
Government reiterates that the framework which the
Secretary-General and President of Sri Lanka agreed
upon in their joint statement would be the basis on
which we will continue to cooperate with the United
Nations in the post-conflict period as we look forward
to the priority tasks of rehabilitation, reconstruction,
reconciliation and launching the political process.

In conclusion, we would like to acknowledge the
valuable contribution of the United Nations agencies,
particularly the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, and other national and
international partners in providing support and
assistance to the Government's efforts towards the
relief, rehabilitation and resettlement of the affected
civilians.

