Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): We are grateful to the
Secretary-General for his recent report (S/2013/139)
on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and to the Acting Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Fisher, for his briefing.
I would also like to commend the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti and the United Nations
country team, which continue to play a crucial role in
supporting the recovery and stabilization of Haiti.

In resolution 2070 (2012), the Security Council
recognized that Haiti had continued to make
considerable strides since the tragic earthquake of
January 2010 and had achieved over the past year a
number of political milestones indicative of progress in
the process of stabilization. We note that in the period
under review, the overall security situation in the
country remained relatively stable, that the performance
of the Haitian National Police (HNP) continued to
improve and considerable results were achieved in
fighting crime. Significant strides were made regarding
the resettlement of persons displaced by the 2010
earthquake, and the Government initiated measures to
respond to grievances linked to the increased cost of
living and food insecurity. We also note the signing of
the finalized integrated strategic framework for 2013-
2016 between the United Nations and the Government of
Haiti, which captures comprehensive shared objectives
for the long-term development of Haiti.

At the same time, as the Secretary-General notes
in his report, the period under review posed numerous
challenges to the stabilization process in Haiti. Indeed,
more should be done by the national authorities and the
international community in the broad interest of the
Haitian people. Needless to say, political stability in
the country is a key priority for the stabilization and
development of Haiti. The tension in relations between
the country's executive branch and Parliament remains
one of the major obstacles to greater stability and
prosperity. It is therefore important that all political
actors in Haiti redouble their efforts to preserve
the progress achieved over the past year and take a
responsible approach to engaging in constructive
dialogue to address their differences in a spirit of
compromise. Such dialogue is particularly important
for launching the long-overdue electoral process and
holding free, fair, inclusive and credible elections as
soon as possible.

It is essential that the international community
continue to encourage political dialogue among the
branches of Government and other key political actors.
The United Nations should support the upcoming
elections and progressively strengthen the capacity of
the Haitian authorities to assume full responsibility for
national ownership of the organization and conduct of
elections. Further efforts are also needed to strengthen
key rule of law institutions, reform the security sector,
attract investment, promote sustainable development
and advance the democratic agenda.

The protection of vulnerable groups, particularly
women, children and internally displaced persons,
should remain the priority.
The humanitarian situation in Haiti continues to
show signs of improvement as the number of internally
displaced persons living in camps declines. However,
significant humanitarian challenges remain. Continued
strong international engagement and efforts by the
Haitian authorities are crucial to ensuring that all
pressing humanitarian needs are met. We note in that
regard that, in consultation with the Government, the
United Nations and the humanitarian actors in the
country further developed a humanitarian action plan
for 2013, focusing on food insecurity and cholera.

The role of MINUSTAH in the maintenance of
overall security and stability remains vital, and the
improvement and the performance of national parties is
partly attributable to support provided by Mission forces.

Close cooperation between the HNP and MINUSTAH
is critical to effectively addressing security challenges
and to ensuring that the police move forward to reach
the capacity necessary to handle its full responsibility
for the provision of internal security. The continued
assistance of the international community and funding
remain critical to supporting professional, reliable and
accountable police forces.

In concluding, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General for submitting a conditions-based consolidation
plan for MINUSTAH in response to the request of the
Security Council in its resolution 2070 (2012). We
believe that the plan will enable MINUSTAH to operate
more efficiently and cost-effectively, that is, to focus
on the most critical aspects of stability, a progressive
transition of functions to national authorities, and the
provision of assistance to international partners.

