Mr. Duval (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
remains greatly concerned over the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and in particular
over the difficult path to implementation of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement.

Today marks the third time that the Security
Council has met to renew the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC). Yet the Ceasefire
Agreement that MONUC was created to help
implement remains the object of wholesale violations
by all sides more than a year after it was signed. These
same parties continue to hinder the deployment of
MONUC, without which these violations cannot be
reported credibly and thus deterred. The principal
political elements of the Agreement also have yet to be
implemented, with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo falling short of honouring its
commitment to participate in a genuine inter-Congolese
dialogue, and with foreign forces, most notably those
of Rwanda and Uganda, remaining on Congolese soil
in violation of United Nations resolutions.

It should be noted by the international
community, and particularly by our friends in Africa,
that the Security Council has spared no effort in
encouraging and exhorting the signatories of the
Lusaka Agreement to honour their commitments under
the Agreement. Since January, the tireless and
commendable efforts of the Secretary-General and of
his Special Representative have been supported
through special Council meetings with the signatories
and with the Political Committee and the Joint Military
Commission; through a Council delegation visit to the
Great Lakes; through a number of extraordinary
meetings; and most recently, through the timely
involvement of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, General Abdulsalami Abubakar. And
throughout, the Council has stood ready to give the full
measure of its support through the deployment of a
peacekeeping force.

Yet the signatories of the Lusaka Agreement have
not seized the Council's engagement as an opportunity
to bring an end to this devastating conflict, and
valuable time and countless lives have been lost during
a year of delay.

It saddens me to say this, but upon reflecting on
the events since January, I am obliged to note that the
main parties to the Agreement have not demonstrated

sufficient commitment to a peaceful resolution of the
conflict. Indeed, the continued pervasiveness of
premeditated attacks throughout the country suggests
that force, rather than dialogue, remains the parties'
preferred means of interaction. Until this changes,
there will be little that the Security Council can do to
stabilize the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo or to move the countries of the region
towards a common understanding of the need for
peace.

At present, MONUC is unable to deploy its
personnel to the regions of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo where its presence is needed. In the first
instance, it is the responsibility of the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to get the peace
process moving again by finally honouring its repeated
commitment to allow MONUC full freedom of
movement. While Canada is ready to support all further
efforts by the Secretariat and the Security Council to
impress upon Congolese authorities the need for
unhindered deployment, we also look to the allies of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to further
manifest their desire that the Government should agree
to a meaningful United Nations presence and to use
their influence to that end. In that regard, we encourage
the Secretariat to explore all diplomatic avenues,
including among key regional actors, to secure the
cooperation of the Government.

It remains the responsibility of all parties,
however, to acknowledge, in word and in deed, that the
United Nations presence is necessary and that it cannot
be made secondary to strategic calculations. The
signatories of the Lusaka Agreement must realize that
the Security Council will not consent to a process in
which cooperation with MONUC or with the Joint
Military Commission is selective or is used to
legitimize gains made through armed aggression.
While Canada encourages the parties to continue
bilateral discussions on the margins of the Lusaka
Agreement, we reiterate that that Agreement remains
the central basis of Canada's support for a United
Nations peacekeeping role in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

Canada believes that the Security Council and the
Secretariat have demonstrated a commendable degree
of patience in nurturing every positive development in
the peace process in the hope of reaching a
breakthrough. Clearly, the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and the human stakes involved,
justify this sustained approach. We also believe,
however, that the parties to the Agreement, through
their unwillingness to commit fully to the process, are
threatening the international community's investment
in the peace process.
If the parties do not desist from this destructive
approach, we believe that the Security Council will
need to re-examine whether MONUC as now
conceived is the most appropriate instrument for
helping to stabilize the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In the wake of the report
(8/2000/809) of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations chaired by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, we
question whether the current level of commitment to
the Lusaka Agreement meets baseline standards for a
United Nations peacekeeping presence.

(spoke in English)

As we agree to renew the mandate of MONUC
for another two months in the hope that forward
progress will soon be realized, Canada believes that the
Council should reflect on the assumptions that
informed the mandate of MONUC upon its creation.
Specifically, we should examine whether the Mission's
concept of operations, shaped as it was by the
expressions of good faith of the Lusaka signatories, can
now be reconciled with the dire situation on the
ground. Canada believes further that the Council
should invite potential and actual personnel
contributors to MONUC to participate in this
discussion, in keeping with recently adopted practice.

We repeat, however, that, even under current
circumstances, it is not too late to realize the promise
of Lusaka, and we call again on the parties to stem the
progression of lost opportunities and to make a genuine
commitment to peace.

