Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): Let me
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for kindly
inviting me to brief the Council as Chairman of the
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission on the Central African Republic. I
welcome the presence of Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Central African Republic, who in just a few months has
demonstrated that she is entirely equipped to carry out
the difficult task before her.

The report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic (S/2009/627),
which Ms. Zewde has just introduced, correctly
describes the situation in that country, including both
recent progress and the central challenges of the day.

The Central African Republic configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission had called for the
transformation of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in the Central African Republic
(BONUCA) into the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
(BINUCA) and welcomed the 7 April 2009 presidential
statement (S/PRST/2009/5), which formalizes that
transition. The integrated office will make it possible to
better support the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission in the Central African Republic. The
peacebuilding effort requires coordination and
consistency, and those are the two main focuses of the
mandate of the new United Nations presence in
Bangui.

Since the adoption in May of our Strategic
Framework for Peacebuilding in the Central African
Republic, I have visited the field twice, first in late
August, then more recently from 3 to 10 December,
along with a delegation from the Central African
Republic configuration comprising representatives of
China, France, Gabon, Japan, Poland, South Africa and
Belgium and of the International Organization of la
Francophonie. I think I can say that since the adoption
of the Strategic Framework - which to some extent is
the road map for our work - the first six-month report
is positive. There has been significant progress,
although the situation in the Central African Republic
continues to present enormous challenges.

Bearing in mind the situation in that country and
the recommendations of the inclusive political dialogue
held in Bangui in December 2008, we have initially
focused our attention on the security sector. The
Peacebuilding Commission has kept a watchful but
benevolent eye on the process that made it possible to

finalize a document on the project for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of
ex-combatants. The cost of the project is $27 million,
with financing provided through contributions not only
from the Peacebuilding Fund and some members of the
Peacebuilding Commission, including from the
European Union, but also and above all from
subregional organizations such as the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community and the Economic
Community of Central African States. I note that the
latter subregional organization has provided military
observers, who have already arrived in the Central
African Republic.

Thanks to these joint efforts of the Central
African Republic authorities and the international
community, the process is ready to get under way; it
awaits the formation of a body responsible for
coordinating the reintegration programme. The launch
of this DDR programme is of the greatest urgency,
because elections must be held before April 2010 and
because it is necessary to establish security throughout
the territory of the Central African Republic prior to
the elections.

In the broader area of security sector reform, the
round table held in Bangui in late October enabled the
Central African Republic authorities to adopt a national
strategy in that sphere. That was an important step
showing that national ownership by the Central African
authorities has become a reality at the technical and
political levels. In the months to come, we will have to
focus on the operationalization and financing of
security sector reform. In that context, it would seem
timely to organize a security sector reform pledging
conference during the first half of 2010 to mobilize
resources for the implementation of the national
strategy. The Commission believes that the time has
come to establish solid links between the DDR and
security sector reform.

The Peacebuilding Commission is working
simultaneously on other priorities of the Strategic
Framework. All are equally essential. In the area of
good governance and the rule of law, progress has been
made thanks to the joint efforts of the Government and
its international partners, such as the International
Organization of 1a Francophonie and the United
Nations Development Programme. The vital campaign
to combat corruption, one of the essential conditions
for socio-economic recovery, is one example of that.

Moreover, the adoption of the revised electoral
code and the establishment of the Independent
Electoral Commission are clear signals of the
Government's resolve to hold elections next year
within the constitutional timetable. The Peacebuilding
Commission and its members have expressed their
support for the organization of those elections. In that
respect, some Commission members have already
announced contributions to support, in particular, the
work of the Independent Electoral Commission, the
members of which were appointed from the bodies that
took part in the inclusive political dialogue.

However, there are significant financial needs
that must still be met and many difficulties to be
overcome, such as the composition of electoral rolls
and the logistical organization of the ballot. The
Independent Electoral Commission still needs to set a
calendar for the elections as well as a detailed draft
budget. I call on the Central African Republic
Government to honour its own financing provided for
in the budgets for 2009 and 2010 and to give the
Independent Electoral Commission the means and
political space for a transparent composition of the
rolls.

I also call on the international community to
make contributions to the Trust Fund that the United
Nations Development Programme has just established
for the elections, and to provide technical assistance to
the Independent Electoral Commission. Finally, the
deployment of international electoral observer missions
before, during and after the elections should be
ensured.

The preparation for the development poles project
has made considerable progress and 2010 will finally
see the realization of that project, which falls under the
development pillar of our Strategic Framework. Those
poles will improve the living conditions of the people,
especially those who have suffered most in the conflict.
The European Commission, the author of the concept
and a member of the Peacebuilding Commission, has
already announced a substantial contribution. In this
area, too, considerable efforts will be needed to
mobilize the necessary resources for that project.

In the next six months, we must concentrate on a
restricted number of priority actions, such as the
effective launching of the DDR process, the
mobilization of resources for security sector reform in
the framework of the donors' roundtable, the
organization of free and transparent elections in 2010,
and the genuine implementation of the development
poles project. Those priorities are closely linked, and it
is important above all to undertake the initial phases of

DDR before the holding of presidential and legislative
elections. A failure in DDR might compromise the
electoral process and even destabilize the country.

However, although the technical preparations for
DDR have been finalized with the arrival of military
observers from the Economic Community of Central
African States and their imminent deployment in the
field, it does not appear that all the necessary political
and security preconditions have been established. For
example, the recent clashes between the Convention
des patriotes pour la justice et la paix and the Central
African Armed Forces in Ndele show that inter-ethnic
tensions persist in the north-eastern part of the country.

In the North-West, the ongoing roadblocks and
the activities of self-defence groups serve as pretexts
for the Armee populaire pour la restauration de la
democratie (APRD) to not disarm. Additionally, the
kidnapping of two humanitarian workers near Birao
shows that the deployment of military observers is not
risk-free. I appeal to the Central African Republic
Government to redouble its efforts to promote dialogue
and mediation among the various ethnic and armed
groups in order to create an environment conducive to
the success of DDR, which should start, as scheduled,
before the end of the year. No new delays are
acceptable.

I would like to indicate finally that the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission takes very seriously the situation of
women and children, who are often the primary victims
of conflict, and makes every effort to implement the
resolutions of the Security Council on the fight against
sexual violence, the protection of children in armed
conflict, and the protection of civilians through the
priority areas of the Strategic Framework.

During our most recent visit, we were,
unfortunately, denied access to a centre for
demobilized child soldiers by the APRD, the armed
group led by Jean-Jacques Demafouth with which
those children were associated.

In all priority areas, considerable efforts are
called for on the part of all partners in peacebuilding in
the Central African Republic, with the assistance of the
international community. I call on all of those actors to
participate with conviction and the unanimous will to
change the country.

