Mr. Seifi Pargou (Islamic Republic ofIran): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
the world's longest crisis. It is a given fact that no crisis
can be solved permanently without addressing its main
root causes. The question of Palestine is no exception.
It started as a result of the occupation and can come to
an end only by ending it.

The Security Council, whose primary responsibility
is the maintenance of international peace and security,
has an explicit legal obligation to counter aggression
and occupation. It must therefore take the necessary
measures to force the occupying Power to end the

occupation. However, the consideration of this issue by
the Council over the course of the past seven decades
has resulted in the adoption of some resolutions with no
actual effect on the fate of Palestinians.

Interestingly enough, relying on the absolute
support of a permanent member of the Council, Israel
has implemented none of those resolutions. In addition,
whenever the Council has determined to adopt a
resolution to compel Israel to implement them, the United
States has vetoed all such proposals - 44 times thus far.
As a result, the Zionist regime has been emboldened to
continue, with total impunity, its expansionist policies
and illegitimate practices and has systematically
committed all four core international crimes, that is, the
crime of aggression, genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes. However, under the current United
States Administration, the situation has drastically
changed, as the United States itself has also embarked
on directly violating the relevant binding resolutions of
the Security Council.

The first example was moving the United States
Embassy to Jerusalem and the second was recognizing
Israel's sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan.
Both acts are against the peremptory norms of
international law, let alone the Council resolutions
According to international law, the territory of a State
shall not be the object of acquisition resulting from the
threat or use of force and no such territorial acquisition
shall be recognized as legal.

Therefore, the acts of the United States in that
regard are illegitimate, null and void and have no legal
weight and value. The Islamic Republic of Iran once
again condemns, in the strongest possible terms, those
internationally wrongful acts. We stress that the Golan
is, and will remain, an integral part of Syria.

The history of Palestine over the past seven
decades teaches us certain important lessons. First,
with regard to Israel, the Council has been both inactive
and ineffective because of the unreserved support of
the United States for Israel. Indeed, the continuation of
that situation would further erode the credibility of the
Council and increase its existing trust and confidence
deficit. Likewise, in addition to the United Nations,
international law is another victim of the Israeli
intransigence to end its occupation of Palestine.

Secondly, regarding Israeli-related issues, the only
principle that guides the United States foreign policy,
particularly under its current Administration, is not
"America first" but "Israel first", even at the price of
blatantly violating the basic principles, as well as the
peremptory norms, of international law.

Thirdly, the United States has proved to be an
unreliable partner, particularly when it comes to all
matters regarding Palestine. Therefore, no one should
trust its ill-advised proposals regarding the Palestinian
question, including with respect to the so-called "deal
of the century". Indeed, the inalienable rights of a
nation cannot be compromised by putting it under
extreme military, political and economic pressure or
bought with petrodollars.

Fourthly, in the past 70 years, Israel has committed
numerous crimes, including waging war against all
its neighbours with total impunity. The decade-long
illegal inhumane blockade on Gaza, the continuation
of which is drastically deteriorating the already
grave humanitarian situation, is another example in
that regard.

Under such circumstances, the international
community must continue its long-standing strong
support for the just cause of the Palestinians and for the
full realization of their inalienable rights, in particular
the establishment of the independent State of Palestine,
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.

Furthermore, the international community should
resist any attempt by the United States and some of its
allies, including Israel and Saudi Arabia, to change the
nature of the real threats in the Middle East. The first
and foremost problem in the Middle East is the question
of Palestine, and the plan to substitute it with artificial
and fabricated threats and crises is designed to divert
the attention of the international community from the
Israeli illegal occupation of Palestine and the lands of
others. It should be rejected by all peace-loving nations.

