Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Peru for convening
this meeting. We also thank the Secretary-General's
Envoy on Youth and the representatives of civil society
for sharing their perspectives and experiences and
illustrating for us the progress made and challenges
encountered in implementing resolutions 2250 (2015)
and 2419 (2018).

Both of those resolutions as well as the progress
study entitled "The missing peace: independent progress
study on youth and peace and security" (S/2018/86)
serve as a reference point for giving a greater voice to
young people in decision-making and implementing
mechanisms that allow them to meaningfully participate
in peace processes. The International Symposium
on Youth Participation in Peace Processes, held in
Helsinki, served as an excellent platform to learn from
young peacebuilders about areas for improvement in
implementing resolutions on youth, peace and security.

Young people living in conflict zones are exposed
to numerous risks and forms of violence. Safeguarding
their lives and their human rights must therefore be
a priority, including those of young peacebuilders,
human rights defenders and youth organizations, which
tend to face reprisals for their work.

With their immeasurable transformative and
innovative potential, young people are allies. They play
a vital role in deterring and resolving conflict. They also
act as peacemakers in their communities and transform
societies by making them more just, inclusive and
peaceful. Guaranteeing the meaningful participation
of young people in building and maintaining peace
and security is essential on the path to achieving
sustainable peace.

It is therefore vital to recognize their role in
implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development as an effective tool for preventing and
mitigating conflict, primarily through implementing
Goal 16 - a task on which our Government is working
with the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP). The United Nations Youth Strategy is
undoubtedly an important element of the Secretary-
General's reform. In this regard, the Secretary-
General's Envoy on Youth and her Office deserve our
highest praise, as does the UNDP, the Peacebuilding
Support Office and the United Nations Population
Fund, which are promoting the issue within their
respective mandates.

We hope that the Security Council ensures that
young people participate in this Chamber alongside us,
briefing us on the maintenance of peace and security
and sharing their perspectives and visions, whether in
open debates or briefings. That has been a practice of
the Dominican Republic.

We wish to seize this opportunity to highlight
other examples of good practices that we believe are
relevant. The United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia has launched a strategy for implementing
resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), with a
focus on the role of young people in efforts aimed at
reintegration and guaranteeing national security. The
Colombian Government has committed to developing
a national action plan for the implementation of the
agenda. Moreover, the African Union has appointed a
Special Envoy on Youth and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo has developed
an in-mission framework strategy on youth, peace
and security.

Those concrete examples of the leading role that
young people play in promoting peace should inspire
our efforts. However, we must continue to take
measures to implement the youth, peace and security
agenda. In that regard, we need to create networks of
young mediators at the regional level to strengthen
their role in mediation and conflict prevention; expand
the profiles and lists of reserve personnel, as well as
prioritize capacity-building and establish an exclusive
budget line to ensure that the United Nations system is
equipped to ensure the implementation of resolutions
2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), while supporting Member
States in that regard; ensure the preparation of an annual
report of the Secretary-General on the progress made
on and existing challenges regarding those resolutions,
within the framework of an annual open debate; and
create an informal group of experts on youth, peace and
security, in order to systematically and continuously
monitor their implementation.

We hope that the Secretary-General's reports
to the Security Council, especially those relating to
specific countries, as well as the renewal of mandates
of peacekeeping operations and political missions, will
include references to the implementation of resolutions
2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018). We also join those who
eagerly await the Secretary-General's first report on
youth, peace and security, as it will most certainly shed
further light on the challenges and gaps that persist in
the implementation of the agenda and provide guidance
on how to address the issue going forward.

In conclusion, let us always remember as States
to work to put youth at the centre of their efforts,
being inclusive and helping them to prevent conflicts
and eliminate obstacles, in order to redress the
historical marginalization and exclusion that they have
experienced in decision-making processes aimed at
achieving peace.

