The Secretary-General: I commend you,
Mr. President, and the Government of Lithuania for
having convened this timely discussion on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
focusing in particular on the European Union (EU).
We are honoured to welcome High Representative
Lady Ashton.

The principle of establishing stronger partnerships
with regional organizations is embedded in the
very DNA of the United Nations. With great vision
and foresight, Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations lays out the critical role of regional
organizations in maintaining international peace and
security.

Today, we know more than ever before that the
effectiveness of the UnitedNations rests in large measure
on our cooperation with regional bodies. We draw on
their expertise. We maximize impact by coordinating
our efforts. Pooling resources and pursuing a common
approach are not only efficient but also essential.
Conflict prevention, mediation, crisis management,
peacekeeping, conflict resolution and peacebuilding are
complex endeavours. No single country or organization
can possibly meet such challenges alone.

That is why we have strengthened relationships
with regional bodies, both to facilitate a swift response
when crises erupt and to allow for long-term joint
engagement. We have made important progress,
including through liaison offices, joint envoys and
cooperation agreements. Joint mediation deployments
have become more common, allowing the international
community to present a united front.

Our cooperation with the African Union (AU) has
made a difference in places such as the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mali and Somalia. The United
Nations is keen to deepen the partnership with the AU
Peace and Security Architecture. I also commend the
mediation efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development in South Sudan.

In Asia, United Nations cooperation with the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has
grown significantly since we signed a memorandum of
understanding in 2007. We look forward to working with
the new ASEAN Institute for Peace and Reconciliation,
launched in December.

We are engaging in extensive collaboration with
the Organization of American States in areas such as
mediation and dialogue, as well as the fight against
illicit trafficking. The partnership with the League of
Arab States has been essential to our efforts to support
inclusive political processes in the Middle East and
North Africa and to work for peace in Syria.

And, of course, our cooperation with the European
Union stretches across our agenda and around the
world. Throughout its history, the European Union
has taken pioneering, forward-looking steps in
promoting cooperation among nations, both within and,
increasingly, beyond its borders. The EU's many and
generous contributions to the United Nations embody
the kind of multidimensional approach that is needed to
foster sustainable peace and development. The United
Nations and the European Union increasingly work
side-by-side on the ground in peacekeeping and civilian
crisis-management operations, and through preventive
diplomacy. The European Union has also been a valuable
partner to the Peacebuilding Commission, a champion
of human rights and a steadfast partner in promoting
the Millennium Development Goals, advancing gender
equality and tackling climate change.

The topic of today's debate could not be more
timely. The United Nations and its regional partners
face an urgent test. The dark clouds of mass atrocities
and sectarian cleansing loom over the Central African
Republic. Public lynchings, mutilations and other
horrendous acts of violence are spreading mayhem and
fear. All Central Africans have been victims, Muslims
and Christian communities alike. Most recently, there
have been large-scale attacks on Muslims in towns such
as Bouali, Boyali and Bossembele, where peacekeepers
have not been able to deploy. I am deeply concerned
by the cycle of revenge and reprisals. Entire Muslim
communities are fleeing for their lives. Some have
called it an exodus of historic scale. Antonio Guterres,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, was
in the Central African Republic this week and described
a humanitarian catastrophe of unspeakable proportions.

The local Red Cross reported finding a mass
grave in Bangui. Public records confirming identities
and land ownership are being deliberately destroyed.
Citizens and officials are fanning the flames through
hate speech. We must do our utmost to prevent further
atrocities and retaliatory violence, in particular the
widespread and coordinated targeting of Muslim
communities. And we must understand what else is at
risk. The very fabric of society, woven over generations,
is being ripped apart. Communities that have no history
ofviolent conflict are on a course that, ifleft unchecked,
could lead to decades of debilitating conflict. Peace,
security, human rights, development - everything that
we at the United Nations stand for and seeks to promote
is under assault. We must live up to the promises made
around this table to act swiftly and robustly in the face
of such bloodshed. We cannot claim to care about mass-
atrocity crimes and then shrink from what it means
to actually prevent them. Our commitment to protect
civilians is only as meaningful as the political, military
and financial muscle deployed to defend them.

Our responsibility is clear: we must stand with the
people of the Central African Republic. I commend the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the African Union for their intensive efforts to address
the crisis and for the establishment of the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA). I pay tribute to the courage and
determination of the MISCA forces, who are doing
their utmost to stem the violence and protect civilians.
I appeal to the international community to urgently
provide MISCA with the support it so clearly needs
to save lives now. In that connection, I thank the
Government of France for deploying its forces, and I
look forward to the forthcoming military contributions
by the European Union, which are to be coordinated
with the MISCA operation. I am committed to doing
everything in my power to prevent further atrocities and
to reduce the risk of a de facto partition of the country.
Now we must act together, we must act decisively and
we must act now to prevent the worst.
As Secretary-General of the United Nations, I
am duty-bound to bring to the Council's attention
my best possible advice on how to address threats to
international peace and security. I intend to return
to the Council on Tuesday with recommendations
for containing and ending that crisis. I look forward
to discussing with the Council what it will take to
urgently curtail the violence, save lives, protect human
rights, support the delivery of humanitarian assistance
and strengthen the command and control of the forces
on the ground. That will be a crucial opportunity for
us to fortify our collective efforts - a chance to show
that the cooperation among the United Nations, the AU,
the EU and others can help the people of the Central
African Republic in their time of need.

As we heighten our efforts to protect people, we must
also pursue accountability for human rights violations.
The international commission of inquiry mandated
by the Security Council will become operational this
month. I welcome the decision of the International
Criminal Court to open a preliminary investigation into
the violence. The international response is building
strength, but does not yet match what is required.

It is critical to do everything we can to support
the efforts of President Catherine Samba-Panza in her
courageous efforts to stabilize the situation, promote
dialogue and find political solutions. The international
community must work together with the national
authorities, religious leaders and all stakeholders to
strengthen reconciliation efforts in an inclusive and
transparent process.

Let us pledge here and now to ensure that the
people of the Central African Republic have the lifeline
of support and protection that they need. Let us commit
to the strongest possible cooperation and coordination
between the United Nations, the AU and the European
Union. Let us show what solidarity and concerted
action can achieve for the people of the Central Africa
Republic.

