Ms. Loj (Denmark): I should like to begin by
joining others in thanking Under-Secretary-General Jan
Egeland for his comprehensive briefing.

Given their gravity and serious implications, the
humanitarian crises of Africa merit more of our
attention and of our political and financial resources.
Violent conflicts, food shortages and governance crises
are some of the most widespread causes. The powers of

nature - floods and droughts - account for only a
fraction of these. Most humanitarian crises are
manmade, and it is fair to say that if we have the
collective will, all those causes and all those
humanitarian crises highlighted by Mr. Egeland can be
influenced and corrected through concerted action by
all parties involved.

Let me take this opportunity to comment on the
situations in the Sudan and in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and on the recent positive developments
with regard to the situation in northern Uganda. I
would like also to underline the fact that the
humanitarian situation in a number of other countries
in Africa - Zimbabwe being one of them - also
requires the close attention of the international
community.

The situation in the Sudan continues to top the
agenda of the Council. While the humanitarian
situation in southern Sudan remains stable and has led
to some optimism, we are all too aware of the sharp
deterioration of the situation in Darfur. Increased
fighting, restrictions on humanitarian access and direct
targeting of humanitarian workers have pushed the
situation to the brink of catastrophe. In the absence of
eyes and ears on the ground, when not only aid
personnel but also journalists are prohibited from
accessing the most vulnerable areas, the rest of the
world has reason to be extremely worried.

An immediate strengthening of the African Union
Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) is essential, not only in
word but also in deed. A decision on extending the
mandate of AMIS will, hopefully, be taken next week,
and the resources and additional capacity must follow.
They are so desperately needed. At the same time, the
joint planning of the transfer of AMIS to the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) must continue
without delay.

If security in Darfur is allowed to deteriorate
even further, we might soon be faced with tens of
thousands of refugees crossing into neighbouring
countries, with further destabilizing consequences for
the entire region. We would also be faced with a
scenario not unlike the one we saw in Rwanda in
1994 - a scenario that we have promised ourselves
would never be repeated.

With more than 1,000 people dying every day,
mainly as a result of the continuing conflict in the east,
the humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic

of the Congo is extremely worrying. Only through
peace and stability can the humanitarian situation be
eased. In order not to lose the present window of
opportunity to achieve peace, lasting stability,
democracy and sustained economic development, the
political actors must first of all respect the electoral
process and work constructively to support democratic
development.

On a much more positive note, I would like to
welcome the cessation of hostilities agreement between
Uganda and the rebels, the Lord's Resistance Army. It
is a very important step in the right direction, and, as
Mr. Egeland has stated, this recent development
represents the best hope for sustainable peace in the
region in some time.

We urge the parties to agree on a comprehensive
settlement which would pave the way for efforts to
help improve the deplorable living conditions of the
nearly 2 million internally displaced persons in
northern Uganda. To secure lasting peace, impunity
must be addressed, and I should like to use this
opportunity to remind Uganda of its responsibility to
find a solution consistent with its obligations under
international law.

Zimbabwe is not on the agenda for today's
briefing. Nevertheless, I would like to stress our
continued concern regarding the humanitarian situation
in the country, a situation that, we all know, is
extremely serious and is getting worse. A huge and
growing number of Zimbabweans are suffering from
food insecurity, homelessness and/or the HIV/AIDS
pandemic. I would like to ask Mr. Egeland to give his
assessment of the present situation in that country and
to update us on the cooperation between the United
Nations and Zimbabwe.

Finally, let me conclude by commending the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and Mr. Egeland for the active advocacy role they
continue to play.

