The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

I would like to thank each and every one of those
present for their statements, which highlight one of
the essential dimensions upon which the effectiveness
of peacekeeping depends: strategic force generation.
France is glad to have been able to organize this
briefing during its presidency, in partnership with the
United Kingdom. I am also pleased that Bangladesh
and Canada were able to share their experiences and
their vision. I thank the Secretariat for its investment in
this major area of work, and Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations Jean-Pierre Lacroix for
his particularly enlightening briefing.

The problem discussed at this meeting arises from
the obvious fact that peacekeeping operations can
succeed only if their forces are appropriately trained,
equipped and led. In that context, strategic force
generation should respond to three requirements at the
very least: clarity, innovation and globality.

First of all, we must be clear-minded and practical
about the needs of peackeeping operations. Force
generation should be based on the identification of
current gaps and elements obstructing the carrying
out of operations. This is, of course, a short-term
requirement, and we must constantly adapt the capacity
of peacekeeping operations currently deployed and
mobilize their critical capacity, making it possible to
quickly respond to changing situations on the ground.

But force generation is also a long-term project.
It is the tool with which we must lay the foundations
for the peacekeeping operations of tomorrow, as well
as the instrument that the United Nations must employ
to anticipate personnel, equipment and technology
capacities that will make it possible to respond to
conflicts in five, 10 or even 20 years. Trilateral dialogue
between the Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat contributes significantly
to this process. Such an approach should bring about
a vision of peacekeeping possibilities that the Council
should nurture in order to establish mandates that are
both ambitious and realistic and that can respond to
challenges on the ground. We welcome the work already
done to achieve these goal, particularly in New York,
London and Paris in 2015 and 2016, as well as next
month at the Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial Meeting
in Vancouver. I commend Canada's commitment to the
full success of that important ministerial conference.

In addition to peacekeeping needs in terms
of medical, aerial, technological and engineering
requirements, the Paris Meeting, on peacekeeping in
a French-speaking environment, recalled to us another
requirement, namely, that peacekeeping operations
must have sufficient language skills in the national
language of the country in question if they are to be
able to effectively counter threats, gain the confidence
of people and lay the foundations for lasting peace.
In order to respond to this requirement, France, in
partnership with the International Organization of La
Francophonie and its member States, has established
language programmes for non-French-speaking
troop- and police-contributing countries. Through the
Boutros-Ghali Observatory for Peacekeeping, launched
in October 2016, it supports the efforts of French-
speaking troop-contributing countries to develop
their participation in peacekeeping operations. As I
indicated yesterday at a round table organized at the
Headquarters of the Permanent Representation of the
OIF, I wish to renew my invitation to all Member States
willing to do so to join this initiative and get involved
with steering it.

On the strength of this clear-mindedness, force
generation must be guided by ambition and innovation.
The establishment of the Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System within peacekeeping operations was
a historic step forward. It helps to identify a reserve
force of trained, equipped and operational troops
endowed with a use doctrine that can be deployed in less
than 60 days. We welcome the commitment of troop-
contributing countries such as Bangladesh, which have
committed themselves to this mechanism. We support
the efforts of these countries and of the Secretariat to
continue developing and refining it.

Many other innovations have followed that one.
The force-generation conference for the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, held last May, was a major milestone for
the predictability in peacekeeping capabilities. We
therefore welcome the initiative of several Member
States, including the Netherlands, Germany, Jordan and
Belgium, and also Norway and Portugal, to coordinate
the provision of air transport on a multi-year basis.
This approach has given solid operational prospects
for the Mission. However, we must continue our
efforts because, 18 months after the Security Council
authorized the raising of the troop-ceiling, the Mission
still suffers from a deficit ofnearly 2,500 troops - a gap
that needs to filled in the current security environment.

The development of such joint commitments,
associating several Member States to generate critical
capacities, must be encouraged. These arrangements
derive from the capabilities and complementarities of
each contributor country in terms of providing troops,
training, financing or equipment. France is fully
committed to this and is providing both predeployment
training and operational training to over 25,000 African
military personnel a year, across numerous deployed
peacekeeping operations. We must collectively
encourage the development of triangular partnerships,
including by making the most of regional initiatives.

I come now to my last point. In order to bear fruit,
force generation must be part of a global approach.
The issue of deployment and support for capacity-
generation is a key element. Efforts to modernize
strategic deployment must be extended so that these
units can deploy quickly, as soon as the need is
identified. Operational and strategic support must also
be adapted so that these units can make a difference
over the long term having been endowed with the
appropriate resources.

Issues of sustainability and medical support must
also be at the core of our concerns. Modernizing
management processes, in particular through delegation
and accountability closest to the ground, must also
contribute to the performance of peacekeeping. The
global approach also requires looking beyond the
military contingents; adequate capacity mobilization is
also necessary in the police and civilian spheres. In many
theatres of operation, the increase in the proportion of
women deployed in United Nations police units should
make it possible to better respond in the missions these
units are called upon to complete. Civilian components
must acquire the expertise needed to carry out their
tasks. In any case, linguistic competence remains
essential to the success of peacekeeping.

On the strength of a lucid, innovative and global
vision of peacekeeping, we can ensure together that the
United Nations through its peacekeeping operations will
continue to meet everybody's hopes and expectations.
The Council can rest assured of France's resolute
commitment to this end.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at 5.55 pm.
