Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): My delegation is pleased to see the People's
Republic of China discharging the presidential duties
of the Security Council. We are grateful to the
delegation of Cameroon, and to the Ambassador of
Cameroon for the excellent manner in which he carried
out his duties as President in the previous month. My
delegation also welcomes the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Uganda to this Chamber.

The Russian Federation expresses its gratitude to

the Panel of Experts, headed by Ambassador Mahmoud
Kassem, for the final report on the illegal exploitation
of natural resources and other forms of wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Today's discussion
has shown that the report of the Panel of Exports has
achieved important objectives. The response by States
in the region and other interested countries has been
lively and interested. Not all agree with the conclusions
and recommendations of the report, including the
Russian Federation. However, we must acknowledge
that the problem exists and we must take adequate
steps to resolve it. That has been borne out by
statements made by the representatives of Uganda,
South Africa, Denmark, France, Norway and other
representatives. In that connection, we are not inclined
to consider the report as an excuse to precipitously
adopt measures or decisions, but rather to consider it as
food for thought that requires further study.

The issue we are discussing today is directly
linked to the protracted bloodshed that has been taking
place in the Democratic Republic of the Congo for
many years. Recently there have been encouraging
indications of resolution of that conflict. However, we
are concerned about the report's information on the
scope of the plundering of natural resources in
violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We wish to draw particular attention to the
conclusion of the Panel of Experts that armed groups in
the country increasingly rely on control of budgetary
resources, licensing fees, taxes on export products,
custom duties on imports and State and local taxation
generally. The result of such activities is the further
plundering of the State, an increase in the number of
refugees and internally displaced persons, human rights
abuses and, ultimately, an extensive humanitarian crisis.

We are concerned about the criminalization of
trade in Congolese resources, the lack of effective State
control, the high level of violence and the
militarization of certain regions of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Uncontrolled access to
especially valuable resources has been attracting
increased interest on the part of criminal organizations.
The consolidation of the illegal activities of criminal
groups in pillaging the wealth of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are also threats to the economic
and political stability of several neighbouring States.

At the same time, we have some questions about
the recommendation of the Panel of Experts to introduce
restrictions against the activities of individuals and
organizations accused of the illegal export of natural
resources from the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The delegation of Belgium even spoke of introducing
sanctions against such individuals.

My delegation believes that combating economic
crime falls, first and foremost, within the purview of
States, not the Security Council. Moreover, only a
court can determine which individuals or organizations
are truly guilty of illegal operations and should be
prosecuted. The establishment of black lists by the
Council would not guarantee an end to the illegal
operations involving Congolese resources. However, it
could give rise to serious legal problems, since, in the
case of the plundering of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, it would be
extremely difficult to prove that the activities of any
type of commercial enterprise or individual pose a
threat to international peace and security and, pursuant
to Chapter VII of the Charter, the imposition of
sanctions requires such a determination.

The Agreements achieved at Pretoria and Luanda,
with the assistance of South Africa and Angola,
establish the necessary preconditions for resolving the
problem of the illegal exploitation of Congolese
wealth. The ongoing and already completed withdrawal
of foreign troops from the country is pulling the ground
out from under the armed bands and criminal groups
that for several years have been plundering their own
State. The success of the inter-Congolese dialogue, the
achievement of a comprehensive agreement on the
establishment of a Transitional Government and the
extension of its authority to the entire territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo could be the turning
point whereby the plundering of the natural resources
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo would cease.

During this critical period, a more active role is
being played by the international community,
represented by the United Nations, its specialized
agencies, international financial institutions, regional
organizations and States that are interested in lending
the Democratic Republic of the Congo support of all
kinds, including at the financial and expert levels. The
goals are: the implementation of programmes for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants; the restoration of the war-ravaged
economy; the establishment of controls with respect to
the use of natural resources; the strengthening of State
bodies; the implementation of appropriate
administrative procedures; an overview of economic
activities related to the exploitation of natural
resources; and a review of the legislation and the
relevant agreements establishing control over the use
of national resources.

Russia firmly believes that advocating a political
settlement in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
should remain a priority for the Security Council. We
see this first and foremost as compliance by the
Council with its Charter obligation to maintain
international peace and security.

Let me briefly react to some of the comments that
were made in this Chamber. In particular, I will touch
on the remarks made by the delegation of Uganda,
which said that the United Nations Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should send
military contingents to the area. That proposal has
some validity, but the capacities of the Mission are
extremely limited, because of the lack of security in the
region as well as the limited number of military
contingents there.

Nevertheless, the appeal by the Ugandan
delegation reaffirms the timeliness of finalizing work
on a Security Council resolution on the expansion of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Furthermore, views were expressed here to the
effect that the monitoring regime in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should be expanded, either by
extending the mandate of the Panel of Experts or
through the establishment of a new monitoring
mechanism. We believe that this is a new issue that
requires additional consideration by the Security
Council. We cannot dissociate it from the situation that
prevails in the region, that is, the situation with respect
to the implementation of the Lusaka, Pretoria and
Luanda agreements and to the withdrawal of foreign
troops.

The current report has given rise to many
questions and protestations on the part of a number of
countries in the region. Here we would like to ask if the
maintenance of the monitoring machinery at this time
might not have an impact on the peace process. We
need to discuss this, just as we need to discuss the
proposal made here with regard to a more active
involvement on the part of regional institutions and
international financial institutions in the process of
resolving the problems related to the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and of putting an end to such
exploitation.

