Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea
thanks Special Representative Leila Zerrougui for the
important briefing she has just delivered. We are also
grateful for the presence of Justine Masika Bihamba,
the Congolese civil society representative, and for her
statement. Lastly, we thank Ambassador Alotaibi for
his briefing.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is entering
a decisive phase for its immediate future. Equatorial
Guinea welcomes the progress that has been made in
the political and technical process for the holding of
elections in December. This reflects the commitment
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to complying with the electoral calendar
established on 5 November 2017 and its commitments
with regard to the 31 December 2016 agreement.
The measures taken demonstrate the Government's
determination to effectively organize inclusive,
fair and transparent elections on 23 December.
We believe that only through constructive
inter-Congolese dialogue will the formation of a
Government of national unity lead the country to
overcome the tensions we have seen and facilitate the
progress of the electoral process, strengthen confidence
in and the mechanisms for oversight and implementation
for a transparent and inclusive process that allows voter
participation under the principle of universal suffrage
and the best possible conditions.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea therefore
welcomes the observations made in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/655) on the political and
technical processes under way for the holding of
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which show considerable progress with regard to
technical and legislative preparations for the holding
of elections.

Our Government commends all the measures
taken with regard to the organization of the elections,
including the submission of candidates from different
political parties and the establishment and extension
of deadlines, which reflects the will and commitment
of the Government and political actors to carry out the
electoral process. We also believe that we must not lose
sight of or neglect the different possible post-electoral
scenarios, and we must adopt the necessary preventive
measures in the event of any eventuality.

With regard to technical aspects, it is important that
the Independent National Electoral Commission be able
to function normally and that any technical issue that
gives rise to a discrepancy can be resolved satisfactorily.
In that regard, we are referring specifically to the use
of the voting machines. We welcome the Government's
efforts to fully fund the electoral process and encourage
it to continue to work and regularly strengthen its
cooperation with the Commission so that the funding
can be carried out and can effectively contribute to
satisfactory elections. We would also like to underscore
the support that can be provided by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).

We recognize the States members of the
International Conference of the Great Lakes Region,
the African Union, the International Organization of
la Francophonie and the Southern Africa Development
Community, as well as neighbouring States, in particular
Angola, South Africa and the Congo, as facilitators of
the political dialogue in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and throughout the region. We also call for
their cooperation in investigating and combating the
criminal networks and armed groups involved in the
illegal exploitation ofthe country's resources. Pressure,
monitoring and punishments must be brought to bear
on those criminal groups to put an end to their crimes.
Otherwise, the Security Council will still be dealing
with problems in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for many years to come, even after the transparent
elections of next December.

Allow me to commend MONUSCO for the work
it has carried out in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for many years and not always in the best of
circumstances. We urge all parties involved in this
process, including the Government and other political
actors, to stay the course of inclusive internal dialogue
and refrain from any violent action that could disrupt
the process.

Finally, we call on the international community
to continue to resolutely support the Government,
MONUSCO, the Independent National Electoral
Commission and all other parties involved in this
process to promote confidence-building measures to
guarantee a favourable environment for the holding of
peaceful elections and to fully comply with the road
map until power has been peacefully transferred in an
environment of peace and national harmony. A happy
conclusion to the political transition in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will have positive repercussions
for stability throughout the region.

In conclusion, I take this opportunity to thank the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for its efforts to eradicate the Ebola outbreak and all
actors who have contributed thereto. We also align
ourselves with the communique on this issue that was
issued by the African Union.

