Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): In
his address to the General Assembly last September,
President Bush said that, because proliferators would
use any route or channel open to them, we need the
broadest possible cooperation to stop them. He asked
the Security Council to help by adopting a resolution to
counter this growing threat. The President called for a
resolution that achieved three primary goals: to
criminalize the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, to ensure that all countries have strong
export controls and to secure sensitive materials within
each country's borders. The United States is pleased
that the important resolution we adopted today fulfils
these key goals and that we have adopted it
unanimously, with all that implies.

In this resolution, the Council is responding
appropriately to what all agree is a clear and present
threat to global peace and security: the proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their
means of delivery, especially to non-State actors,
including terrorists. Because this threat and the actions
we are taking today concern the entire United Nations
membership, the United States and the co-sponsors
have made major efforts to consult, listen and take into
account the many views expressed. We share a
common goal: to implement the resolution.

Implementation will require States to undertake a
variety of steps, both legal and technical, to meet the
requirements of the resolution in a manner that best
suits their legal systems and procedures. The language
in the resolution calls for effective and appropriate
measures to be taken to meet the requirements set out
by the Council. Each Member State will need to review
its laws and to determine what laws or regulations will
be necessary to meet the resolution's requirements.
Member States are also required to strengthen controls
in order to prevent the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons and their means of
delivery. Member States are also asked through this
resolution to submit within six months a first report
assessing their implementation of this resolution to the
Committee established by the resolution.

The United States recognizes - and the
resolution clearly states - that some countries may
lack the resources to enact and enforce the laws and
regulations called for. As the President told the General
Assembly last September, we stand ready, as do others
as well, to assist countries, as appropriate, that require
technical assistance and we encourage others that are
able to do so to provide assistance as well.

The resolution clearly states that it will not alter
or amend the existing Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons regimes. The steps to be taken by
States under the resolution do not take the place of the
commitments that they have made in connection with
non-proliferation Treaty regimes.

The Security Council today is responding
unanimously to a threat to international peace and
security: the uncontrolled spread of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons, their means of delivery and
related materials by non-State actors, including
terrorists seeking to exploit weak export-control laws
and security measures in a variety of countries. We
believe that it is essential that all States - not just
States parties to a specific treaty or supplier regime -
maintain adequate controls over their nuclear material,
equipment and expertise. In that regard, as called for in
the resolution, we urge all countries to work bilaterally,
regionally and internationally to take cooperative
action to stop, impede, intercept and otherwise prevent
the illicit trafficking in these weapons, related
materials and their means of delivery.

We are pleased that the resolution addresses the
importance of such cooperative action. We believe that
the proliferation security initiative announced by
President Bush in Krakow, Poland, on 31 May 2003 -

almost one year ago - is a valuable initiative in this
regard. We are pleased that so many States are working
with us to interdict shipments of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons, their means of delivery and related
materials. No one nation can meet this challenge alone.
We hope that all States will join us in the proliferation
security initiative and other cooperative efforts,
consistent with national and international legal
authorities, to stop the flow of these deadly weapons
and materials. Halting such traffic is in the interests of
all of us.

The United States appreciates the broad
cooperation of all members of the Security Council and
the wider membership in improving this resolution and
addressing this threat to international peace and
security. The international community now has a solid
basis for moving ahead and working together to deal
with this important security issue.

