Mr. Tachie-Menson (Ghana): Allow me first to
join members in thanking the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge Fausto Pocar, the President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR), Judge Dennis Byron, the Prosecutor of the
ICTY, Madam Carla Del Ponte, and the Prosecutor of
the ICTR, Mr. Hassan J allow, for their detailed reports.
We are impressed by the commitment and
professionalism shown by the Presidents, Judges,
Prosecutors and staff of these Tribunals, who are in the
forefront of the international community's efforts to
combat impunity for the most serious crimes.

On the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia, we note with satisfaction the fact
that out of 161 accused under indictment, only 11
remain in the pre-trial stage, even though four accused
persons are still at large. We also would like to
commend the role of the ad litem judges, who also
contributed to this achievement.

The issue of referral of cases to competent
national jurisdictions is another important means, not
only of reducing the work load of the Tribunal, but also
of putting it on course towards the successful
implementation of its Completion Strategy. We
consider the Tribunal's Outreach Programme as
essential to educate people, not only on the role of the
Tribunal, but also on the task of putting in place
systems of justice in the post-conflict areas. This
people-centred and grassroots approach is
indispensable to the efforts of the international
community to build institutions that will entrench the
rule of law in the affected areas.

Linked to this is the question of capacity-
building, which is critical to enhancing the capacity of
the national jurisdictions to enable them to handle
referred cases and legacy issues.

On the subject of cooperation, we call on all
States to meet their obligations in such areas as
assisting in the tracing and arrest of fugitives and in
whatever areas of assistance may be required by the
Tribunal. Without this cooperation, the effectiveness of
the Tribunal and its Completion Strategy would be
undermined. It is necessary that a clear message is sent
to the accused persons still at large that they cannot
play a waiting game.

On this point, it is disappointing that four
fugitives, including two of the most notorious, are still
at large. We urge the relevant States to take the
necessary steps to apprehend these fugitives and bring
them to justice.
We wish to express our concern about reported
cases of witness intimidation and call for the setting up
of an effective and permanent witness protection
programme. This is both a moral and a legal duty owed
to those who risk their lives to give crucial testimony
in some of these trials.

With regard to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, we are again impressed with the
progress made in the disposal of cases. We note the
difficulty faced by the Tribunal in seeking to have
some of the cases referred to competent national
jurisdictions, particularly in Africa. We believe that in
order to make some of these transfers possible, the
Tribunal may have to put in place capacity-building
and technical assistance programmes in the target
countries, some of which have overburdened judicial
systems.

The international community should provide the
Tribunal with the necessary resources to ensure the
success of this programme. This will reinforce the
outreach activities of the Tribunal, which are a key
contribution of the Tribunal in bringing peace and
national reconciliation to Rwanda. We are certain that,
by its work, the Tribunal will leave behind a legacy of
justice and respect for the rule of law - which is at the
core of peace, stability and security in the region.

We wish to touch on the crucial subject of the
completion strategy and legacy issues for the two
Tribunals. The international community is soon to be
confronted with legacy issues, particularly the question
of fugitives at large, review of judgements, supervision
of prison sentences and archives. It is clear that a
downsized version of the Tribunals will have to be in
place to tackle these issues for the sake of continuity.
In this regard, we wish to say that, for practical reasons
and as a matter of principle, we do not regard the
completion strategy as a fixed and rigid deadline. It is
our View that there must be flexibility to enable all
outstanding cases and issues to be concluded. National
jurisdictions may have a role to play in assisting the
downsized Tribunals in that regard. That is the only
way the Tribunals can discharge their mandate
successfully and leave behind a lasting legacy in the
fight against impunity and also in strengthening
international humanitarian law.

Finally, my delegation wishes to express
appreciation to Ms. Carla Del Ponte, the outgoing
Prosecutor of the ICTY, for her dedicated pursuit of
justice and for her sterling service to the Tribunal and
the international community.

