Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We attach great importance to the convening
of this open debate of the Security Council on the issue
of its working methods. In our view, the very fact of
conducting the meeting in this format bears witness to
the improved transparency of the Council's work.
Pursuant to the United Nations Charter, the Security
Council is responsible for establishing its own rules of
procedure, but we are prepared today to listen carefully
to the views of our colleagues on how to make the
Council's work more effective.

It is clear that the Council is the organ that bears
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and is at the service of
the international community as a whole. We wish
nevertheless to note that, in the context of the
discussion of working method reform, questions are
often focused on broader topics, such as how
successfully and appropriately the Council is
implementing its Charter-mandated tasks. For instance,
the Council is criticized for encroaching on the
prerogatives of the other United Nations bodies. I note
that we share this concern. Our colleagues on the
Council are well aware that the Russian Federation has
always soberly and selectively reacted to initiatives for
the Council to consider thematic issues, particularly if
they are generic in nature. We believe that the Council
should focus on issues on which it can and must take
concrete decisions.

We also understand the concern that the Council
may too often resort to Chapter VII of the Charter,
3
including the application of sanctions. In that regard,
we stress that the Russian Federation has consistently
called on the Council to make more active use of the
toolkit of preventive diplomacy and to invest in the
development of mechanisms for the peaceful
settlement of disputes. The provisions of Chapters VI
and VIII should be fully exploited. Sanctions and the
use of force to settle conflict are appropriate when all
possibilities for peaceful settlement have been
exhausted, the threat to international peace and security
is clear, and the decision to resort to Chapter VII
enjoys the broadest possible support of Council
members.

An interesting and very relevant example is that
we have recently seen inconsistent and broad
interpretation of the decisions of the Security Council
in situations where such decisions are supplemented or
undermined by unilateral measures of pressure. We
believe such activities to be unacceptable and to
undermine the Council's authority. We stress the
importance of this issue, but in our view it transcends
the agenda item on the Council's working methods.
Another set of provisions that bear no relation to the
Council's working methods is that pertaining to the
right of veto.

In order to make the Council even more effective
and responsive to realities on the ground, we must
work meticulously to improve its working methods. To
that end, we established and operationalized the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. Although its activities are not
public, it is working in organized, rational and
constructive interaction with all interested delegations
of Member States. It should be understood in that
respect that proposals to enhance the transparency of
the Council's activities should not undermine its
effectiveness or its ability to respond promptly to
situations. Dialogue on this important issue must be
carried out in a balanced and professional manner,
without politicization.

We feel that improving the quality of the
Council's interaction with other United Nations bodies
on issues within the Council's competence to be
another key issue in improving the Councils working
methods. One relevant task in that regard would be the
future formulation of effective forms and methods for
dialogue between the Council and the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, other
United Nations bodies, regional organizations and
international partners. The practice of holding
operational consultations between Council members
and troop-and police-contributing countries must be
maintained.

Much has been done recently to improve the
Council's working methods. The number of open
meetings on various issues has grown, and informal
interactive dialogue and Arria Formula meetings have
been held. One instrument of regular contact between
the Council and interested non-members is the
traditional briefing given by the Council presidency.
Russia will assume the presidency tomorrow, and we
invite all to a meeting, to be held on Friday,
2 December, at which I shall discuss the highlights of
the Council's schedule for next month. I note that 178
Permanent Representatives have been invited to that
meeting, but only eight attended the last such briefing.

