The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat at
the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members have before them the third special
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, document S/2004/650.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2004/774, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I should like to call the attention of members to
document S/2004/715, containing a letter dated 3
September 2004 from the Secretary-General.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/2004/774) before it. Unless I hear any objection, I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by a show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Benin, Brazil, Chile, China,
France, Germany, Pakistan, Philippines,

Romania, Russian Federation, Spain, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1565 (2004).

I give the floor to the Secretary-General.


