Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
briefing and Mr. lvica Dacie, Prime Minster of Serbia,
and Mr. Hashim Thaci, Prime Minister of Kosovo, for
their statements.

The Security Council is meeting for the first time
since the historic agreement of 19 April was achieved
between Serbia and Kosovo under the auspices of the
European Union. The agreement lays the bases for
normalized relations that will contribute to regional
stability and enable the people to turn towards their
future, the development of their countries and their
European prospects. We commend the Serb and Kosovo
authorities, particularly the two Prime Ministers,
who have been personally committed to that difficult
exercise, for their determination and courage. Their
statements before the Council today represent a new
demonstration of their spirit of cooperation. We call
upon them to ensure the swift implementation of the
agreement, pursuant to the road map of 22 May.

Serbia must steadily dismantle the parallel
sovereign structures that it maintains in the north,
pursuant to its commitment. For its part, Kosovo must
provide the future community of majority-Serb areas
with substantive autonomy, as provided for in the
19 April agreement, in order to reassure the northern
Serbian population and allow it to find its lasting place
in Kosovo.

Generally speaking, it is clearly important to ensure
that the rights of the various communities throughout
the territory, especially concerning their cultural and
religious heritage, are protected. The two parties must
work to successfully achieve the municipal elections
scheduled in the autumn, in cooperation with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). The previously concluded agreements must
also be fully implemented.
If the conclusions reached by the European Council
at its December 2012 meeting are met, by the end of
June new milestones on the two countries' paths to
Europe - including the launching of negotiations
with Serbia on accession to the European Union
and a stabilization and association agreement with
Kosovo - could be reached.

The international community must acknowledge
those positive developments and cast off the paradigms
of a bygone era. Kosovo has now been recognized by
the majority ofthe States Members ofthe Organization,
reflecting the reality of a State that aspires to good
relations with its neighbours and peaceful integration
within its region and to find its proper place in the
international community.

As the European Union, NATO and the OSCE
adjust their presence on the ground, we encourage
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) to do the same with a view to
promoting peaceful conduct, in cooperation with the
Kosovo authorities, while avoiding the undue influence
of those who champion the status quo. In that context,
I wish to thank the Special Representative and the
UNMIK actors for their efforts.

It is also essential that the Kosovo authorities
actively cooperate with the Special Representative of
the European Union, Mr. Zbogar, and the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), as
they carry out crucial work to implement the dialogue
agreements between Belgrade and Pristina and combat
corruption, organized crime and impunity for the most
heinous crimes, including alleged trafficking in organs.
All parties must respect the freedom of movement of
troops and personnel deployed under the Kosovo Force
and EULEX.

France remains committed to the reality of a
sovereign, peaceful, democratic and multi-ethnic
Kosovo living in peace with its neighbours. It believes
that Serbia must become one of the pillars of stability
in the Balkans. Today, we have inched a bit closer to
those two goals.

