Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
thanks you, Sir, for convening this meeting. My
delegation would like to thank Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed,
Mr. O'Brien and Mr. Muhannad Hadi for their briefings
and poignant descriptions that they have provided us
with regard to the situation in Yemen. Their combined
work on the ground allows us to entertain the hope of the
cessation of hostilities, better access to humanitarian
aid and a final political solution.

Senegal regrets the deteriorating situation in the
country and the innumerable lives lost, including
those who died during a funeral procession, which was
targeted on 8 October. We must remind all the parties
to the conflict, including the Houthis and their allies,
their obligation to protect civilians in accordance
with international human rights laws. Unconditional
and uninterrupted access to humanitarian aid must be
provided to all those in need ofit. Once again, we would
like to recall that the challenge to the legitimacy of the
Yemeni Government is at the basis of the crisis. The
conflict has overflowed in the form of missile attacks
on Saudi Arabia in Jeddah and the holy site of Mecca.
Senegal vigorously condemns those missile launchings
and agrees with Egypt that that is a red line, which must
not be crossed.

The political solution remains possible on the
basis of negotiations between the parties, taking into

account the initiative proposed by the Gulf Cooperation
Council, as well as its implementation mechanism, and
in line with Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015).

My delegation would like to condemn the presence
of Da'esh and Al-Qaida in Yemen. We know that
terrorist groups are the only ones that profit from the
instability of countries in crisis, exacerbating the threat
of terrorism throughout the world. My Government
therefore calls on the parties to the conflict, particularly
the Houthis and their allies, to quickly resume in good
faith negotiations and show a realistic attitude and
mutual trust-building, so as to foster the necessary
conditions to end the crisis which has disastrous
humanitarian and security implications.

Senegal urgently calls on the international
community to support the humanitarian action plan
crafted for Yemen aimed at providing humanitarian
assistance, which is vital for millions of individuals. In
the same vein, Senegal encourages the continued efforts
of the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism, taking into account the importance of
resuming port and airport activities so that highly
needed aid, including fuel, gets to Yemen.

In his briefing, Mr. O'Brien stated that there can
be no humanitarian solution to the crisis in Yemen. The
only solution is political. Senegal, together with the
other members of the Security Council, reiterates its
support for the Special Envoy's efforts to find a swift
political solution to the crisis.

