Mr. McNee (Canada) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I thank you, Sir, for having organized this
important meeting. I especially wish to thank Mr. J ean-
Max Bellerive, Prime Minister of Haiti, for his
presence here today. I also acknowledge the presence
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Edmond Mulet, and thank him for having agreed
once again to represent the United Nations in Haiti in
very difficult and challenging circumstances.

Haiti was a top priority of Canada's foreign and
security policy even before the catastrophic
earthquake. Canada is the second-largest donor of
development assistance to Haiti and the largest per
capita donor. Our humanitarian efforts in the aftermath
of the earthquake were Canada's greatest ever in
response to a natural disaster.
The events of 12 January took a heavy toll on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). Still, the Mission has carried on,
contributing invaluably to the relief effort and working
with the Government of Haiti and the international
community to mitigate the effects of the disaster on
Haiti's people.

For that reason, Canada commends
MINUSTAH's efforts and encourages it to continue to
work for the Haitian population alongside the
Government. Given the new reality in Haiti, Canada
believes that MINUSTAH will continue to play a
crucial role as we work collectively to put Haiti back
on track towards long-term prosperity. As the Canadian
Minister of Foreign Affairs stated at the 31 March
conference, our vision for Haiti is that of a country
built on solid foundations of security, sovereignty, the
rule of law, economic prosperity, equality, inclusion
and social well-being.

With the completion of the post-disaster needs
assessment, the donors' conference and the release of
the Secretary-General's report (S/2010/200), we
believe it is time to reiterate our support for the work
of MINUSTAH. Canada welcomes this opportunity to
examine how to best strengthen the Mission's role in
support of the Government of Haiti in achieving this
common vision.

In the immediate aftermath of the 12 January
earthquake, the Council authorized in its resolution
1908 (2010) an increase of 2,000 troops and 1,500
police officers to support urgent recovery,
reconstruction and stability efforts. The Secretary-
General has now recommended an expanded surge
effort to support ongoing relief efforts, prevent the
deterioration of public order and reinforce the authority
of the Government of Haiti. Canada considers the
integrated approach proposed by the Secretary-General
to be an appropriate framework for the conduct of the
Mission over the next 18 to 24 months.
As the Council considers the Secretary-General's
proposals, Canada would like to highlight two
particularly important elements. First, Canada
recognizes the need for interim support to Haitian
institutions and supports enhanced co-location and
decentralization programmes. The Secretary-General
has also recommended that MINUSTAH use its
resources to provide direct logistical support and
technical expertise to the Government of Haiti. Given
the extent of the difficulties inherent in the loss of a
third of the bureaucracy and a significant portion of
State infrastructure, a focused and deliberate approach
to capacity-building is essential.

(spoke in English)

Haitian institutions have suffered a serious blow
at a crucial phase in their development and require
exceptional efforts to maintain their ability to deliver
services for Haitians, particularly outside of Port-au-
Prince. Important work has been done in supporting
Haitian institutions and the progress achieved thus far
need not be lost.

Also, while acknowledging the need to assist the
Government of Haiti in restoring, sustaining and
decentralizing service delivery, the international
community must also recognize the continuing
importance of aligning its support with the priorities of
the Haitian Government. As social and political
stability are restored, Haitian institutions will gradually
reassert their ability to carry out their mandates. In the
interim, the onus is on MINUSTAH and other partners
to engage constructively and preserve the authority of
the host Government.

We must work to keep our activities aligned with
Haitian priorities with a view to transitioning all
governance functions back to Haitian authorities once
the immediate need has passed. We are collectively
committed to building the long-term institutional
capacity of Haiti, not simply the maintenance of short-
term public order. Again, in this way we are well
served by a strong mandate and a dedicated community
of partners.

Canada supports the request for more resources,
including additional police, to strengthen the Mission's
work in Haiti. In this context, Canada would also like
to stress the need to regularly assess the composition of
surge resources to ensure that they remain appropriate
to evolving circumstances on the ground. We look
forward to the Secretary-General's follow-up reports
on the progress achieved during the surge period.

In conclusion, the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti is one of the most important
reflections of the collective commitment of the
international community to Haiti's reconstruction. It is
for this reason that Canada has increased its total
commitment of police officers to MINUSTAH from
100 to 150. We are confident that the gains we saw in
Haiti before the earthquake have not all been lost and
that Haiti is capable of building back better with the
help of the international community.

