Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine is appalled by
the reports of mass atrocities and manhunt campaigns
launched by the Syrian regime and its partners in crime.
Just listen to those Syrians trapped in Aleppo who cry
out,

"We are all praying for rain. When it rains the
planes cannot fly and the bombardment stops for
a short while."

Is that fake, according to the Russian Ambassador?
People seeking refuge are flooding into the area that
is still outside of the regime's control. Thousands are
cramming onto a piece of land of about six square
kilometres. People arrive with three or four children in
tow, fleeing the looming carnage.

The Syrian regime says that it has opened a corridor
for the people towards so-called safety. But local
civilians prefer to face bombs and harsh conditions
rather than the welcoming hands of the Government.
The fact that the Syrian army has already killed half
a million of its own people is indeed a big deterrent.
Things could not possibly look uglier. The worst part is
that it is not as if no one had seen this coming, or could
not have stopped it. It was crystal clear from the very
beginning what the Syrian regime forces and militias
would do to the residents of Aleppo once they captured
the city. It was crystal clear from the very beginning
that sectarian violence and slaughter would take place.

That is why in the past two months members of the
Security Council twice attempted to avert such a course
of events. But all of those efforts were shattered by the
irresponsible position of one ofthe permanent members
ofthe Council, namely, the Russian Federation. We find
that the words of Jan Egeland go straight to the point:

"Syrian and Russian Governments must be held
responsible for the atrocities committed by militias
loyal to President Bashar Al-Assad in Aleppo".

Is that fake too, simply because it has not been
confirmed by the Russian military - who are of course
the most trusted people in the world?

Besides the unimaginable suffering of the people
fleeing the ongoing onslought in Aleppo, we also must
keep in mind disturbing developments around Palmyra,
where the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
is again trying to reassert its presence. An ugly picture
emerges. While opposition forces are being persistently
and mercilessly pounded by the full military might
assembled by Bashar Al-Assad, with the help of his
allies, Da'esh meets close to no opposition on its way
to retake Palmyra.

That raises the question: What are the real priorities
of Damascus and its allies? When will the same amount
of dedication go into fighting against ISIL's forces as is
expended against the opposition forces? It is clear now
that both the Syrian regime and Russia have chosen
to resolve the Syrian conflict militarily. I cannot
remember how many times my delegation has repeated
that. Instead of a cessation of hostilities in Aleppo,
Russia and the Syrian regime are using a Grozny-
style scorched-earth policy. They have to face justice
for their crimes, and for what will come afterwards in
terms of the grave consequences of such brutality.

Words do not suffice to describe the magnitude of
the crimes committed in Aleppo. History will be the
judge. I am sure that the day will come when the Syrian
regime and its accomplices will be sitting in a different
chamber under different circumstances, facing a trial
on all that they have done.

We call once again- I hope in a voice ofunity- for
imposing a sustainable ceasefire in Aleppo to allow
the safe evacuation of the vulnerable and the wounded
from the rubble of Aleppo. We underline yet again
the obligation of all parties on the ground to protect
civilians and abide by international humanitarian law
and human rights law.

