Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like to thank you, Sir, for convening this open
debate, and the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/ 189) on enhancing mediation and its support
activities, submitted pursuant to the presidential
statement of 23 September 2008 (S/PRST/2008/36),
adopted under the presidency of Burkina Faso. We pay
tribute to the report's objectivity with respect to the
importance of mediation as a means of preventing
armed conflicts or of settling them in their early stages,
before they escalate into armed conflicts threatening
international peace and security. That is why this issue
must be addressed at the international level through the
Security Council.

I should also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Lynn Pascoe for presenting the Secretary-
General's report, and to associate myself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of Cuba
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Despite the Secretary-General's intensive efforts
to enhance the United Nations capacity to assume its
mediation responsibilities, the implementation of the
provisions of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1) as an
informal framework for promoting peaceful settlement
has yet to rise to the level of arbitration among parties.
However, the report perpetuates the confusion between
mediation activities aimed at preventing conflicts
through preventive diplomacy, such as good offices
and the facilitation of dialogue and mediation, and the
settlement of disputes and post-conflict peacebuilding
activities.
It is also important to identify the range of
mediation tasks that the United Nations can undertake
while maintaining clear objectives and a time frame
focused on the phase when a dispute among States or
within a State is still at the stage of a difference of
opinions. Such tasks must be undertaken before a
crisis, if not settled, escalates into an international or
internal conflict that threatens international peace and
security and upon the request or the direct approval of
the State or States concerned.

From this perspective, the United Nations and the
Security Council in particular have a major
responsibility in enhancing the trust of Member States
in their capacity to mediate in an objective, transparent
and neutral manner. That responsibility should be
assumed in a way that provides the United Nations
with an exceptional role in this field and in cooperation
and coordination with regional and subregional
organizations and arrangements. That role should
directly influence the sovereign decisions of States,
upon their request and approval, through arguments
and negotiations demonstrating that the parties'
interests can be served through such efforts. Those
efforts must be made in accordance with the principles
of national ownership and in respect for the relevant
provisions of the Charter on sovereignty and regional
security.

This can be achieved not only through the
restructuring of the Department of Political Affairs, the
establishment of the Mediation Support Unit and the
strengthening of its capacity to assume the role for
which it was created, but also by enhancing
international conviction that the Secretary-General and
his seniors assistants, who play the role of mediators,
are starting with a neutral perspective, accurate
information and realistic approaches. They should take
into account all aspects relating to the cultural,
political, religious, ethnic and other causes of
international conflicts, independent of the views and
visions of the Security Council members, in addressing
situations in their early stages. Their work should also
be based on the enhanced independence of the
Secretary-General and his representatives as they
assume their exceptional roles free of all influence.

We in the African Union have accumulated
mature experience in the field of mediation through the
Panel of Eminent African Personalities. The Panel
comprises a number of former leaders known for their
wisdom, impartiality and justice. It meets periodically
to follow up on developments in various African
countries in a manner that allows for an incremental
accumulation of information on disputes that might
arise at different stages, and takes advantage of the
trust that African leaders place in these eminent
personalities. This trust has been built over the course
of years and is founded on the record of achievements
of every one of its members in their country of origin.
The Panel is also founded on its diversity, representing
all African subregions, on the full independence and
absolute impartiality of its members, and on their
awareness of regional developments.

Without doubt, the ability of the United Nations
to mediate between nations is directly linked to its
ability - particularly that of the Security Council - to
deal effectively with conflicts when they arise. It is not
enough for the United Nations to manage crises
without making any real effort to settle disputes. That
has led to the increase of peacekeeping operations to
their current level, which endangers the chances of
dispatching additional such missions in the near future.
In this regard, Egypt believes that there is an organic
link between deploying peacekeeping missions and
attaining peace agreements. We therefore agree with
the Secretary-General observation in his report on the
work of the organization at the sixty-third session of
the General Assembly: that peacekeeping requires that
there be a peace to keep. Accordingly, all parties
should consider the role of the United Nations in
addressing issues of concern at an early stage, before
these issues evolve into conflicts that require
intervention by the Security Council or the dispatch of
a peacekeeping operation.

From that perspective, Egypt emphasizes the
critical importance of strengthening the organic link
between the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council and of deepening
cooperation between those two organs in the field of
mediation. The successes of the two organs can be
enhanced by strengthening coordination in these
activities between the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the African Union Commissioner. From
the same perspective, we stress the centrality of
enhancing the joint mediation efforts of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States on the one hand
and the Organization of the Islamic Conference on the
other, in order to address issues involving Member
States in the same manner in which the international
community has recently been dealing with the case of
Darfur.

The report's consideration of lessons learned
highlights the importance of preventing the repeated
failure of mediation processes in a manner that could
negatively affect efforts to reach a settlement. It also
stresses the importance of coordination among various
United Nations bodies, with due regard for gender
balance in the appointment of mediators; of appointing
appropriate trustworthy personnel to assume mediation
roles; and of ensuring respect for the rules of
international law in dealing with serious crimes,
especially with respect to the scope of application of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.

We accept most of the recommendation set out in
the report, but Egypt observes with increasing concern
the Secretary-General's attempt to finance all the
mediation and mediation support activities through
voluntary contributions, even though this could affect
the neutrality of these efforts and lead to their failure.
Egypt believes that mediation processes have to be
financed through formal contributions to the United
Nations budget and that such processes should be listed
in the Organization's budget among the special
political missions. In this regard, we have previously
suggested the establishment of a special account in
order to avoid calculating such activities as extras in
the budget. We will continue to support this proposal
with a view to its adoption by the General Assembly,
which is the principal organ originally mandated to
deal with budgetary issues.

