Mr. Brattskar (Norway): I speak on behalf of the
Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden,
and Norway.

There can be no doubt that security sector
reform (SSR) is fundamental for conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Its importance is
growing. The absence of professional, sustainable and
capable security and justice institutions is a major
cause of conflict and relapse into conflict. It is also
hampers conflict resolution, stabilization, and longer-
term peacebuilding. Lack of security andjustice affects
individuals in a profound way. It limits their aspirations
and potential, and restrains their ability to lift
themselves out of poverty. A well-functioning security
and justice system is a precondition for development.

The effective delivery of service within a framework
of the rule of law, good governance and accountability
is essential in moving the SSR agenda forward. Human
security must be at the core of those efforts. We attach
great importance to the gender dimension of SSR and
in combatting sexual violence. The United Nations
plays a role in promoting SSR. We have long supported
its normative work on SSR, as well as United Nations
assistance to member States , particularly in countries
affected by violent conflict. We welcome the report
of the Secretary-General on SSR of August 2013
(S/2013/480).

The United Nations has made significant progress
in strengthening its coherence and effectiveness in
support of SSR. We welcome initiatives to strengthen the
cooperation between the United Nations Development
Programme and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in that respect, such as the global focal point.
The Nordic countries congratulate the United Nations
on its new policy on policing in peace operations. We
will continue to support that effort, including in the
African setting.

Integrating SSR principles into broader mechanisms
for engagement, such as civil service reforms, poverty
reduction strategies, mediation, peace agreements and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration design
and implementation is necessary to ensure both the
required political support for SSR and the right type
of platform for medium- to long-term initiatives. We
need to enhance the SSR capacities of United Nations
field missions. The Security Council is responsible for
matching mandates and expectations with the necessary
resources.

Security sector reform is not just purely a technical
activity. It is essentially about building confidence
between the people and those entrusted to protect them.
Support for security sector reform therefore needs to be
better linked to broader transformative processes such
as reconciliation, political dialogue and mediation.
We therefore encourage elevating the importance of
security sector reform as a strategic priority in United
Nations mission structures and operations, including
through the good offices of senior United Nations
officials

There can be no sustainable SSR without national
ownership. Furthermore, we fully agree on the
importance of strengthening regional ownership of
SSR processes. We encourage the United Nations
to develop further its partnerships with regional
organizations, such as the African Union. I take this
opportunity to commend the African Union and the
Economic Community of Western African States
for their engagement in SSR, and we look forward to
continued cooperation. We furthermore appreciate the
work of the United Nations Group of Friends of SSR,
which contributes to inclusive dialogue and coherence.
It is important to ensure that the right sets of skills are
available in all parts of a Government to support SSR
activities. The Nordic countries are considering how
they can contribute to that end.

Lastly, I would like to stress the fact that SSR does
not affect only countries emerging from conflict. SSR
is in fact relevant to any country. Review and reform of
security and justice services should be an integral part
of public policy and good governance in all countries.

