Ms. Batista Diaz (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): The Dominican Republic voted in favour
of resolution 2479 (2019) in the understanding that,
in fulfilling its mandate, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) has
the responsibility to protect the civilian population
because, despite the moderate impact of the events in
Khartoum, in Darfur there continue to be reports of
human rights violations, mainly against children and
women, unresolved intercommunal conflicts, internal
displacements and restrictions on humanitarian access.
Given that situation, the renewal of the mandate until
October makes it possible for UNAMID to continue
fulfilling its responsibility.

The Sudan is in the midst of a political crisis. We
must act with caution and prepare for the possibility of
increased violence. One example is the promulgation
of decree 102, which orders the handover of team sites
to the Rapid Support Forces and the looting of the El
Geneina facilities. Those facilities should be handed
over to civilians. In that regard, we welcome the decision
by the United Nations to suspend the transfer of the
facilities and to pause the reconfiguration process.

Twelve years after the deployment of UNAMID,
we cannot allow the mission to fail. It is crucial for
UNAMID to have a mandate commensurate with the
situation that can be adapted to potential changes. The
time frame allows us, albeit minimally, to rethink the
exit strategy and focus on maintaining the mission's
capacities to protect civilians and monitor human
rights abuses.

The recent events in Khartoum open up a series
of opportunities for an open, civilian-led political
negotiation that is inclusive of women and young
people, facilitates, above all, an accountability process,
brings to justice those responsible for acts of violence
and enables an independent investigation.

My delegation would like to reiterate that the
challenges facing the Sudan must be resolved through
open dialogue in the interests of the well-being of the
Sudanese people.

