Mr. Touadera (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of December. I wish also to congratulate the
Secretary-General on his reappointment to the helm of
the Organization. Allow me to assure him of the
support of the Central African Republic during his
second term in his noble mission in the service of
peace and security in our world, which is today beset
by so many challenges. I wish also to congratulate
Ms. Margaret Vogt for her work at the helm of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the
Central African Republic, as well as for the good
relations between her Office and the Government of
the Central African Republic.

It would be remiss for us not to extend such
words of gratitude to the Chairman of the country-
specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission on the Central African Republic,
Ambassador Jan Grauls, whose commitment to the
Central African cause we wish to recognize.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/739)
that has just been presented generally sets out, with
clarity, precision and concise analysis, a mostly fair
picture of the Central African Republic since last July's
update. We have paid careful attention to the report.
The Government of the Central African Republic,
which I have the honour of leading under the authority
of the President of the Republic, has already noted the
observations contained in the report. It is committed, in
line with its capacities, means and limitations, to
continue the reforms that underpin the recovery of our
country, which aspires to peace, stability and
development but remains very fragile. Allow me,
however, to say that we face numerous challenges that
could severely jeopardize the opportunity for a lasting
peace in my country and the entire subregion.

Since 15 March, the beginning of the mandate of
the second five-year term of the President of the
Republic, while we recognize that much remains to be
done, at the same time we can point to significant
developments on the political level,. An inclusive
Government, whose members are of different and
varied affiliations, with quite a significant number of
women, is doing its utmost to address the pressing
issues of the Central African people. Parliament
operates freely and plays its role in the service of the
nation. On the political level, it is also worth recalling
that a space for dialogue has been established between
the Government and the various national political
families. The same applies to certain bilateral and
multilateral partners.

The recent consultation with the political parties
of the democratic opposition aimed at establishing a
standing body responsible for organizing future
elections, the revision of the electoral code, and
continuing the dialogue with the European Union under
article 8 of the Cotonou Agreement on issues of mutual
interest are, in our View, the paths to follow to ensure a
sustained dialogue as the basis for mutual
understanding, so that, together, we can overcome the

obstacles impeding the recovery of the Central African
Republic.

On the security front, on 12 June the Government
signed a ceasefire and peace agreement with the
Convention des patriotes pour la justice et la paix
(CPJP) armed group, which calls for that group to
accede to the Libreville Comprehensive Peace
Agreement of 2008. In June, the President of the
Republic launched disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) operations that, in their first
phase, enabled the demobilization of more than 4,000
former combatants in the north-west of the country,
comprising largely former rebels of the Armee
populaire pour la restauration de la democratie
(APRD).

DDR operations are ongoing in the centre-north
and the north-east of the country, where the
strongholds of the CPJP and Union des forces
democratiques pour le rassemblement (UFDR) armed
groups were situated. The second disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration phase, like
reintegration, is hampered by a lack of funding, which
could jeopardize all efforts to date.

With regard to security sector reform, while
short-term actions have been successfully launched by
the Central African Government, we must nevertheless
say that medium- and long-term actions requiring the
assistance of our partners will be decisive; they merit
the international community's special attention so as to
expedite the process. The Mission for the
Consolidation of Peace in the Central African Republic
(MICOPAX), which is helping to shape peace and
security in the Central African Republic, should
gradually withdraw in stages by 2013. It will be
replaced by the Central African Armed Forces.

The situation of greatest concern involves the
foreign armed groups and road bandits, the Zaraguinas
or roadblockers, who continue to operate in the north,
carrying out attacks, kidnappings and the extortion of
goods and money and causing the displacement of
people, who have abandoned their villages, homes and
fields with humanitarian consequences that can be
imagined. The most appalling cases to date have been
as a result of the incursions of the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA), led by Joseph Kony, and the presence on
our territory of the Chadian rebel Baba Ladde. They
pose a significant challenge for the Central African
Republic at a time when internal armed groups are
hampering the implementation of the Libreville
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

With regard to the Lord's Resistance Army, the
Government will continue to fight that terrorist
movement on its own and with the assistance of the
subregion, the international community and those
countries that have understood that that barbarous
situations cannot remain the concern of just the few
States that are victim to the crimes of those bandits and
criminals.

This is an opportunity to welcome the initiatives
of the Economic Community of Central African States,
the African Union, the United Nations and the United
States of America, who have been present and
committed alongside us on the ground. Our gratitude
also goes to the organizers of the thirty-third
ministerial meeting of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, held in Bangui from 5 to 9 December. That
meeting not only commended the joint actions of the
States of the subregion aimed at rooting out the LRA
rebellion, but also demanded the departure of the
Chadian armed group of Mr. Baba Ladde, who has
installed himself in the centre of the country and seeks
now to extend his influence to other parts of the
national territory. He must leave the Central African
Republic without conditions, and all legal means will
be used to facilitate his departure from the Central
African territory, starting with dialogue.

Concerning governance and the rule of law, the
Government will continue its efforts in its unwavering
struggle against corruption. The same goes for
improving the business climate by providing some
legal certainty for investment through laws and good
practices drawn up and implemented to promote that
end. Respect for human rights is an integral part of a
democratic State. The State will ensure that respect and
will spare no effort in ensuring access to justice for
those who seek it.

Finally, in this international context of crisis,
where austerity seems to be the order of the day, the
State will do its utmost to maintain and, I would say,
engage in dialogue with our traditional financial
partners, without whom the Central African Republic, a
post-conflict and fragile State, will not be able to curb
the endemic poverty affecting its population.
To conclude my statement, my presence at the
head of a significant delegation from my country in
New York, is testimony to the unequivocal will of the
Central African Government and people to pursue by
every possible means the paths of peace and stability,
prerequisites of any sustainable development. For that
reason, all goodwill, old or new, that can help us along
that path is welcome in order to reach that shared goal.
11-63696
