At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the assumption by your country, the Dominican Republic, of the presidency of the Security Council this month, and I wish you every success. Let me first express our deep gratitude to and total support for all health professionals around the world, and especially those on the front lines, for their enormous efforts and great courage in combating the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which affects all corners of the globe and peoples of all religions and races. The pandemic has claimed hundreds of thousands of innocent lives and left more than a million people infected. The fight against the epidemic requires a transparent, strong, coordinated, broad and knowledge-based global response based on science anda spirit of solidarity. Saudi Arabia is committed to putting up a united front against this common threat. Addressing the epidemic and its interlocking health, social and economic effects is an absolute priority for our country. We are all facing the same battle against one and the same enemy, and it will require close cooperation and effective coordination for us to emerge from this crisis stronger than before. That point was underscored by the virtual summit of Group of 20 leaders, hosted by the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, King Salman Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, on 26 March. At a time when our world is witnessing many unprecedented crises, risks and challenges, and even more so with the spread of the COVID-19 virus, which knows no international borders, and the danger it poses to societies and peoples, especially those under the yoke of occupation and settlement, the Israeli occupation authorities continue to pursue their settlement policy in the occupied Palestinian territory. They do so with total disdain for all international covenants, the four Geneva Conventions and the relevant internationally recognized resolutions, which outlaw settlement- building and prohibit the prejudice caused to civil and public rights and property when settlements are expanded, or when those already in place are legalized. Saudi Arabia categorically rejects all illegal Israeli policies, practices and plans as null and void. That includes recent moves by the Israeli authorities to annex land in and parts of the West Bank, in particular in the Jordan Valley, in an attempt to impose a new reality in the occupied territories. Saudi Arabia also rejects any Israeli move to institutionalize racial discrimination against the Palestinian people and obliterate its national identity, to displace an entire people and to revoke its right to its own land and holy places. Saudi Arabia will continue to defend the cause of Palestine and its people in its quest to exercise its legitimate and inalienable rights, which are guaranteed under international law. For my country, the central pillars of the Palestinian question remain the ending of the occupation, the establishment of an independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital and within the 4 June 1967 border, and a guarantee of the right of return of Palestine refugees. Equally, we attach importance to a comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East as a strategic choice, based on the two-State solution and in line with the international terms of reference and the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002, which provides for the establishment of the State of Palestine within the borders of 4 June 1967 and an end to the occupation of all Arab lands, including the Syrian Arab Golan and Lebanese territory. 89/99 90/99 The time has come for the international community and the Security Council to meet their responsibilities, come to the aid of the Palestinian people and champion its cause by seeing that justice is done and making its dream of building an independent State a reality. It is time to deal firmly with the ongoing practices and violations by Israel of international law and the relevant Security Council resolutions, which undermine any chance of peace and extinguish any glimmer of hope for a lasting and comprehensive peace in a region that has long been plagued by instability. Saudi Arabia has provided support to the Yemeni people in recent years and is committed to fulfilling its duty to all Yemenis, without exception. Accordingly, in spite of the difficulties faced by the world's Governments in tackling the threat of the spread of the coronavirus, my Government has announced that it will support the United Nations humanitarian response plan in Yemen for 2020 in the amount of $500 million, including $25 million in aid to slow the spread of the pandemic Yemen. In order to deal with the outbreak of the pandemic, it is crucial to foster an environment, far removed from military operations, in which the Government of Yemen can put into place effective health policies and initiatives to protect the Yemeni people. My country has gone to great lengths to bring peace to Yemen and worked to facilitate access to the country. It has supported recent efforts by the United Nations to de-escalate the situation, achieve a ceasefire agreement and put in place measures to build trust between the parties in order to end the Yemeni people's suffering and reach a political solution. As a part international efforts, in line with the Secretary- General's call for a ceasefire and for calm so as to make it possible to address the coronavirus outbreak and bring the parties together to reach a political solution to the crisis, the Arab coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen has backed the position of the Government of Yemen by accepting that call and declaring a two-week ceasefire that may be extended. In spite of all of those international efforts to achieve a ceasefire, the Iranian- backed Houthi militia has yet again demonstrated to the international community its lack of seriousness about achieving the peace for which Yemen and its people are yearning. It has carried out terrorist attacks on cities and civilians in my country and has continued its military offensive inside Yemen. It has shown no concern for the urgent need to confront the spread of the pandemic; indeed, it has endangered efforts to pacify the situation. The Coalition, however, has continued to exercise maximum restraint by adhering to its declared ceasefire and supporting the efforts of the United Nations to reach a comprehensive political solution. Nonetheless, Saudi Arabia will not hesitate to resolutely defend its territory and its citizens, in accordance with international law, where its security is threatened. Now more than ever, in circumstances in which the whole world needs to unite to achieve peace and confront a pandemic that makes no distinction between countries or societies, it is high time for the international community, and in particular the Security Council, to shoulder their responsibilities and to act firmly to prevail on the Houthi militia to accept and comply with the ceasefire and engage seriously and constructively with the United Nations in its efforts to arrive at a comprehensive political solution in Yemen in line with the three terms of reference, in particular resolution 2216 (2015). They must also convince the parties that back the rebel militia and are fanning the flames of insurrection, carnage and destruction in the region to put an end to those actions and abandon the subversive policy that they are pursuing in Yemen and other countries in the region.
