Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank Mr. Lubbers for having joined us in the Security
Council and for having undertaken his first trip to West
Africa, a fragile and suffering place that is of the
highest concern to us. His Office has a key and
essential role to play alongside the Security Council in
helping the countries of the region emerge from their
cr1s1s.

The problem of refugees is a human problem, but
it has also become a political one, a stake in the
conflict. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) finds itself
dealing with an essential political dimension that
transcends the humanitarian aspect. It is therefore clear
that we are partners in managing two different but
complementary aspects of this crisis. It is thus fitting
that we hold this dialogue on a regular basis and that
we have a good understanding. I thank the High
Commissioner for having clearly explained his vision
of the situation and the directions that he would like his
Office to take.

Like Sir Jeremy, I have questions and even some
doubts about the cooperation of the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) and of the other rebel movements
in the region, the United Liberation Movement for
Democracy in Liberia in particular. We therefore
question the possibility of organizing a mass voluntary
return that many refugees, such as the 100,000 Liberian
refugees, would certainly like to undertake to their
countries. I would ask Mr. Lubbers' opinion as to how
many can return safely to their country of origin. Of
course, I am thinking above all of the more numerous
refugees from Sierra Leone.

Mr. Lubbers referred to the role of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). I fully
agree with the Ambassador of the United Kingdom in
saying that, having set personnel numbers that are now
too low, UNAMSIL will have to focus its energy on its
mandate. Perhaps, once those numbers will have
increased in a second phase, it may be able to consider
other tasks. A force of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) was considered, with
mandates that evolved as thinking evolved. Mr.
Lubbers mentioned the possibility of assigning the
establishment of a corridor to ECOWAS, but all that is
still uncertain and would warrant a dialogue between
the regional organization and the Security Council on
concrete modalities.

As the Ambassador of Jamaica pointed out, all
this will take time. If we follow that line of reasoning
and focus our attention on the immediate emergencies,
we agree that the voluntary returns cannot be very
numerous. As a result, our duty undoubtedly lies in
helping Guinea to resettle on its territory the very large
number of refugees that it has accepted with such great
generosity for so many years. I believe that our first
duty is to provide more means to Guinea and to
UNHCR in order to continue this policy of generous
welcome while awaiting the desired resettlement of the
majority of refugees in their countries of origin.

I heard Mr. Lubbers' appeal to everyone's
generosity and I will convey his message in the
confidence that he will have a positive response from
France. France has already made a direct contribution
to UNHCR and provided assistance to Guinea. We
intend to pursue this twofold effort in order to help
Guinea ensure that its army is up to the challenges that
lie ahead and its authorities to welcome in safety the
refugees they are willing to accept on their soil. France
also provides direct assistance to UNHCR so that it
may carry out the tasks entrusted to it.

