Mr. Annabi: This briefing will cover the period
since the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, briefed the Council on 3
February. I will cover, successively, the economic and
social situation, the maintenance of law and order and the
security situation, as well as the situation of refugees in
West Timor.

Since Mr. Vieira de Mello's briefing on 3 February,
there have been important developments, including the
signing, on 21 February, of an agreement between the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) and the World Bank concerning a large
community empowerment project. Other developments
have been, of course, the formal hand-over of
responsibility from the International Force in East Timor
(INTERFET) to the military component of UNTAET on
23 February and the visit by President Wahid of
Indonesia on 29 February. The Secretary-General has
already briefed the Council, on 29 February, on his own
Visit to East Timor in the middle of February. There have
been other high-level Visitors to East Timor, including the
President of Portugal and the Prime Minister of Ireland.

Economic and social conditions in East Timor
remain the main and primary concern. Very high
unemployment and high prices continue to pose a threat
to social peace. The situation is reflected in the very large
number of applicants who respond to UNTAET's
recruitment efforts.

A number of efforts are under way to create
employment opportunities. These efforts include 18 quick-
impact projects undertaken by UNTAET for the repair of
local infrastructure in advance of the World Bank's much
larger community empowerment project, under which the
communities will manage their own rehabilitation
projects. Additional projects are being undertaken by
bilateral donors. At the end of February, UNTAET was
providing stipends or salaries to more than 2,500 civil
servants, a number that will grow quickly as a result of
the recruitment of new personnel. A fast-track programme
in education has also grown rapidly and now involves
some 7,000 teachers, reaching over 130,000
schoolchildren.

At present, cash contributions to the UNTAET Trust
Fund amount to a little over $23 million, out of an

 

estimated total of $43 million that will be needed for the
East Timorese administration during the year 2000.

The community empowerment project is of particular
interest. While it deals essentially with the rehabilitation of
infrastructure and support for income-generating activities,
it provides at the same time for the strengthening of the
capacity of subdistricts and villages, through elected
representatives, to determine their priorities and to manage
the implementation of the projects they decide on.

During the very important Visit of President Wahid of
Indonesia to East Timor, it was agreed that the Government
of Indonesia would work together with UNTAET to
facilitate the rebuilding of public records and archives, the
return of cultural artifacts and the reopening of cross-border
trade. President Wahid also agreed to the establishment of
a land corridor linking the Oecussi enclave to the main part
of East Timor. On 4 March, the Indonesian air carrier
Merpati resumed commercial flights between Indonesia and
East Timor. An Australian regional airline has also been
operating flights between Dili and Darwin since the
beginning of the year. President Wahid also confirmed his
Government's agreement to the establishment by UNTAET
of a liaison office in Kupang, West Timor - an office
which actually opened today.

Since the Secretary-General's report to the Council at
the end of January, UNTAET has passed legislation
approved by the National Consultative Council on a number
of important matters. Customs and immigration
arrangements have been put in place and a border service
established to administer those arrangements. A provisional
tax regime has been established, with taxes and duties
levied on imports, exports and the domestic production of
goods. Collection of import duties commenced yesterday,
20 March. Regulations on the licensing and supervision of
banks, on public procurement and on the organization of
the courts have also been issued.

Turning to the law and order situation, the number of
major incidents inside East Timor has recently declined.
Law enforcement, however, is still weak, and Timorese
communities and groups have in some cases attempted to
enforce law and order directly. UNTAET has cooperated
with some of these groups informally, so long as they act
within the law; however, I must report that there have been
some abuses. UNTAET's civilian police is still building up
its strength; as of today, it has a strength of 933, which will
grow to close to 1,000 by the end of this week, out of an
authorized strength of 1,640. Yesterday, the first 50
Timorese were recruited to the newly established Police
Assistance Group. The creation of the Police Assistance
Group is an interim measure pending the development of
an indigenous police force. The Group comprises former
local police personnel, who will assist the United Nations
police but who will have no executive powers, which will
continue to be exercised by UNTAET. As for the new
East Timor police, I am happy to report that the first
group of recruits will begin a four-month training course
next Monday, on 27 March.
UNTAET has issued a regulation establishing a
panel of Timorese and foreign judges to try war crimes
and crimes against humanity. Close to 300 murder cases,
involving 627 victims, are currently under investigation.
Most of these relate to the period between late April and
September last year. UNTAET is currently negotiating
with the Indonesian Government an agreement on
cooperation in such cases, including the exchange of
evidence and access to witnesses.

Turning to the security situation, the handover from
INTERFET to UNTAET's military component at the end
of February went very smoothly. However, within a week
of the handover the military component of UNTAET was
tested, as had in fact been widely expected. The test came
through increased incursions of pro-autonomy militia
members from West Timor. In one such incident, on 5
March, a Villager was killed and another was wounded.
UNTAET troops searched the area and on the following
day, 6 March, found a group of five armed men in a
house. Four of them managed to escape after an exchange
of fire; one was captured and interrogated. There have
also been a number of cases in which weapons were
found on refugees returning from West Timor. UNTAET
has therefore instituted stricter controls in that regard.

UNTAET has reported that, according to information
available to it, elements of the Indonesian armed forces
continued to tolerate and even support the militias in
West Timor. On 9 and 10 March, the Force Commander
of UNTAET together with the Political Director of the
mission visited Jakarta to discuss these incursions from
West Timor with the Indonesian authorities. They
received firm assurances that stern action would be taken
against militia activity, including as regards military
training in and outside the refugee settlements in West
Timor.

As of yesterday, a total of 7,310 United Nations
troops were deployed in East Timor. The remaining
troops are scheduled to arrive by the end of this month,
which will bring the total strength of the military

 

component of UNTAET to 8,600. In addition, UNTAET's
military component includes 200 military observers, 198 of
whom are now present in the territory.

Turning to the refugee situation, a little more than
153,000 refugees have by now returned to East Timor, most
of them returning from West Timor. The Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
estimates that approximately 50,000 more would wish to
return. The total remaining refugee population in West
Timor is currently estimated at approximately 100,000
people. The Government of Indonesia and the High
Commissioner for Refugees are conducting a census to
obtain a more exact number. Primary and secondary
movements of returnees are managed by the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) from the refugee camps
through points of entry to final destination in East Timor.
While there have been incidents of Violence against
returnees, for the most part the return has been effected
with minimal incident, and the reintegration of refugees into
their original communities has been generally smooth.

It is worth noting that persons who supported
autonomy have alsobeen among those who returned. Under
arrangements made by UNTAET, Mr. Joanico Belo, a
senior militia leader, visited Baucau and Los Palos from 9
to 12 March to see for himself the conditions awaiting
returning refugees. He was well received wherever he went
and held meetings with local leaders, who assured him that
refugees returning to these areas would be safe, while those
accused of crimes would be dealt with in accordance with
fair and transparent procedures.

In a similar development, six former Timorese
members of the Indonesian armed forces visited Aileu last
weekend to discuss the return of 59 former soldiers and
their families. They received assurances from the local
leaders that they were welcome, so long as they were
returning not as soldiers but as East Timorese willing to
participate and assist in the reconstruction of the country.

The High Commissioner for Refugees, supported by
UNTAET, has asked Indonesia to adopt a comprehensive
strategy and to allow the refugees to decide whether to
return to East Timor or to be resettled in Indonesia. To
encourage returns, UNTAET has suggested that Indonesia
should publicly commit itself to paying the pensions and
benefits accrued by those East Timorese who had worked
for the Indonesian civil service, even if they return to East
Timor.

Mr. Vieira de Mello is scheduled to Visit Jakarta
again next week to follow up on some of these issues
with the authorities in Jakarta, including of course
regarding the security situation at the border with West
Timor.

UNTAET has been giving thought to what would be
the most appropriate sequence of steps as East Timor
moves towards independence. Rather than trying to
establish a fixed timetable, Mr. Vieira de Mello is
focusing, as requested by the Secretary-General, on
objective benchmarks that will have to be achieved in this
process leading towards independence. This is of course
a complex and politically sensitive undertaking, which
will involve close consultation with the East Timorese.
Mr. Vieira de Mello has reported that this consultative
process has in fact begun in an informal manner. We will
of course keep the Security Council informed as this
process unfolds.

