The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like, at the outset of the meeting, to acknowledge the
presence at the Council table of the Vice-Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Costa Rica, Mr. Rodrigo Carreras, to
whom, on behalf of the Council, I extend a warm welcome.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President (interpretation from Spanish): As this
is the first meeting of the Security Council for the month
of October, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to Mr. Bill Richardson,
Permanent Representative of the United States of America,
for his service as President of the Security Council for the
month of September 1997. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Security Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Richardson for the great
diplomatic skill, good humour and imagination with which
he conducted the Council's business last month. I should
particularly like to emphasize the United States initiative to
hold an open debate on Africa last month, which lends a
political framework to our debate today.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone


The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Nigeria and Sierra Leone, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jonah (Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Gambari
(Nigeria) took the seat reserved for him at the side of
the Council Chamber.


The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/1997/777, which contains the text of a draft resolution
prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: S/ 1997/776,
letter dated 7 October 1997 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council;
S/1997/499, letter dated 27 June 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, transmitting the
text of the final communique issued at the meeting of the
Foreign Ministers of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) on the situation in Sierra
Leone on 26 June 1997; S/ 1997/646, letter dated 15
August 1997 from the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the
Permanent Mission of Nigeria to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the text of the Declaration of the ECOWAS
Committee of Four on Sierra Leone of 30 July 1997; and
S/ 1997/695, letter dated 8 September 1997 from the
Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting the text of the final communique of
the ECOWAS summit held in Abuja on 28 and 29 August
1997 and the decision on sanctions against the junta in
Sierra Leone issued at the summit.

The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Sierra Leone, on whom I now call.


