Mr. ngowe (Botswana): Let me first of all convey
to you, Sir, the congratulations of my delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council this
month. I wish you every success in your work. I also wish
to thank Ambassador Qin Huasun of China for the excellent
manner in which he guided the work of the Council last
month.

My delegation regrets the decision of the Government
of Iraq to deny United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) inspection teams access to two Republican
Guard facilities in Baghdad that UNSCOM. had designated
for inspection. This is not completely new. Iraq has in the
past denied UNSCOM. inspection teams access to certain
sites and facilities on the grounds of their sensitivity in
terms of the national security, sovereignty and pride of Iraq.
While on previous occasions the teams were ultimately
allowed access to those sites, the difference is that for the

 

first time, Iraq has not only flatly denied access to the
sites in question, but it has also insisted that no
inspections would be allowed to take place at any
facilities Iraq may consider sensitive to its security and
sovereign concerns. This Iraqi disposition towards
UNSCOM. calls into question the commitment of the
Government of Iraq to the full implementation of Security
Council resolutions.

My delegation fully appreciates the sovereign and
national security concerns of the Government of Iraq, but
it is equally important that Iraq should comply with the
resolutions of the Security Council. My delegation would
therefore like to appeal to the Government of Iraq to
cooperate with UNSCOM. and to allow the inspection
teams immediate and unrestricted access to all sites
designated for inspection. We do not believe compliance
with Security Council resolutions necessarily violates the
sovereign rights and national security interests of Iraq. To
the contrary, there is merit in Iraq's cooperating with
UNSCOM. and, by so doing, complying with Security
Council resolutions, in that UNSCOM. would speedily
complete its work and thus pave the way for the
modification and ultimate lifting of the sanctions regime.
An overly sensitive position on sovereignty and national
security is not in the long-term interests of Iraq, according
to this reasoning.

Iraq has in the recent past declared its readiness to
work and cooperate fully with the Special Commission in
addressing outstanding issues on biological, chemical and
missile weapons programmes without let or hindrance.
We welcomed this Iraqi decision and foresight. The
present Iraqi actions, however, create a deficit between
Iraq's declared intentions and the translation of those
intentions into concrete action on the ground. It is the
wish and hope of my delegation that Iraq can cooperate
with UNSCOM, so that the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council can be speedily implemented, thus
making it possible for the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities under their appropriate provisions.

It is for all these reasons that my delegation voted in
favour of the resolution we have just adopted.

