The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council welcomes the
briefings by the Chairmen of the Al-
Qaida/Taliban sanctions Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), the Counter-
Terrorism Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) on
the work of the three Committees.

"The Security Council reaffirms that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
peace and security and that any acts of terrorism
are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivations, whenever and by whomsoever
committed.

"The Security Council also reaffirms that
the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons, as well as their means of
delivery, constitutes a threat to international
peace and security, as stressed in resolution 1540
(2004). The Security Council recalls its grave
concern at the risk posed by non-State actors that
attempt to develop, acquire, manufacture,
possess, transport, transfer or use nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons and their means
of delivery.

"The Security Council welcomes the
adoption by the General Assembly on 13 April
2005 of the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, by
consensus.

"The Security Council stresses the different
mandates of the three Committees. The Security
Council reaffirms its call for enhanced
cooperation among the Committees, as well as
their respective groups of experts, in monitoring
States' implementation of provisions of the
Security Council resolutions relevant to the three
Committees, and invites the Committees,
including their respective groups of experts,
further to strengthen their cooperation through
enhanced information sharing, coordinated visits
to countries and other issues of relevance to all
the three Committees. The Security Council also

invites the three Committees to continue

cooperation with the working group established
pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004).

"The Security Council recalls the obligation
of Member States to report to the three
Committees in a timely manner on steps they
have taken or intend to take to implement
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540
(2004) and related resolutions, and encourages
the three Committees to consider, if appropriate,
how to deal with late submission of reports to
these Committees in a coordinated manner.

"The Security Council reaffirms that the
responsibility for implementing the Security
Council resolutions relevant to the mandates of
the three Committees, including preparation of
reports to the respective Committees, rests with
the States. The Security Council encourages
international, regional and subregional
organizations to enhance their efforts to further
their members' implementation of these Security
Council resolutions, and further encourages such
organizations, as well as States, where
appropriate, to provide technical assistance to
enhance the capacity of States to implement these
resolutions.

"The Security Council welcomes the
important contribution made by relevant
international, regional and subregional
organizations in the fight against terrorism and to
ensure that non-State actors do not develop,
acquire, manufacture, possess, transport, transfer
or use nuclear, chemical and biological weapons
and their means of delivery. The Security Council
encourages the three Committees to further
strengthen the cooperation with such
organizations.

"The Security Council further welcomes the
important contribution made to the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) by the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team established pursuant
to Security Council resolution 1526 (2004) in
application of its mandate annexed to that
resolution; to the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) by
its experts; and to the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) by the Counter-Terrorism

the

Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
established by resolution 1535 (2004), and notes
with satisfaction the completion by the CTED of
its first field mission to a Member State as
contemplated by resolution 1535 (2004).

"The Security Council invites the CTC to
pursue its agenda as set out in the work
programme for the CTC's fifteenth 90-day period
(S/2005/266). It encourages all parts of the
United Nations to do their utmost to ensure that
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate becomes fully operational in the
shortest possible time.

"The Security Council also invites the 1540
Committee to pursue its undertakings as provided
in its first trimestrial programme of work,
approved by the Committee on 22 April 2005.
The Security Council welcomes the submission
by 113 Member States of reports so far on steps
they have taken or intend to take to implement
resolution 1540 (2004) and calls upon States that
have not yet submitted such a report to do so as
soon as possible. The Security Council welcomes
the recruitment of experts of the Committee and
notes that they have begun to support the
Committee in the consideration of the first
reports submitted by Member States pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).

"The Security Council invites the three
Committees to continue reporting on their
activities at regular intervals and, where
appropriate, in a coordinated manner."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2005/16.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.30 pm.
