Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): Allow me, Mr. President, to
congratulate you and your team, for your leadership of
the Security Council this month. I would also like to
commend the members of the Permanent Mission of
the Russian Federation for a job well done during their
presidency last month. We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

While the sun was setting and many Palestinians
were readying themselves for prayers and breaking
their fast, Israeli jetfighters and frigates and tanks
broke the peacefulness and pounded the Gaza Strip.
Over the past 15 days, more than 600 Palestinians have
been killed, more than 3,600 injured and more than
100,000 displaced. Sixty-four mosques, eight medical
centres and hundreds of houses have been destroyed.
Apparently, that is how Israel chooses life for the
Palestinian civilians in Gaza.

Time and again, we have heard about the so-called
right to self-defence. Based on the figures I have just
mentioned, it looks like self-help. Some might ask:
Who will defend the helpless in Gaza?

The territory of the State of Palestine is being
devastated by the continuing occupation and, more
particularly, by the growing illegal settlement activity.
Jerusalem is being deprived of its inclusiveness and
diversity.

The civilians in the West Bank are being subjected
to systematic security searches, massive arrest, the
illegal demolition of homes and collective punishment,
in blatant violation of Israel's obligations under
international law, human rights law and international
humanitarian law.

How many mothers should be bereaved and how
many more youngsters should be assassinated? How
much longer should the Gaza Strip and its civilian
population be punished by the imposed blockade, the
rainfall of shelling and the repetitive punitive Israeli
military strikes in order for the Council to condemn
and put an end to those barbaric actions?

The atrocities on the ground should serve to
summon the political will in all Council members to
adopt a draft resolution to immediately end the Violence
against civilians. In that context, Lebanon hopes that
the efforts led by Egypt and supported by the Secretary-
General and other officials in the region or visiting the
region will yield the much needed ceasefire that ends
the suffering of thousands of civilians.

We also support the call by President Mahmoud
Abbas to ensure international protection for the people
and territory of the State of Palestine. We agree with
the Secretary-General on the need to address the root
causes of the conflict. In that regard, we think that
the international community should finally translate
its commitment to the peace process into action,
in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference and the
integral provisions of the Arab Peace Initiative.

Since the adoption of resolution 1701 (2006), my
Government has reaffirmed its commitment to the full
implementation of said resolution. Today, and in light
of the latest developments in the south of Lebanon,
my Government stands firm against any attempt to
destabilize the situation. Need I recall that the Lebanese
Minister of Foreign Affairs clearly rejected the rockets
launched by outlaw individuals and marginal groups?
Need I recall that the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF)
arrested their perpetrators? Need I also recall that the
LAF and the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) continue to work relentlessly to maintain
stability?

Notwithstanding these endeavours, Israel launched
more than 100 shells into the south of Lebanon,
undermining the joint efforts of the LAF and UNIFIL
and endangering their safety. We therefore lodged a
complaint, asking the Security Council to condemn
in the strongest term the Israeli bombardments, which
constitute a blatant breach of resolution 1701 (2006)
and a clear violation of the sovereignty of my country.
Furthermore, more needs to be done to ensure the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). Indeed,
Israel should immediately end its occupation of the
northern part of Al-Ghajar, the Sheba'a Farms and the
Kfar Shouba hills. Israel should end its almost daily
violation of Lebanon's airspace, and Israel should
refrain from any unilateral action that could lead to
escalation.

Ross Mountain, the United Nations Humanitarian
Coordinator in Lebanon, has said:

"When you have 50,000 or 100,000 refugees in
the country, it is a refugee emergency. When you
have a quarter of the population of the country now
arising and one-third estimated by the end of this
year it is a national calamity."
Moreover, my country cannot cope alone with this
situation, particularly since the host communities
have reached their breaking point. The international
community should do more through the provision of
direct assistance to the Government agencies and by
fulfilling the pledges made at the donors conference. It
is alarming that only 29 per cent of the response plan
for Syrian refugees living in Lebanon has been funded.

Furthermore, burden-sharing is a principle that we
collectively need to uphold, and we reiterate our call
for the intensification of efforts to increase the number
of refugees included in resettlement programmes. Most
importantly, serious efforts should be made to widen the
humanitarian space to accommodate Syrian refugees
in safe zones in Syria or in camps along the border.
In this context, my Government will remain engaged
with the international community to ensure a well-
calibrated approach to the issue of the Syrian refugees
in Lebanon, based on the principles ofinternational law
and the need to maintain stability in the country.

We commend the Security Council for adopting
resolution 2165 (2014) and welcome the Secretary-
General's appointment of Mr. Staffan de Mistura. We
hope that similar consensus will emerge around a
much-needed mission of the Security Council to the
neighbouring countries hosting refugees from Syria.
Said mission would allow a first-hand account of the dire
situation of those refugees and their host community,
and highlight the urgent need to find a political solution
to the conflict in Syria. Maybe during that mission, the
members of this body will meet Ahmad, a 10-year-old
boy who fled Syria to Lebanon in 2013. Ahmad dreams
of building a time machine that would take him to a
time when there will be a solution to the conflict and
peace in his country - a time that will allow him and
many other Syrian children to go back to their homes
and schools and regain their lost childhood. It is time to
heed the call of Ahmad and millions of Syrian people.

