Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix, Chairperson Mogae and
Ms. Mueller of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for their very candid and sobering
briefings to the Council this afternoon.

We remain deeply concerned about the security
and the humanitarian situation in South Sudan. The
Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities, Protection
of Civilians and Humanitarian Access, signed on
21 December, offers some hope that an end to the
fighting is within reach. We hope that opportunity will
be fully grasped.
Ending the seemingly unbreakable cycle of
conflict, displacement and hunger endured by the
people of South Sudan will require leadership, courage
and commitment. The time has now come for the
violence to end once and for all. We strongly condemn
all violations of the peace agreements reached between
the parties, and we call on all parties to immediately
and unconditionally implement their obligations in
good faith.

We welcome the fact that the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism has been able to conduct timely
investigations and to report on violations of the
agreements. The United Nations Mission in South
Sudan should do what it can to support that effort. I
am proud to say that the European Union has decided
to support the Mechanism with more than €5 million.

The international community and the countries
of the region have expressed their determination to
ensure that the parties abide by their obligations and
responsibilities. That determination has been clearly
voiced both by the Council in its presidential statement
of 14 December (S/PRST/2017/25) and in the African
Union Peace and Security Council communique
of 20 September last year, quoted here earlier
this afternoon.

We commend the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development for its preparation of the High-Level
Revitalization Forum, as well as the support provided
by the African Union. The conclusion of its first phase,
with the cessation of hostilities agreement, shows
that constructive dialogue and compromise have the
potential to yield progress. But as we have previously
stated, the Forum represents a unique window of
opportunity to reinvigorate the peace process. To grasp
this opportunity, all parties must recognize that only a
political solution can bring the conflict to an end.

It is imperative that the Council continue to stand
unified behind the High-level Revitalization Forum,
not least in view of the start of the second phase,
which will be tasked with addressing some of the most
difficult and contentious issues. The legitimacy and
future achievements of the Forum will depend on the
transparency and inclusiveness of the process. In this
regard, the full and effective participation of women
is crucial, as is the active participation of civil society.

As we have heard, the humanitarian and human
rights situation in South Sudan remain very serious,
threatening the lives and undermining the dignity of
millions. Violations and abuses of international human
rights law and violations of international humanitarian
law, including attacks on hospitals and schools, the use
of access to food as a weapon of war, the recruitment
of children and horrifying levels of sexual and gender-
based violence are unacceptable and must come to an
end. We welcome the steps taken so far to establish the
hybrid court, which will act as a strong deterrent against
atrocity crimes. I must say that we really appreciate and
support the efforts of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the humanitarian agencies
and actors, and we fully agree with the call made here
this afternoon by Ursula Mueller on the parties to
fully respect international humanitarian law, including
humanitarian access, as well as the call on all of us
to step up our humanitarian response in line with the
demands on the ground.

The millions of South Sudanese caught up in this
brutal and futile war have waited for more than four
years for an end to the conflict and an opportunity to
rebuild their lives and their country. The High-level
Revitalization Forum has opened a space for peace,
reconciliation and recovery. All parties must now fully
engage and take this opportunity to set South Sudan on
the path to sustainable peace and to end the suffering of
the South Sudanese population.

