Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
United Nations peacekeeping plays an important role
in maintaining international peace and security. China
supports efforts aimed at improving the performance
of United Nations peacekeeping operations, enhancing
mandate-delivery capabilities and strengthening
safety for peacekeepers. China therefore voted in
favour of resolution 2436 (2018), just adopted by the
Security Council. China would like to highlight the
following points.

First, improving peacekeeping performance is an
important aspect of efforts aimed at strengthening
United Nations peacekeeping, which requires joint
efforts on the part of the Security Council, the
Secretariat, troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and
peacekeeping missions. The Secretariat and the civilian
component of missions, needs to provide more efficient
and high-quality support to ensure peacekeeping forces
are able to deliver on their mandates. Due regard should
be given to the real needs of TCCs, especially those
from the developing world, in order to support their
capacity-building in peacekeeping.

Secondly, peacekeeping operations should abide
by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and adhere to the basic principles
of peacekeeping, namely, the consent of the parties
concerned, impartiality and the non-use of force,
except in self-defence and defence of the mandate.
Peacekeeping operations should focus on the central
tasks of maintaining peace in order to create conditions
for the political settlement of conflict. Peacekeeping
operations should respect the sovereignty of the
countries concerned, heed their views and assist in
their capacity-building efforts.

Thirdly, in devising a peacekeeping mandate, the
Council should take into consideration the full spectrum
of factors, including the realities and needs of the
countries concerned, and the capacities and conditions
ofpeacekeeping missions so as to ensure the mandate is
clear, realistic and achievable, while allowing for timely
adjustments to the priorities and key tasks at each stage
in response to local dynamics. It is important to fully
use the strength and role ofregional organizations, such
as the African Union, and to strengthen information
exchange and policy dialogue with a View to forging
synergies with United Nations peacekeeping.

The meeting rose at 3.25 pm.
