Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): Allow me
to begin by thanking Mr. Valentine Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
his briefing and report (S/2019/843, enclosure) on
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as
Ms. Selma Korjenie for her briefing.

As evident from the High Representative's briefing
and report, the continued disagreements by the political
parties has negatively impacted the fulfilment of the
5+2 agenda, established by the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board. In addition, the divisive,
provocative and nationalist rhetoric contributes to
undermining the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the State.

South Africa therefore calls on all parties to
recommit to the formation of an inclusive Government
without delay and in line with previously agreed
commitments. In that regard, we also call on all parties
to respect the rule of law and the legal instruments
that underpin the political structures in the country.
That includes swiftly taking the necessary steps to
harmonize the constitutions of some cantons with the
national Constitution.

As my delegation has stated before, direct political
dialogue among parties is critical in order to resolve
outstanding issues. We call for constructive and
open dialogue among all the communities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. In addition to those engagements,
continued cooperation and talks among the various
Bosnian structures and the High Representative is
also of great importance. That is the only way to make
progress in finding agreement on matters vital to
all communities.

I would also like to commend High Representative
Inzko for his continued dedication and efforts in
ensuring that the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
retain ownership of the political processes in line with
the work of the Peace Implementation Council.

In conclusion, South Africa encourages all parties
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to recommit to the full
implementation of their obligations under the various
peace accords and agreements. Political will and
national ownership over this process is essential to
making progress towards long-term peace, stability
and reconciliation for all the people and communities
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

