Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank Ambassador Takasu for
introducing the twelfth 90-day report. His briefing
revealed quite clearly the extent of the Iran's deliberate
violations of the sanctions arising from resolutions
1737 (2006), 1747 (2007) and 1803 (2008), as
reaffirmed by resolution 1835 (2008).

The serious violations are accumulating:
Monchegorsk, ANL Australia, Hansa India and now
Francop. These ships represent a true flow of arms and
other dangerous material that is designed to destabilize
fragile regions and to perpetuate conflicts. The regular
shipments originating in the port of Bandar Abbas
probably represent only the tip of the iceberg. Almost
all of those violations involve the Islamic Republic of
Iran Shipping Lines.

We have to understand the consequences. States,
ports, charter companies and captains must be alerted
to the risks they are being made to take. We shall not
be satisfied with simply writing letters that go
unanswered, which merely compounds violations of
the law with disdain for those who administer it.
09-642 1 7
Moreover, even more serious is the fact that Iran
has placed itself in a dangerous deadlock. Since 2003,
we have tirelessly sought to open negotiations with
Iran. We have stepped up our efforts and proposals, and
for several months now we have involved the United
States at the highest level in order to engage Iran in
dialogue. That country has responded to none of our
proposals.

The most recent offer - one of emblematic
cooperation involving Russia and France - proposed
enriching Iranian fuel abroad in order to operationalize
the Tehran research reactor. The International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) guaranteed the operation. That
was a unique opportunity to build trust. Iran refused.

Even more serious, on 25 September a
clandestine uranium enrichment site of a size and
configuration clearly inappropriate for civilian use was
revealed to the IAEA. Iran had not declared that site, in
violation of its Safeguards Agreement and of Code 3.1
thereof, as confirmed by the latest report of the
Agency. That is a new, major affront to the trust of the
international community. Everyone is now wondering
how many other sites there are in Iran.

Given the gravity of the situation, on
27 November the Board of Governors at the IAEA
adopted and transmitted to the Security Council, for the
first time since 2006, a specific resolution on Iran. That
resolution urges Iran to respect its obligations. It
demands that Iran suspend work at the clandestine
Qom site and provide full access and all documents in
order to shed light on the origins of that site. It also
demands that Iran confirm in writing that there are no
other clandestine sites. The Agency had already made
that request in writing on 6 November, and Iran did not
respond. The resolution also demands that Iran apply
the transparency measures requested of it under Code
3.1, an obligation for Iran under its Safeguards
Agreement that it illegally and unilaterally rejected.
Finally, the resolution asks Iran to resolve outstanding
issues with the IAEA, which the Agency considers to
be essential in order to provide credible assurances that
there is no military programme in Iran.

Iran's reaction to the adoption of that resolution
of the IAEA Board of Governors was to announce the
construction of 10 new uranium enrichment sites. It
goes without saying that, in the absence of a nuclear
reactor, having 10 new enrichment sites makes no
sense within the framework of a civilian nuclear
programme.

We find ourselves most reluctantly at a turning
point. This week, the heads of State and Government of
the European Union will meet in Brussels. They will
take stock of month after month of Iranian refusals to
negotiate. If Iran continues to do its utmost to violate
five Security Council resolutions, to reject the slightest
confidence-building measures, and to refuse dialogue
and transparency after the major revelations that have
just been made, we must draw all the necessary
conclusions and move on to a new resolution involving
sanctions. Let us be prepared to do so. France, for its
part, is prepared. There is no longer any reason to wait.

