The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Singapore for the kind words she
addressed to Colombia.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.

I have listened with interest to the opinions
expressed during the course of this debate. They reflect
the concern of the Secretary-General and the
representatives of the States Members of the
Organization at the excessive accumulation and
uncontrolled circulation of small arms and light
weapons in many regions of the world. They also
recognize the close link that exists between the illicit
trade in these weapons and several of the principal
problems currently facing the international community,
such as terrorism, organized crime and trafficking in
drugs and precious minerals. All them also recognize
the grave humanitarian and socio-economic
consequences of this scourge and the serious threat it
poses to international peace, security and stability.

It could not be otherwise. In the past decade
alone, the use of small arms and light weapons has
caused the death of millions of people, mostly
civilians, including 2 million children. It was also
responsible for 6 million persons seriously wounded or
permanently disabled, and contributed to the forced
displacement of approximately 20 million people.
Some 40 per cent of the 500 million small arms and
light weapons circulating throughout the world are
believed to have been diverted into the illegal market
and to have fuelled both old conflicts and those that
have erupted since 1990, particularly in the developing
countries. Many of these countries earmark more than
10 per cent of their annual gross domestic product for
controlling this illicit trade and for treating the victims
of armed conflicts.

It is ironic that most of the conflicts in which
small arms and light weapons are used take place in the
developing world, while most of those arms are
produced in the developed world. This terrible irony
requires the application to the global trade in such
weapons of a principle that has already been accepted
in the fight against drug trafficking: the principle of
shared responsibility. We must all resolutely confront
this problem and seek solutions that apportion
responsibility in a balanced way, with a view to
preventing, combating and eradicating the illicit trade
in these weapons.

The United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, held here in New York last month and over
which Colombia had the honour of presiding, marks a
first step in this direction. At that Conference, a firm

commitment by Member States emerged - as
expressed in the political declaration and the
Programme of Action - aimed at preventing,

combating and eliminating this trade at the national,
regional and global levels, including measures both for
securing international cooperation and assistance and
for the follow-up to the Conference.

Progress was also made towards defining
important elements in the fight against this scourge,
such as the marking and tracing of arms, as well as the
monitoring of exports, surpluses and intermediaries in
their legal trade.

Regarding the arms embargoes imposed by the
Security Council, the countries that participated in the
Conference pledged to adopt all appropriate measures
to ensure their effectiveness and to cooperate with the
United Nations system in the strict enforcement of
those embargoes. The Security Council was urged to
take into account, in the mandates and budgets of
peacekeeping operations, activities related to the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
armed actors. The Conference also reached agreement
on the elaboration and implementation, at the national
level, of effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes that include the collection,
control, storage and destruction of small arms and light
weapons.

I should like to avail myself of this opportunity to
express, on behalf of my Government, our deep
gratitude to all the delegations members of the Council
that have made mention of the efforts of Ambassador
Camilo Reyes, who, with the cooperation of
participating countries, was able to make the
Conference a significant first step in a process within
our Organization that will undoubtedly take many
years.

As President of the Security Council, Colombia
favours an approach to the problem of small arms and
light weapons that gives priority to those cases in
which their availability and illicit trade help to create
or exacerbate situations of conflict that are under
consideration by the Council. I invite the Council to
collectively assume concrete responsibilities in this
area in order to ensure that these conflicts do not
escalate, to maximize the possibilities of finding
political solutions to them and to consolidate a true
culture of peace and prevention in the United Nations.

We realize that because of its scale, the problem
of small arms is beyond the reach of any individual
effort. Nevertheless, its dimension cannot be an
obstacle for us in promoting concerted action at the
global, regional and national levels, with a View to
preventing and combating this scourge by fully
applying the principle of shared responsibility, which I
mentioned a moment ago. My country has been
committed to this process since the 1980s, when, with
the support of several other countries, it submitted to
the General Assembly the first draft resolution on the
subject. At the regional level, we were active
participants in the negotiations on the Inter-American
Convention against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and
Other Related Materials, a legal instrument whose
importance is widely acknowledged by the
international community. Lastly, as I have already
mentioned, we presided over the recent United Nations
Conference, the only global process that has been
undertaken in this field.

Now, speaking as a member of the Security
Council, I wish to state that Colombia stands ready to
help this organ to fully assume its responsibility and
make a true difference in the treatment of the question
of small arms and light weapons in those situations that
are under the Council's consideration.

I will offer some preliminary ideas to add to those
already presented and to those that will be expressed
during the course of this debate, all of which will be
very useful for advancing the Council's actions in this
area.

My first recommendation concerns the need for
an effort to be made to systematize significant
experiences that exist in the fulfilment of international
commitments related to the question of small arms and
light weapons. This should be done with a view to
compiling the best practices in such a way that they can
be used as a reference by the Security Council or by
the Secretariat. The difficulty of obtaining accurate
information on the availability of small arms in
situations of conflict that engage the Council's
attention means that any positive documented
experience would be of great value. The Council may
wish to invite the Secretary-General to coordinate such
an effort in order to draw upon the opinions of staff
members in the field and of interested States that are
willing to share their own experiences.

It is also essential for the Security Council to
complement and reinforce regional initiatives. My
second recommendation goes in this direction. The
Council should promote a continuous dialogue with
regional organizations, particularly those in Africa, to
mutually support their work in this field. The
declaration by the Economic Community of West
African States of a moratorium on the importation,
exportation and manufacture of light weapons in West
Africa is a case that illustrates this need. The region is
making a tremendous effort to prevent the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons, but the mechanism
could be made even more effective if the Council helps
to prevent arms suppliers from violating the
moratorium.

A third recommendation concerns the need to
provide the Security Council with accurate information
on the question of small arms and light weapons
whenever it considers a particular situation. The
Secretary-General should be given a clear mandate to
include in his reports a detailed section on the question
of small arms so that it can be considered as an integral
part of the treatment of conflicts. It is therefore of
critical importance to develop a methodology that
allows the Council to react to this phenomenon, for it is
a principal source of political instability and a direct
and real threat to the civilian population.

It is also necessary to emphasize the transnational
character of the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, which knows no territorial, political or
ideological frontiers. Consequently, as a fourth
recommendation, and bearing in mind that many of
these weapons originate in countries and regions where
armed conflicts have been overcome, it is a matter of
urgency that the Council assist in halting this trend by
adopting strategies to thwart the activities of traffickers
and criminals.

The fifth recommendation has to do with the need
for closer cooperation among States for the destruction
of surplus weapons in the possession of States, the
voluntary collection of small arms and the confiscation
of illegal weapons. This cooperation may include
border control operations involving both police and
customs authorities.

Lastly, as a country affected by the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons, Colombia wishes to
express its solidarity with Africa, the region of the
world that is most severely affected by this scourge,
and to pay it a well-deserved tribute for the role that it
played during the just-concluded Conference.

We have highlighted the growing concern of the
international community over the consequences of
uncontrolled proliferation for peace, security and the
social and economic development of many countries
and regions, and for the well-being of their peoples. I
therefore appeal to all Member States of the United
Nations to join the fight against this scourge by fully
implementing the principle of shared responsibility,
and in particular to the Security Council to forge ahead
in the decisions that should be adopted in this area in
connection with matters that are within its competence.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Peru. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

