Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by warmly thanking Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs Mark Lowcock and Executive Director of
UNICEF Henrietta Fore for their very enlightening
interventions. I also thank the Peruvian Chair of the
relevant Committee for his briefing. Today I would like
to focus on three points in particular.

First, I would like to strongly reaffirm France's full
and complete support for the tireless efforts of Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths, as well as Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard, with whom we will have a discussion later.

We welcome the announcement by the United
Nations of the commitment to redeploying forces
from the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa.
Lieutenant General Lollesgaard was on the ground to
verify that redeployment. Such developments are an
encouraging signal for the full implementation of the
agreements concluded between the Yemeni parties. We
have every confidence in the United Nations teams that
will monitor the redeployment, which is part of the first
phase of the plan agreed by the parties in Stockholm.
We call on both sides to respect their commitments
without seeking to exploit the initial redeployments.

At the same time, we strongly condemn yesterday's
drone attacks on Saudi oil facilities, claimed by the
Houthis. Such attacks are unacceptable. We call on
all parties to refrain from any escalation that could
jeopardize the implementation of a political solution to
the Yemeni conflict and remain concerned about the
ongoing threat of arms transfers.

While encouraging the efforts under way, we must
remain particularly vigilant and mobilized. Much
remains to be done. In that regard, we reiterate our
support for the United Nations Mission in Support
of the Al-Hudaydah agreement, deployed in January.
Its presence on the ground is crucial to monitoring
and facilitating the redeployment, as provided for in
resolution 2452 (2019). That is to say, it is essential to
strengthen the United Nations presence on the ground. In
that context, it is important that the remaining observers
provided for in the Mission's mandate be able to arrive
quickly. It is up to the parties to ensure the security and
free movement of United Nations personnel.

However, the relative holding of the ceasefire in
Al-Hudaydah must not allow us to lose sight of the
seriousness of the situation in the rest of the country.
This will be my second point. We remain seriously
concerned about the continuing deterioration of the
humanitarian and security situations. The intensity
of hostilities has increased throughout the rest of the
country. I am thinking in particular of Al-Dhale'e
governorate, which is facing a worrisome military
escalation. At the same time, as Mark Lowcock and
Henrietta Fore recalled, the already tragic humanitarian
situation is worsening, in particular with an increased
number of displaced persons.

I would like to reiterate our full support for
humanitarian workers, United Nations personnel and
civil society, who are working tirelessly with exemplary
courage to alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni
population and who themselves must be protected.
It is crucial and urgent that humanitarian access and
the delivery of commercial goods be guaranteed by
the parties. More than 24 million Yemenis need that
assistance and the risk of famine as well as a resurgence
of the cholera epidemic is increasing. It is essential to
overcome all obstacles to such access, in particular
bureaucratic ones.

The World Food Programme at last has access
to the Red Sea Mills, which is good news and proves
that it is possible for the parties to act responsibly
to meet humanitarian needs. We also hear Mark
Lowcock's appeal, which is essential: pledges must be
honoured in a timely way in order to respond to the
humanitarian emergency.

I would like to emphasize our particular concern
about the situation of children in Yemen. Children not
only are among the first victims of the conflict but also
continue to be recruited and used on a large scale. We
must therefore step up our efforts to protect children
in the Yemeni conflict. To that end it is imperative
to protect schools and to encourage teachers and
educational staff to continue or to resume their work
under good conditions. In that regard, I would like to
commend the essential work done by UNICEF, under
the leadership of the Executive Director, which has for
example made it possible to rehabilitate six schools
in Lahj and to pay more than 100,000 teachers and
educational staff in 11 governorates in a few months. I
would like to echo the appeal made by Ms. Fore.

Finally, and I will conclude with this point, let us be
well aware that resuming the political process as soon
as possible is inseparable from the ongoing efforts and
remains the priority objective. It is therefore crucial
that the parties maintain their engagement with the
Special Envoy and Lieutenant General Lollesgaard and
play a responsible and constructive role.

The initial results in Al-Hudaydah should make
it possible to recreate a positive momentum towards a
political solution and to establish, or re-establish, bonds
of trust between the parties. In that context, a military
solution is, more than ever, not an option.

The resumption of a dialogue on a comprehensive
and inclusive political agreement that takes into
account the diversity of Yemeni political and civil
society actors is the only real prospect for ending the
conflict and the resulting humanitarian crisis. After
having unanimously adopted resolutions 2451 (2018)
and 2452 (2019), the Council must do its utmost to
promote the momentum initiated in Stockholm. Our
collective mobilization and the genuine unity of the
Council in supporting the efforts of the Special Envoy
are our greatest asset on that path. Let us use that unity
as a driver for peace.

