Mr. Santos (Mozambique): My delegation would like
to convey to you, Sir, sincere congratulations on your
deserved assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January.

We would also like to extend our congratulations to
your predecessor on the excellent manner in which he
guided the work of the Security Council during the month
of December.

As I take the floor in this body for the first time this
year, I would like to welcome the new members of the
Council and assure them of my delegation's readiness to
cooperate with them in the next two years. Let me also
seize this opportunity to congratulate the outgoing
members on their excellent contribution to the work of
the Security Council during their mandate.

The report of the Secretary-General and the
statement just made by the Permanent Representative of
Angola give us reason for cautious optimism with regard
to the peace process in that sister country.

The approval by the Joint Commission of a timetable
committing the Government of Angola and UNITA to
completion of the remaining tasks in the implementation
of the Lusaka Protocol may represent a turning point on
the way to the conclusion of the process under the
"Acordos de Paz".

It is encouraging to note that the will of the Angolan
people, the peoples of region and the international
community is prevailing and that UNIT A is now
persuaded to join in the efforts aimed at bringing about
peace and stability in Angola.

We should also recognize the fact that the progress
in the Angolan peace process is to a large extent due to
the decisive and constructive role played by this body in
bringing the process onto the right track. The Security
Council has not only remained seized of the situation in
Angola but has taken decisive steps to prevent the
derailment of the process.

We are equally encouraged by the information
contained in the Secretary-General's report, according to
which tensions have decreased between the parties
throughout the country, registration and disarmament of
residual military personnel has been formally concluded
and demobilization is in progress.

However, our optimism is cautious, because the
experience of the recent past has not been very
reassuring, and we are concerned over the information
that UNITA is still regrouping some of its military
personnel. We do not understand the motive behind such

 

actions, which may undermine the confidence being built
between the parties.

We would also like to see an accelerated normalization
of State administration in UNITA-controlled areas and the
completion of the transformation of Radio Vorgan into a
non-partisan broadcasting facility. In this regard, we urge
the Government of Angola, and in particular UNITA, to
complete, in accordance with the new calendar they have
agreed upon, the implementation of the remaining tasks of
the Lusaka Protocol by the end of February 1998.
The challenges ahead are mammoth but not
insurmountable. The international community should
continue to persevere in its efforts to provide the necessary
support to the peace process. Some of the challenges facing
the Angolan people today will go beyond the conclusion of
the peace process as such. These include reconciliation,
which entails not just reconciliation among leaders of the
parties but also, and perhaps most importantly, reconciling
families, communities and the entire people of Angola. The
reintegration of the demobilized soldiers is of paramount
importance in order to make sure that returning to war is
not an alternative for their livelihood. Demining is a
concern of equal importance, for it will allow for the
resettlement of people in their areas, and allow them to
produce.

The Angolan people are anxious to devote their energy
and efforts to these challenges of national reconciliation,
reconstruction, democracy and economic development. The
country is endowed with rich natural resources which will
allow the Angolan people to develop and prosper. We trust,
therefore, that the international community will continue to
lend its indispensable assistance.

It is within this context that my delegation supports
the recommendation contained in the report of the
Secretary-General proposing the extension of the mandate
of the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola, thus
enhancing confidence-building and helping to create an
environment conducive to long-term stability, democracy,
reconstruction and development.

In conclusion, we wish to renew our appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his continued commitment to the
Angolan peace process, and to his Special Representative
for his positive contribution. Our appreciation is also
extended to the members of the troika for their positive role
in the Angolan peace process.

