The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I thank
the French Government for initiating today's debate,
which follows the Security Council's visit to the Sahel.
I also thank the Ministers of the States members of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) for their
presence today.

Allow me to pay tribute to the three Chadian
Blue Helmets of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
who died on Thursday, as well as to their wounded
colleagues. I commend their courage and dedication
to restoring peace and security to Mali. Their sense
of sacrifice compels us to urgently find solutions to
help us combat terrorism in Mali, while ensuring the
security and safety of MINUSMA contingents.

The situation in the Sahel challenges us all. Poverty,
underdevelopment and climate change have contributed
to the humanitarian and security crises. The weakness
of institutions and the exclusion and marginalization of
some groups are exploited by extremists and terrorists.
Porous borders facilitate trafficking in human beings,
drug and arms trafficking and other criminal activities.
The recent deadly attacks on Nigerian gendarmes and
American soldiers, as well as the unremitting attacks
on the Malian defence and security forces, MINUSMA
peacekeepers and Force Barkhane soldiers, illustrate
the scale of the security threat.

The humanitarian crisis is deteriorating. Nearly
5 million people have been displaced and 24 million
need humanitarian aid. Birth rates are among the
highest in the world, yet millions of Sahelian children
do not have access to health care and do not go to school.

Given the urgency of the situation, we must come
up with innovative actions in support of the G-5 Sahel's
efforts not only in the security field, but also in the
areas of development and governance. Time is not on
our side. We must urgently align our efforts in order to
remedy the root causes of instability in the region. The
creation of the Joint Force demonstrates the willingness
of the countries of the G-5 Sahel to cooperate closely in
order to jointly address the threat.

Today, we have the opportunity to support them
and, together, reverse the course of events. We owe it
to the people of the Sahel. We also owe it to the States
of the G-5 Sahel, which have taken that courageous
initiative. At the time of their appeal, I supported the
creation of a force with long-term financing and a
mandate commensurate with the threats it would face.
We owe it to all those who have paid with their lives.
Their selfless commitment against the terrorist threat
and peace in the Sahel compel us.

Given the rapid evolution of the situation and
the risks of widespread spillover, failure to act could
have serious consequences for the region and beyond.
Therefore, I invite the Council to be ambitious in the
choices it has to make. Strong political support for
the G-5 Sahel and material and operational support
commensurate with the current challenges are essential.

The Security Council has four options, as set out
in my report (S/2017/869). The United Nations could
quickly mobilize essential support, complementing
the work of bilateral partners. Such support would
not only serve to reinforce the Joint Force of the G-5
Sahel, but would also help to mitigate the threats that
directly affect MINUSMA. Like MINUSMA, the Joint
Force will operate in support of the Malian peace
process. The two forces are deeply complementary
and mutually reinforcing. But only the comprehensive
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali could restore the State's authority
and stability. I renew my appeal to the signatory parties
to accelerate the implementation of the Agreement and
its key institutional reforms.

During my last informal meeting with the Council,
I had the opportunity to share my opinions and
preferences. Naturally, whatever the Council decides
to do, the Secretariat will do its best to support the G-5
Sahel within the framework defined by the Council.
That support to the Joint Force would also be part ofthe
strategic partnership to strengthen African responses
to crises on the continent. When we talk about strategic
partnership, it must ensure mutual commitment
accompanied by guarantees, criteria and indicators of
success agreed by the countries of the G-5 Sahel and
international partners.

The countries of the G-5 Sahel have set specific
goals and made remarkable progress towards
achieving them over the past few months, be it in the
elaboration of a concept of operations, bringing certain
domestic instruments and normative frameworks into
conformity, or the provision of national resources and
the mobilization of regional and international partners.
All of those efforts demonstrate the political resolve
to define a strategy and take the steps necessary to
implement it. However, certain aspects should be
further clarified and consolidated.

With that in mind, Ihave presentedrecommendations
to strengthen the political leadership of the Joint
Force and its integration into the African peace and
security architecture. Ihave also suggested introducing
transparent and credible monitoring and follow-up
mechanisms that could strengthen the legitimacy and
the political framework of the Joint Force, as well as
the support of the region and its partners. In particular,
it is essential to establish control mechanisms to ensure
respect for human rights and international humanitarian
law in the context of military operations. The African
Union and the United Nations can support the G-5 Sahel
in establishing adequate monitoring systems, with the
support of partners, including the European Union.
In that regard, it is urgent to define the modalities of
cross-border prosecutions, arrests, detentions, legal
proceedings, risk reduction and the broader protection
of civilians. I encourage States members of the G-5
Sahel to work to finalize the concept of operations
and to clarify the objectives and timing of the force
generation of the Joint Force.

Security cooperation in the Sahel is essential, but
only a multidimensional response can end instability.
I have instructed the Deputy Secretary-General to
coordinate and revitalize the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. We must together strengthen
our efforts in favour of governance, development and
resilience. To that end, at the Brussels Conference
in December, we will present an investment strategy
for the region, and I hope to be able to count on the
support of all our partners. I would also like to call
for greater coherence among the various national,
regional and international initiatives in place. Only
an effective presence and a strengthening of the rule
of law will make it possible to ensure the continuity
of these initiatives. In such a difficult and complex
context, it is also important to support the efforts of
humanitarian staff and agencies working to promote
sustainable development.

Since I took office, prevention has been my
absolute priority. In the Sahel, this means preventing
the region from falling into a state of chaos, which
could have dangerous consequences for the continent
and the world as a whole. I therefore call for a win-win
partnership and a framework of shared responsibility
that will formalizes our mutual obligations so as to
address the root causes of the crisis.

