Mr. Carmon (Israel): Mr. President, I would first
like to thank you for convening this important meeting
and for your leadership of the Council this month. On a
personal note and since this is Israel's last intervention
in the Council for the month of June, I wish to
congratulate you personally on your many years of
remarkable diplomatic service to your country and to
the international community.

This year marks a decade since the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict has been on
the Council's agenda. During this period, there has
been progress in some vital areas, such as child
recruitment, and we have also seen an increased
awareness of the horrific consequences of sexual
violence used as a tool in conflict. In spite of these
advances, it is clear that other areas of concern
stubbornly resist our efforts to make improvements. In
response to these continuing challenges, and using the
spotlight of this anniversary, it is now an appropriate
time for stocktaking.

In this regard, we look forward to the
forthcoming study jointly commissioned by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations
on the protection of civilians mandates of peacekeeping
missions. The Secretariat and Member States should
carefully consider its findings and conduct a
meaningful review of strategies found to have fallen
short of expectations. More resources might also be
devoted to replicating, where appropriate, elements of
protection mandates that have proven successful.

In its latest report, the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations recognizes the important role
of the Secretariat in promoting protection activities in
peacekeeping, particularly relating to children and
gender. Israel supports the progressive enhancement of
mission activities in these areas, including through the
strategic deployment of child protection advisers. We
also endorse the addition of grave sexual violence to
the triggers for the listing of parties on the Secretary-
General's annexes related to children and armed
conflict.

I would like to turn to the recent report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
(S/2009/277), a document that contains a number of
deficiencies and inaccuracies that must be addressed
here. We were dismayed to find that the report does not
acknowledge the Hamas terrorist organization's actions
against civilians of my country. It does not note that for
eight consecutive years those terrorists subjected the
southern part of my country to a ceaseless barrage of
rockets and mortars fired from Gaza into Israel,
terrorizing, maiming and killing Israeli civilians.

Israel's civilians - men, women and children -
are not accidental casualties. Hamas, in the old terrorist
tradition, deliberately targets Israeli civilians and has
proudly acknowledged that strategy on a number of
occasions. Those actions, which provoked last winter's
military campaign, should have warranted at least a
brief mention in the report, but they did not.

During those months, the majority of the
international community acknowledged the perilous
humanitarian situation of the citizens of southern

Israel. The very least OCHA should do in a report
entitled "The protection of civilians in armed conflict"
is to acknowledge that humanitarian problem. If the
authors of the report do not consider the daily
bombardment of Israeli civilians an issue related to the
protection of civilians, then what is? We demand a
clarification of that omission.

Moreover, the report ambitiously verges on
drawing judicial conclusions concerning international
humanitarian law, although it is unclear on what
mandate, expertise and procedure those are based. The
report makes no mention of Israel's extraordinary
efforts to avoid civilian casualties or of its
implementation of the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF)
own operational standard procedures in the aftermath
of any military operation. As part of its normal
practice, the IDF has conducted five in-depth
investigations concerning the recent conflict. These
reflect Israel's democratic oversight, which ensures
rigorous attention to Israel's laws, as well as those of
the international community.

Not only does the report omit any mention of
Hamas's terrorism perpetrated against Israeli civilians,
but its weak treatment of Hamas's terrorism practised
against Gaza's civilians is inexplicable. It is troubling
that, in the face of overwhelming evidence, the report
finds only that concerns exist as to whether Hamas
used civilians as human shields. In that regard, it is
worth noting that the most recent report on children
and armed conflict (S/2009/158) found that Palestinian
families were too terrified of Hamas retribution to
speak publicly against the group's use of Gaza's
children. It is regrettable that the current report on the
protection of civilians does not see fit to mention that
fact. Moreover, while clear evidence exists of Hamas's
cruel misuse of civilian infrastructure, contrary to the
most basic humanitarian values, the report shies away
from addressing that practice in an appropriate manner.

The report is fundamentally flawed. It is flawed
for its omissions, it is flawed for its errors and it is
flawed for its selective use of language. With those and
other deficiencies, the report does not help civilian
protection, which the report acknowledges is
increasingly challenged by asymmetric conflicts
involving States with obligations, on the one hand, and
non-State armed groups, on the other. In spite of that
recognition, the report fails to seriously address the
actions of non-State parties who have made a mockery
of the concept of protection of civilians.

Many States around this table, as well as in the
wider membership of the Organization, know exactly
what terrorism is all about. They have paid the terrible
price levied by terrorism and have decided to confront
this phenomenon. Like Israel, they have felt the
importance and urgency to protect their own citizens,
which is the primary obligation of any responsible
State. They also know the difficulty of confronting this
new enemy, which considers innocent civilians to be
legitimate targets. None of those States would tolerate
a politicized, unjust and biased treatment of its struggle
against terrorism. Neither does Israel.

Let me stress that the issues contained in this
statement have been addressed to our Secretariat
colleagues in the past two weeks, highlighting the
deficiencies of the report. We understand that we were
not the only ones to have done so, to say the least. We
also understand and trust that coordination within the
Secretariat will improve in the future and that
misrepresentations will not be repeated, thus avoiding
futile politicized semantics, wrong accusations and
deliberate omissions.

In conclusion, Israel will continue to seriously
address the issue of the protection of civilians in a
constructive manner. For Israelis, as victims of
terrorism, the protection of civilians is not a theoretical
exercise; it is a reality that we have been grappling
with for over 60 years. It is unfortunate that, on a daily
basis, terrorism presents us with the dilemma arising
from the need to uphold human rights while protecting
civilians on all sides. Israel takes the issue to heart,
whomever it concerns and wherever they may be. We
expect substantial improvements in future reports so that
the international community can engage in a relevant,
accurate and in-depth debate on this important issue.
