Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative Tanin for his briefing. I also welcome
Ambassador Citaku and Deputy Prime Minister Dacic'
back to the Council again.

I want to begin by congratulating the representatives
from Serbia and from Kosovo on their success in the
recent Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro. The athletes
did incredibly well, securing gold medals and no
doubt making the countries and the region very proud
in the process. As the Ambassador has said, Rio was
quite special for Kosovo. For the first time, athletes
competed under the Kosovo flag at the Olympic
Games. Thanks to judoka Majilinda Kelmendi,
Kosovo brought home its first-ever medal, and a gold
one at that. That shows that Kosovo is not only a real
contender on the international sporting stage, but also
that it is increasingly and irreversibly integrating into
the international community. Kosovo's membership in
the Union of European Football Associations and the
Federation Internationale de Football Association only
serve to reinforce that point. We should all welcome
their progress.

I begin with that point because I want to contrast
that positive, hopeful vision of Kosovo with the negative
assessments that are so often shared in the Council
every three months. We often hear in the Chamber
about the numbers of people protesting in the streets of
Pristina, but we should also hear about the thousands
who came out to celebrate Majilinda's return - the
thousands who filled the streets in the hope for a better
future for their country. Steps have been taken in this
reporting cycle to help seize that future.

First, we welcome the progress made on the
Specialist Chambers. Coming to terms with the past is
a vital part of building a future for all in Kosovo. So
we are pleased that a Registrar for the court has been
appointed and that a Chief Prosecutor will be appointed
soon.

Secondly, we welcome the return of the opposition
to the Assembly. That is an important step, one that
must be met with a sustained commitment to dialogue
rather than a return to tear gas and protests.

Thirdly, we welcome the downsizing of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and the increasing transfer of responsibility
to Kosovo for its own rule oflaw. It will be important to
get the transition period right and to continue to build
the capacity of the Kosovo authorities through focused
monitoring, mentoring and advice.

Challenges remain, of course. We are concerned
that the dialogue has stalled. It needs new energy so
that the benefits of the normalization of the relations
between Kosovo and Serbia can be realized for all. I
hope both sides can draw some hope from the literal
bridge-building that is ongoing in Mitrovica. But for all
the challenges, we also need to gain some perspective.
This week, the Council has discussed the horrifying
situation in Aleppo, the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and yet another missile launch by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Yet we find
ourselves again in the Chamber debating an issue that
has no need to be on the Council's agenda.

Ambassador Citaku has already given the example
of the fight that took place over a car parking space.
That clearly is not a threat to international peace and
security. It is not the only odd inclusion. Is a peaceful
protest by taxi drivers or stone-throwing really worth
reporting to the Council? While the United Kingdom
has the utmost respect for UNMIK and the Special
Representative, the inclusion of such low-level incidents
detracts from the important reporting that UNMIK
is carrying out. Therefore the United Kingdom once
again calls again for a reduction both in the number of
these meetings and of the reports. Not only will that
allow UNMIK to provide better substantive reporting
from UNMIK, but the Council can focus on other more
pressing issues.

As I have said on previous occasions, we have to
accept that discussions in this Chamber exist in a bygone
era where Kosovo's independence, its sovereignty and
its very existence are still questioned. We need only
look to the Olympics to see that that era is over. Instead,
ordinary Kosovars now look to Majlinda Kelmendi to
begin a new golden era. Let us all help Kosovo seize
that future rather than drag it back to the past here in
New York.

