Mr. Guehenno: I welcome the opportunity to
introduce the Secretary-General's report on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). This report covers pivotal events over the
last three months that not only mark a great
accomplishment for the people of Kosovo, and for the
international community, but also open the door to new
opportunities for all parties in Kosovo.

Since UNMIK's inception in 1999, the
international community has worked with the people of
Kosovo to create the institutions and the conditions on
the ground to establish provisional self-government.
Over the last three months we have come closer to this
goal.

On 17 November 2001, Kosovo-wide elections
were held in a generally peaceful environment. With
the institution-building pillar of UNMIK and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) in the lead, the elections were well organized
and executed both within and outside Kosovo. As the
report points out, the elections did not result in one
party having the necessary majority in the Assembly to
form a Government without entering into a coalition.

The focus of UNMIK's work prior to the
elections had been on convincing the Kosovo Serb
community that only through participation in the
legitimate institutions of provisional self-government
can their grievances be adequately addressed and
progress be forged. The signing of the Common
Document in Belgrade on 5 November 2001 by Special
Representative Haekkerup and Serbian Deputy Prime
Minister Covic was an important step in engaging the
Kosovo Serbs.

The Common Document elaborated on UNMIK's
past and present efforts in creating the conditions
necessary for effective participation in the provisional
institutions of self-government. The Document also
created a basis for a cooperative relationship with the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The
Common Document establishes a high-ranking
working group, which will include members of the
provisional institutions of self-government, thus
creating direct contact between Kosovo's leaders and
leaders in Belgrade. The high-ranking working group
has already met once and is scheduled to meet again
today.

The report elaborates on some of the steps listed
in the Common Document that have already been
taken, including the promulgation of a regulation on
transparent and non-discriminatory recruiting
procedures in the Civil Service and the creation of the
Office of Returns and Communities in the office of the
Special Representative.

UNMIK continues to work to create an
environment in which Kosovo's minority communities
will feel secure in participating in public life. The high
level of Kosovo minority community participation in
the elections is evidence of some success in this
endeavour. The fact that there were no serious security
incidents on election day is a tribute to the people of
Kosovo and to the security elements, including the
Kosovo Police Service, UNMIK police and KFOR. The
Kosovo Police Service was charged with, and has
successfully executed, providing security for the
Assembly members within the Assembly building.
Special arrangements were made for the protection of
the 22 Kosovo Serb members' travel to and from the
Assembly building.

Overall, the last three months had been relatively
calm until the very sad incident that I have to report to
the Council. On 17 January, Mr. Ismail Hajdaraj, an
Assembly member of the Democratic League of
Kosovo (LDK), was murdered in the Pec region.
UNMIK strongly condemned the act. On the initiative
of the President of the Assembly, a commemorative
ceremony was held on 19 January. UNMIK police have
launched a thorough investigation into the matter. At
this point, the motivation behind the killing is unclear.

The inaugural Assembly session, held on 10
December 2001, was successful in constituting the
Assembly and in electing a President of the Assembly.
However, progress in electing the President and Prime
Minister of Kosovo, and in thus forming a
Government, was not made at either the 13 December
2001 or the 10 January 2002 Assembly sessions. The
Assembly has not met since 10 January, and the
deadlock in forming a coalition persists. UNMIK and
interested members continue to impress upon the
various actors the importance of an early solution to
the current stalemate.

UNMIK has also laid the administrative
groundwork necessary to restructure its own
organization to complement the eventual establishment
of provisional self-government. The majority of
UNMIK staff in Pristina vacated their offices in the
Assembly building, and buildings were prepared to
make space for the new institutions. The 20 Joint
Interim Administrative Structures were consolidated
into nine Transitional Departments. These Departments
will become ministries as soon as a Government is
formed. International staff will continue to serve in the
ministries with a role progressively changing from
executive to advisory. Directorates have been
established for Civil Protection, Administrative
Affairs, Infrastructure Affairs and Rural Affairs to
discharge the powers reserved to the Special
Representative. At the municipal level, UNMIK
administrators have been handing over responsibility to
the local authorities, including Kosovo Serbs and other
members of Kosovo's minority communities.

UNMIK continues its efforts to bring the Kosovo
Serbs and other minorities into the legitimate structures
of the provisional institutions of self-government. The
Regional Administrator in Mitrovica is establishing an
UNMIK office in northern Mitrovica. A more active
and robust approach by UNMIK and KFOR towards
the so-called bridge-watchers has helped decrease the
level of violence in northern Mitrovica and appears to
have undermined some of the support for the so-called
bridge-watchers.

With regard to the economic reconstruction of
Kosovo, several important developments have taken
place. The 2002 budget was drawn up with the aim of
ensuring that recurring expenditures can be met by tax
revenues generated domestically. In order to make this
possible, new wage and profit tax regulations have
been prepared for introduction this year. The currency
conversion from the deutsche mark to the euro
proceeded smoothly. UNMIK's strategy to minimize
the need for cash exchanges by encouraging the people
to open bank accounts has been successful. The
challenge still remains for the European Union-led
pillar on economic reconstruction to solve the power
problem plaguing Kosovo.

While we can look back at tangible achievements,
it is apparent that a great deal still needs to be
accomplished with the support of this Council and the
European Union, the OSCE and all the Member States
contributing to UNMIK.

Finally, I would like to inform the Council that
the Secretary-General has taken a decision on the
appointment of a new Special Representative and that a
letter is on its way to the Council.

