Mr. Arnault (spoke in French): As this is the
first time I am briefing the Council, allow me to begin
by warmly thanking the Council for its confidence in
me, shown by its support for the Secretary-General's
decision to appoint me his Special Representative for
Afghanistan, for its strong support for the extension of
the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in its most recent resolution
on that matter, resolution 1536 (2004).
(spoke in English)

A few months separate us from the holding of the
national elections that will mark the end of the
transitional Government. I would like therefore to
focus my briefing on the main challenges confronting
the country in the preparation of that event. In keeping
with the format of previous Security Council briefings,
and in view of the critical impact of security conditions
on the political process, I would like to begin this
briefing with a review of the security situation in the
country.

In his latest report on Afghanistan to the Security
Council, last March (S/2004/230), the Secretary-
General observed that insecurity in Afghanistan
continued to follow a well-known pattern. The most
recent United Nations security map bears that out, with
little change in the identification of low-risk, middle-
risk and high-risk provinces. Within that pattern,
however, the situation has evolved negatively in recent
months in the more risky areas - and particularly in
the south - with a tangible increase in the number of
incidents and in the number of resulting casualties.

That increase is consistent with the spring surge
in extremists' attacks, which the coalition had been
expecting. The modus operandi - anti-Government
forces operating in small groups of 10 to 20 men and
targeting Afghan police, the Afghan National Army,
the civilian administration, non-governmental
organizations and Government representatives - also
confirms the shift in the strategy of the Taliban and
other groups that was observed last year. According to
the coalition, various extremist groups are involved,
including Taliban operating in the south, foreign
fighters in the south-east and Hezb-i-Islami/Hekmatyar
in the east.

At the same time, one must be cautious in
establishing responsibility for events taking place in
the south, east and south-east. Drug-related violence is
an important factor of insecurity. Militias involved in
combating the Taliban are also widely believed to be
responsible for a high percentage of incidents in the
areas where they operate. A recent attack against an
electoral assessment mission in the south-east turned
out to have been organized by the local border brigade
commander, perhaps in connection with criminal
activities. In addition, in the context of ongoing
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes, there have been warnings that
commanders targeted by DDR would get involved in
incidents aimed at creating a perception of a security
vacuum.

Many of these factors are also present in other
parts of the country. In particular, the province of Farah
has become increasingly insecure as a result of
rivalries among local factions. In the north and north-
east, tensions between the Jumbesh and Jamiat factions
remain high following clashes that took place in March
in the provinces of Faryab and Balkh. However,
deployments there, and in Herat, of the new Afghan
army have had a stabilizing impact and have prevented
further escalation.

In Kabul, even though no deadly suicide
attacks - like those directed against the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) last winter - have
taken place another ISAF patrol was attacked last week
with rocket-propelled grenades, causing the death of
one Norwegian soldier. Earlier, a rocket landed at ISAF
headquarters, fortunately without fatality. In addition,
in recent weeks the number of arms caches uncovered
by ISAF has been increasing, and multiple signs of
heightened anti-Government activity have appeared,
indicating that the spring surge under way in much of
the country may be ongoing in the country's capital as
well.

While the aid community continues to keep a low
profile in insecure areas in order to reduce its
vulnerability, the expanding voter registration
process - to which I will come back later - has been
affected by the overall increase in incidents. So far,
four attacks have taken place against registration
teams, involving improvised explosive devices - one
in the south, one in the north-east and two in the
east - fortunately, in all those cases, without fatalities.
In addition, grenade attacks took place in the province
of Wardak and two improvised explosive devices were
found in Logar, near a registration site, last week. It is
still unclear, however, whether those attacks have been
directed against the electoral operation per se or
whether they are intended, like many other similar
attacks, against Government targets.

The level of violent opposition to the electoral
process is therefore still difficult to gauge, but
precautions are, of course, being taken, as registration
is now pushing into the rural areas. In particular, very
close coordination has been developed with coalition
forces. The deployment of a new United States Marines
unit in Uruzgan and Zabul has allowed access to the
registration process in areas that until now have been
forbidden to internationals. The coalition has now
reorganized its forces into three regional commands
that cover the territory as a whole and that liaise with
electoral authorities to allow registration to take place.

I will now turn to voter registration and the
electoral process. Upon completion in April of voter
registration in the eight major population centres, the
process entered its second and final phase, which is to
cover the rest of the country over the next couple of
months. The second phase started with 160 sites in
early May and has now expanded to almost 600 sites in
31 of the 34 provinces, with more than 1,000
registration teams operating simultaneously.

Since the beginning of May, close to a million
people have been registered, which brings the total
number of registered voters today to 2.7 million.
Contrary to initial expectations, the participation of
women has not dropped as voter registration expanded
beyond the main urban centre.

After a slow start between December and March,
women's registration has picked up in the past two
months, accounting now for between 37 per cent and
38 per cent of registrations over that period. However,
we also have to take into account the fact that
significant under-registration of women continues in
the south-east and east, where women account for less
than 30 per cent of registrants.

As mentioned earlier, with the active support of
the coalition, the high-risk provinces of Uruzgan and
Zabul, which have been off-limits to international
agencies for two years, are now open to registration,
though on a reduced scale, and we hope to expand to
the remaining high-risk provinces of Paktika and
Nuristan in the coming days.

In order to meet registration targets, further
expansion is planned in the short term, from 600
currently to approximately 800 sites by 1 June. This is
needed to enable voter registration to achieve the
minimum required cruising speed of at least 75,000
registrations per day.

Although the process is well under way, a number
of concerns remain that I would like to share with the
Council. I have already mentioned the problem of
security and the distinct possibility that insecurity
could lead to under-registration in some provinces. The
figures today are revealing: altogether, the nine
provinces of the south and south-east represent a mere
12 per cent of registered voters. If that pattern should
last, it will give rise to a second issue - namely, that
of a lack of balance in registration between various
provinces. Ultimately, under-registration in one
province relative to another should have little impact
on the outcome of the elections to the Lower House,
since the number of seats for any one province will be
based on population estimates rather than registration
figures. But registration figures will still have an
impact in terms of creating a perception that some parts
of the country have been - perhaps deliberately -
disenfranchised. Much is riding, therefore, on
providing to unsafe areas of the south an equal
opportunity to participate in the electoral process.

Another challenge relates to the determination of
population figures themselves. Indeed, under the new
Electoral Law, the figures that will be used to define
the number of representatives per province will be
based on a current survey done by the Central
Statistical Office. Unfortunately, again due to
insecurity, it is now quite likely that the provinces of
Zabul, Helmand, Paktika and Uruzgan will not be
surveyed, or only very partially. Based on the trends
identified in the country as a whole, census experts are
still confident that they can produce fairly reliable
figures for those four provinces, but, again, given the
sensitivity involved in all matters related to
representation, that lack of survey is also bound to
compound the suspicion already created by low
registration figures.

A third challenge is, of course, funding. The voter
registration process itself is almost fully funded, with a
shortfall of just $2.6 million, but the election itself is
only partially funded, to a very limited extent. To date,
the figures are as follows: of the $107.8 million needed
to cover presidential and parliamentary elections as
well as out-of-country registration and voting, as well
as security, only $66.1 million were pledged at the
Berlin conference in April, and only $27.7 million
have been secured so far. This creates a particularly
serious problem for refugee voting, which I will come
back to later.

Following lengthy debates within the Cabinet and
the Joint Electoral Management Body, the Electoral
Law has now been finalized. The main point under
discussion has been the role of political parties during
the transitional election. Because the creation of
single-member constituencies for all 240 seats in the
future Lower House was not an option, at least for the
Transitional Government, the point of departure for the
recently adopted electoral system is the establishment
of multi-member constituencies based on the
boundaries of the current provinces.

Some have argued that, in order to promote
multi-party democracy, it was advisable to encourage
existing political parties to serve as intermediaries
between the voters and their representatives in
Parliament through the creation of party lists. Others
feel very strongly that the electoral system should not
rely on political parties - which still have a largely
negative image in public opinion - and should, on the
contrary, promote a direct relationship between voters
and their representatives in Parliament. The latter view
has prevailed, and the current law places political party
representatives and independent candidates on the
same footing. The system chosen - the Single Non-
Transferable Vote - has the merit of being simple to
explain and fairly simple to operate, but it also tends to
spread the vote widely among candidates, leading,
therefore, to a potentially very fragmented
representation in Parliament. In order to try to contain
those disadvantages, some prerequisites for the
nomination of candidates have been included in the
Law which are meant to mitigate the problem of
fragmentation. As to the representation of women, the
Electoral Law ensures compliance with the
constitutional requirement that, on average, two
women per province be elected to the Lower House by
providing that the best- performing women will
automatically get the seats that the provincial quota
requires.

A few words now about local elections and also
about refugee participation in the elections. In
February of this year, it was agreed that the elections to
be held in September would include only the
presidential election and elections to the Lower House.
Local elections, it was agreed, would take place in a
staggered way over a period of six months, and the full
Upper House would be constituted soon after. This, it
turns out, was a wise decision, since the settlement of
disputes concerning district boundaries - obviously, a
precondition for local elections - has not yet been
completed and is likely to take quite some time.

I referred briefly to the issue of out-of-country
registration and voting. It is hoped that a final decision
will be made soon by the electoral authorities, in
consultation with the central Government. Certainly,
the participation of refugees in the upcoming elections
is important, but one has to understand that the
challenges are considerable. Indeed, with the goal of
enabling more than 2 million refugees to vote, this is
the largest out-of-country voting operation ever
undertaken in a post-conflict context.

In Berlin, we had presented the international
community with a bill for full registration and voting
in Iran and Pakistan amounting to $37.6 million. Some
donors were concerned about the high price, in
particular if it covered only presidential elections -
which is the choice of the Cabinet. Together with the
Afghan Electoral Commission, we have been working
on less expensive options, but they raise some issues of
credibility, particularly where the identification of
eligible voters is difficult. Again, we hope that a
solution that meets electoral standards and provides
franchise for the overwhelming majority of refugees
will soon be found.

A few words now about political parties,
obviously key actors in the electoral process. The
registration of political parties has been slow and
difficult. This is in part because the Political Party Law
sought, understandably, to limit the right to operate
legally to those groups that were not related to military
organizations. But that criterion has proved very
difficult to implement - and let us remember, after all,
that the main partners in the coalition Government are,
or have been, in fact, heads of political or military
organizations themselves. As of today, 16 parties have
been registered, out of the 48 that have applied. We
continue to encourage donors to provide some capacity
to those registered parties - on an equal basis - in
order to enable them to participate meaningfully in the
upcoming elections.

The status of political parties takes us directly to
the all-important issue of the political environment in
which the upcoming elections are to take place. You
may remember, Mr. President, that in August of last
year, Ambassador Brahimi circulated to the Council a
draft work plan that contained a series of security and
political benchmarks that the country had to meet in
order to be able to hold free and fair elections, leading,
as the Bonn Agreement requires, to a fully
representative Government.

Those political measures included the adoption of
a Political Party Law; the registration of political
parties; the revision of the existing Press Law to
enhance the protection of journalists; the creation of a
Media Monitoring Commission; a Code of Conduct for
political parties; and the issuance by the central
Government of clear instructions to officials, both
military and civilian, regarding their behaviour during
the electoral campaign.

Those measures are at various stages of
implementation today. As I mentioned earlier, the
Political Party Law has been adopted, and political
parties are being registered, albeit slowly. A new
Media Law has been passed which has some
shortcomings but is overall considered to be a major
improvement over the Press Law adopted in 1992.
Following the adoption of the Electoral Law, the
electoral authorities are now in the process of
establishing a media monitoring commission, which
will have to start operating 60 days before the
elections. A code of conduct has now been approved by
the electoral authorities and is open for signature to
political parties. Finally, the organization of a
campaign of verification of political rights is now
being discussed between the Afghan Human Rights
Commission and UNAMA and we hope that it will
start in the next couple of weeks.

Among the benchmarks for the holding of free
and fair elections, one stands out in the minds of an
overwhelming majority of Afghans: disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. The importance of
DDR goes, of course, beyond the elections themselves.
It is a critical component of a larger process aimed at
addressing one of the most dangerous legacies of the
lengthy war in Afghanistan, namely, the continued
existence of multiple armies that jeopardize the
building of a viable Afghan State and constitute a
permanent threat to civil peace.

But the significance of DDR for the shorter-term
electoral process cannot be overestimated. Indeed,
Afghans, irrespective of geographical origin and ethnic
affiliation, have reaffirmed on countless occasions
since the Emergency Loya Jirga that a genuine exercise
in electoral choice could take place only if the grip of
local militias on the political process was loosened.
The principal goal of the 2004 elections -
strengthening the legitimacy and authority of the next
Afghan Government - would no doubt be
compromised if public perception should prevail that
the election was distorted by military intimidation and
interference.

This is why UNAMA has been insisting that
DDR, while negotiable, is not optional, but both a
central and urgent task of the Transitional Government.
Naturally, it is also a very complex and sensitive task.
Coercive disarmament is not an option in Afghanistan.
Even if the central Government had the will to conduct
compulsory demobilization, it does not have the means
to match. The process of disarmament is therefore,
unavoidably, a voluntary process. It requires a
combination of factors that include a measure of
overall confidence in the institutions of the State, in
particular the Ministry of Defence; the confidence of
soldiers and commanders in the sustainability of
reintegration; and the confidence of factional leaders in
their security and their integration in the political
future of the country.

As members are aware, following the completion
of the pilot projects from December 2003 to February
2004, the Government and the international community
have reached an agreement on the main phase of DDR,
which is to include, by June, 40 per cent of the militia
forces and, by July, the full cantonment of heavy
weapons under a reliable safekeeping arrangement. The
implementation of this agreement, however, has
encountered very serious delays. Senior commanders
have been reluctant to cooperate with the process on a
variety of grounds. They have cited a lack of balance in
DDR between rival armed formations; Taliban
operations in the South; and a lack of confidence in the
prospects for reintegration, including political
integration. Some of these concerns can be entertained
and have been addressed through adjustments that have
been made in the past few days to the DDR plan. As a
result, we expect more cooperation with the plan from
a variety of senior commanders from now on.

With regard to political integration, discussions
have been taking place on and off for many months.
We hope that an understanding can now materialize
and, just as importantly, that this understanding
between the Government and senior commanders will
advance the main priorities on Afghanistan's national
agenda: disarmament, the strengthening of national
institutions, the rule of law, the observance of human
rights and the all-important fight against drugs.

As to heavy weapons cantonment - an important
component of the DDR process - the country-wide
survey is now complete. So far, about 3,000
functioning or repairable weapons systems have been
surveyed. Heavy weapons cantonment is now about to
start in Gardez and in Kandahar and will take around a
month to complete in each location. I should also stress
that in Kabul, where heavy weapons cantonment
started last November, ISAF hopes that full cantonment
will be achieved in one week to 10 days.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that there is
no doubt about the positive impact that the holding of
genuine national elections can have on the
consolidation of peace in Afghanistan. This election
can be an invaluable means to a critical end, namely,
that of broadening the legitimacy of the new State and
strengthening its authority to address the persisting
problems of violent extremism, factionalism, drugs and
what is still a sombre picture in terms of human rights.
Surprisingly, perhaps, in a country without a strong
electoral tradition, voter registration has mobilized the
population at large, which is insistently demanding
participation in the electoral process. This certainly
should allay the concerns of those who may fear that
these elections have no popular support. There is
momentum and there are expectations. Those - not a

small number - who were disappointed after June
2002 by the composition of the Transitional
Government - deemed too unrepresentative of the

nation as a whole - have now transferred their hopes
to the national elections.

But this momentum and these expectations also
place a considerable burden on the electoral process
and the environment in which it will take place. As I
said before, a process that is perceived to be biased and
distorted could deeply undermine hopes, which were
enhanced by the adoption of the new Constitution, that
differences among Afghans can be settled through
peaceful political means. Let us not make any mistake
in that regard: the requirements of freedom and
fairness are not a foreign standard. They are deeply a
prerequisite for the holding of an election that will
further peace, stability and national reconciliation in
Afghanistan. Much of the responsibility for providing
this environment will certainly rest with the Afghans
themselves. In particular, those Afghan leaders who
aspire to the authority that stems from a national
election must know that the anticipated legitimacy of
its outcome is predicated upon the legitimacy of the
process itself. But the burden also rests on the
international community.

Let me conclude, as I started, with a mention of
the security issue and take advantage of this
opportunity - perhaps the last - to call upon the
States members of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization to respond to the appeal of their Secretary
General and allow that organization to meet the
commitments it has given to the people of Afghanistan.
Security in general, and that of the electoral process in
particular, is ultimately an Afghan responsibility, but it
is a responsibility that Afghans currently cannot
shoulder without international assistance. A
widespread, robust international military presence in
support of domestic security forces remains absolutely
critical. The persistent woes of Afghanistan -
terrorism, factionalism and criminal networks - are as
much at work today as they were two years ago and
their ability to subvert State-building and a genuine
political process is hardly diminished. Whether it is
counter-terrorism, electoral security, counter-narcotics
or control of factional fighting, at this critical juncture
for the Afghan peace process international security
assistance continues to make the difference between
success and failure.

