Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the delegation of France, I would first like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council. I also wish to
thank delegations for their kind words about our
presidency. I would also like to thank Mr. Michael von
der Schulenburg, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Majoor and the
Permanent Representative of Sierra Leone for their
statements.

The statements we have just heard confirm that
the situation in Sierra Leone is improving, but that
difficulties also continue. Like the Secretary-General in
his report (S/2009/59), we too welcome the significant
progress that has been made to consolidate peace in
Sierra Leone. As the Security Council has emphasized,
the proper conduct of general elections in July 2008
illustrated the commitment of the people of Sierra
Leone to peace and democracy. However, the country
continues to face difficulties, in particular in the socio-
economic area. Those difficulties have worsened as a
result of the successive crises that have affected the
global economy.

We are also very concerned about the growth of
the drug trade in the subregion and its destabilizing
impact on the most fragile States. In that connection,
France welcomes the holding in Cape Verde, under the
auspices of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), of a ministerial conference on that
subject from 28 to 29 October 2008, which produced a
draft political statement and a three-year plan of action
to combat drugs in West Africa that were adopted at the
ECOWAS heads of State and Government conference
last December. We hope that that will lead to the
strengthening of regional cooperation in that regard.
France is prepared to support United Nations efforts in
that area, which could benefit from the expertise and
assistance to be provided by the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime to combat drugs in West Africa.

The implementation of the Peacebuilding
Cooperation Framework for Sierra Leone must
continue. We are pleased at the productive cooperation
between the Government of Sierra Leone and the
Peacebuilding Commission, as illustrated by the
Government's adoption of the Framework in January
2008. We also encourage the Government of Sierra
Leone to continue to implement the Framework. We
would also like to recall the conclusions issued by the
Peacebuilding Commission at the end of the second
biannual review last December.

Moreover, France welcomes the good pace with
which the operations of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) have
begun. We supported replacing the United Nations
Integrated Office in Sierra Leone with an integrated
United Nations political office responsible for
following up on support for the peacebuilding process,
including welcome support for the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

We believe that the adoption of the Joint Vision
of the United Nations Family for Sierra Leone, which
sets out the way in which United Nations agencies and
programmes will work in concert with UNIPSIL and
integrates political and developmental initiatives, is an
excellent step. Such integration is necessary to
supporting hard-won peace and stability in Sierra
Leone, to contributing to sustainable socio-economic
development and to supporting the Government's
poverty-reduction strategy. We call on UNIPSIL to
continue down that path as it carries out its mandate.

