Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset I welcome His Excellency Mr. Jean-Max
Bellerive, Prime Minister of Haiti, and thank him for
his statement. I thank Mr. Edmond Mulet for his
message of hope. Allow me to make the following
comments.

My delegation again expresses its solidarity with
the Haitian people following the humanitarian disaster
caused by the earthquake of 12 January, which left
220,000 people dead, 1.5 million without shelter, and
$11.5 billion in damage. It is unfortunate to note that
Haiti will require a great deal of time before it is in a
position to overcome this crisis. Faced with this
disaster, we can only reiterate the statement of the
Secretary-General in his report that "our best tribute to
[the people of Haiti] is to continue their work, to
transform Haiti and build anew out of tragedy
(5/2010/200, para. 80).

Lebanon welcomes the Action Plan for the
Reconstruction and the Development of Haiti presented
by the Government of Haiti at the pledging conference
held in New York on 31 March. We welcome the
positive results of the pledging conference, which
raised $9 billion. The donors' generosity reflected the
international community's solidarity with the Haitian
people and highlighted the importance of collective
efforts when facing the disasters that regularly confront
humankind.

The challenge now lies in continuing our work to
ensure that all of the assistance is transformed into
tangible services on the ground. We fully support the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), which lost 101 staff members,
including the head of Mission and his deputy.

We welcome the additional efforts of the Mission
in the areas of emergency assistance, assisting civilians
and reopening roads. My country understands the
difficult circumstances under which the Mission is
operating and therefore welcomes the response of
States to the United Nations appeal aimed at
strengthening troop levels pursuant to resolution 1908
(2010) of 19 January.
The people and Government of Haiti must play a
primary role in determining the future of their country.
Lebanon supports national and human capacity-
building efforts in Haiti through its assistance in the
fields of education, information-sharing, equal
opportunity, the strengthening of equitable
development, and respect for human rights. The report
refers to this as an "investment in human capital". We
therefore express our satisfaction at the security and
political stability in the country.

We support MINUSTAH's technical assistance
for the upcoming elections. In the light of the report of
the Secretary-General, upon the approval of the Haitian
Government and in line with Mr. Mulet's proposal, we
express our readiness to work with the other members
of the Council to adapt MINUSTAH's mandate to the
changes on the ground, including to provide technical,
operational and logistical assistance, in full respect for
the authority and competence of the Government of
Haiti.

