Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to thank
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his briefing today on the
situation in South Sudan.

Once again, we lament and express our concern
about the deterioration of the situation in the country.
There has been so significant improvement in the
humanitarian, security and economic crisis, while
the people of South Sudan are far from achieving the
peace and stability that they have been unjustly denied
for so long. As a result, every day thousands of South
Sudanese are leaving their homes, thereby giving rise
to new internal displacements that aggravate the crisis.
It is not possible to speak of real progress if the clashes
between the parties do not cease. Several months ago,
the Security Council called for full compliance with the
ceasefire declared by the Government. However, that
call has been ignored. We emphasize that it will not
be possible to establish the necessary conditions for
dialogue if the fighting continues The lack of political
will and leadership remains very evident.

Bolivia underscores that a sustainable solution to
the conflict in South Sudan must be achieved through
a credible political process and inclusive dialogue that
will lead to compliance with the 2015 agreement. In that
regard, the efforts being made by regional organizations
are fundamental to achieving that end - all that is
needed is complementarity among those initiatives.

For my delegation, support for the leadership of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
is indisputable. The high-level revitalization forum is
the only concrete initiative that exists, and we therefore
appreciate the efforts exerted by IGAD in that regard.
We also welcome the support of the African Union,
as expressed in the most recent communique of the
African Union Peace and Security Council, which
serves to give new impetus to and re-establish the
political process in South Sudan through the high-level
revitalization forum. We encourage all the parties to
engage and participate constructively. It is a unique
opportunity to establish sustainable peace through
restoring a permanent ceasefire, implementing the
peace agreement and developing a realistic timetable for
a democratic election at the end of the transition period.

Another important point is the call to put
forward a memorandum of understanding on the
establishment of the Hybrid Court. We believe that
justice and accountability would help to bring about
the reconciliation and healing processes, which are key
to establishing lasting peace. We emphasize that it is
essential that the process of establishing the Hybrid
Court be African-led. We emphasize the Government's
willingness to carry out the establishment of the
Hybrid Court.

With regard to the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force (RPF), we welcome the good offices
of the Special Representative. It is essential to work
in harmony and cooperation with the Government
in order to allow the RPF to operate smoothly. Its
deployment will enable the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) to extend its presence to
other areas of conflict, protect civilians and provide
humanitarian assistance.

In conclusion, we wish to express our appreciation
to the United Nations country team and to UNMISS
for the work that they carry out in South Sudan. We
commend the approach they have been taking to the
protection of civilians.

