Ms. Power (United States of America): We are
profoundly concerned about the dramatic deterioration
of the situation in Burundi over the past year and a half.
During this period, as we all know, some 270,000 people
have been displaced; at least 348 people have reportedly
been the victims of extrajudicial killings; and 651
reported cases of torture have been documented. These
arejust the crimes that we know about. All are worrying
signs that the country's brutal past may be repeating
itself. This week, appalling new reports emerged of
sexual Violence by members of the ruling party's youth
militia, which we and other Council members have
been warning about for several years. Women have said
that they were raped simply because of their political
party affiliations. This is sickening. Absent serious,
concerted international engagement and pressure, the
situation is all but certain to deteriorate further.

The Council is not alone in its grave concern
regarding these crimes or in its efforts to stop them and
bring the perpetrators tojustice. The United Nations has
established an office in Burundi, drawn up contingency
plans, sent the Secretary-General to Bujumbura
and opened a Human Rights Council independent
investigation into the situation. And, as we all know,
in January the Security Council travelled to Burundi,
where we urged President Nkurunziza to change course
and pursue a path to peace. None of the steps that we
asked the President to take has he embarked upon.

Meanwhile, the African Union (AU) authorized the
deployment of 200 human rights and military monitors,
dispatched a delegation of five Heads of State to help
address the evolving crisis, and authorized, initially, a
5,000-strong peacekeeping force to stem the violence.
The AU began the deployment of human rights
observers and military experts to Burundi on 22 July
2015 - more than a year ago - after the AU Peace
and Security Council agreed to deploy monitors in May
2015. But rather than facilitating the deployment of AU
monitors, the Government of Burundi spent months
delaying the implementation of a memorandum of
understanding that would have allowed the monitors to
do their job.

After rejecting a peacekeeping force, the
Government promised AU Heads of State in February
of this year that 200 monitors would be allowed to
deploy. Yet today, only 36 monitors are in Burundi. I
want to stress that this is the Government of Burundi
with which many members of the Council have insisted
we coordinate the United Nations deployment. Of
course, the deployment must be coordinated with
the Government of Burundi. In order for anybody to
deploy, you have to coordinate with the Government
that provides Visas and landing rights at the airport, and
that allows people to move around.

But, honestly, listening to speakers today, I feel
as if we are living in a parallel universe. Council are
members speaking, in many cases, with no regard
for what the Government is doing to Africa's own
monitors. It is especially disappointing not to hear the
two abstainers from Africa even acknowledge the fate
of Africa's own monitors. We have got to merge the
reality that we live in, in this beautiful Chamber, with
the reality that is playing out on the ground every day.

Today was an occasion when we could have sent a
clear, unified message to the Government of Burundi
that we will not allow similar tactics to delay the
police deployment authorized today, and that continued
obstruction of the AU mission must stop. If the African
Members of the Council cannot stand for this, I do not
know what we are doing here. This is a Government that
is blocking their people from deploying. The African
Council Members are trying to help. We are trying to
help them help.

The Government of Burundi has remained closed,
unwilling to listen to its neighbours, partners and the
international community, and resistant to following
through on the commitments it has made. Meanwhile,
it has to be stressed that some of those who oppose the
Government continue also to resort to violence and to
commit abuses. The United States strongly condemns
violence perpetrated by all sides in Burundi. We hope
that this presence, as it evolves, will document those
abuses and empower us to come to agreement on what
further steps might be taken.

The authorization of a United Nations police
component will put additional eyes and ears on the
ground, who will be able report directly to the Security
Council. That is valuable. But we should not harbour
any illusions that this will fix Burundi's problems. It
will only at best observe those problems. Police are
not being deployed to protect civilians, even though
civilians are in dire need of protection. That should
embarrass us. Instead, police are effectively being
asked to be human rights monitors. That is the most
that we as a Council were able to agree upon, and we
could not even secure consensus on this.

This really raises questions about the Council's
will when it comes to preventing atrocities, especially
when a Government is implicated in atrocities. What
the people of Bunrundi deserve and what the Council
needs to continue to insist on is serious engagement
by the Government in a process of dialogue with all
stakeholders in order to reach agreement on a peaceful
way forward. The games have to stop; the preconditions
have to stop. The Government is still insisting on sitting
down only with those it already agrees with. It must
stop lashing out at civil society and the opposition, and
the opposition, those who have engaged in violence,
must renounce it and must itself refrain from setting
these onerous preconditions for dialogue. No one will
get anywhere if things continue as they are.

The United States has settled for much less than
what it wanted with this resolution. Others have spoken
about good-faith proposals. I assure the Council that
lots of good-faith proposals do not appear in the text of
the resolution. But, as someone who has looked at the
issues of mass atrocities over many years and studied
it on many continents, I have to say that we worry
that our inability to unite even on this sends precisely
the wrong message to parties that already feel a great
sense of impunity. These abstentions will be solace to
a Government that relishes our division; it has always
made that clear. It is not at all clear to me that a Council
that says repeatedly that it has learned the lessons of
Rwanda has in fact done so.

It is not at all clear to me either that, for all the
talk at yesterday's Africa peacebuilding meeting (see S/PV.7750) about the importance of prevention, we in
the Security Council are serious about prevention. This
is a prevention moment, and yet this is where we are.
What is clear is that we believe in the prevention of
atrocities by non-State actors, but when a Government
is implicated, we cannot even unite to send a robust
monitoring presence.

Today's resolution is a step forward, but it is a much
smaller one than this crisis and the people of Burundi
deserve.

