Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Yuri Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Ambassador Kairat Umarov, Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011), and Ms. Ghizaal Haress,
member of the Independent Commission for Overseeing
the Implementation of the Constitution, not only for
their enlightening briefings but also for their tireless
efforts to achieve a lasting peace in Afghanistan. We
express our sincere appreciation to them.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea will look at the
situation in Afghanistan from three aspects - national,
regional and international 4 because we believe that
genuine tripartite cooperation is the most effective
inducement to achieve the peace and security to which
the Afghan people aspire.

At the national level, unfortunately, security
continues to be the key challenge for Afghanistan.
Improving its security is one of the main requirements
for achieving stability and long-term socioeconomic
development. We continue to note with extreme concern
the effects of the high level of violence to which the
Afghan people, in particular civilians, are subjected.
In that regard, we firmly condemn all deliberate and
abhorrent attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure
that occurred during the reporting period. We urge
the parties to comply with their obligations to protect
civilians from harm. We maintain that all parties to
the conflict must strictly fulfil their obligations under
international humanitarian law to take all possible
steps in order to prevent attacks against civilian and
civilian infrastructure, as well as the restriction of
humanitarian access.

We would like to mention in particular the
treacherous and barbaric terrorist attack in Kabul on
20 November, which claimed the lives of approximately
55 people and wounded more than 60. While we
reiterate our condemnation and rejection of such acts
in the strongest terms, we also once again express our
deepest condolences to the Government of Afghanistan
and to the families of the victims.

With regard to the political process, we share
the view of Kabul and the Geneva conference that
the process must be led and fully owned by Afghans.
By holding parliamentary elections in Afghanistan
in such difficult and threatening circumstances, the
Afghan people once again showed that they wanted to
participate in the democratic process. In that regard,
we wish to take this opportunity to congratulate all
Afghan women and men on their courage in going to
the polls in a climate of terror and constant threats to
exercise their constitutional right to vote and to elect
their representatives. The considerable increase in
the participation of Afghan women by 8 percentage
points as compared to the 2014 elections may seem
insignificant. However, in the light of Afghanistan's
history, we know that an effort to include women and
also young people in the electoral process is being
made. We call on the Afghan Government to step up
that effort so that women also take part in all stages
of the peace process. As Ms. Aleta Miller, UN-Women
country representative for Afghanistan, said:

"Not only does peace last longer when women
lead and participate in peace processes, but also
women have a right to participate in negotiating
peace in Afghanistan. No decisions on the future
of Afghanistan should be made without the full
participation of all citizens affected by that future,
and no peace process will be complete and lasting
without the direct involvement of women."

Equatorial Guinea welcomes the significant
progress made in the political, economic, social and
governance reform agenda of the Government of
Afghanistan, including the finalization of 10 national
priority programmes, the implementation of far-
reaching fiscal reforms and the promotion of women's
participation in public life. Given our concern about the
high level of violence against women and girls, as well
as boys, in Afghanistan reported by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (see S/2018/1092),
we hope that both the establishment of a technical
committee to review the Elimination of Violence
against Women Law of 2009 and the adoption of the
Geneva Mutual Accountability Framework will result,
among other achievements, in stronger and rights-based
legal protection from violence for all Afghan women
and girls, as well as the prosecution of perpetrators
of atrocity crimes against the civilian population,
among others.

We take good note of the successful meetings held
by Mr. Zalmay Khalilzad with various States in an
effort to generate regional support for the Afghan peace
process, as well as the outcomes of those meetings.

At the regional level, Equatorial Guinea
understands that resolving a number of fundamental
issues relating to economic development, security
and stability in Afghanistan depends to a large extent
on the neighbouring countries and their goodwill,
firm resolve and willingness to actively facilitate
national reconciliation and to put an end to violence
in Afghanistan. We therefore attach great importance
to promoting regional cooperation in support of peace,
stability and development in Afghanistan. We commend
the efforts being made by some Central Asian countries,
such as Kazakhstan, through bilateral agreements to
contribute to stabilizing the situation in Afghanistan
and to its social and economic development.

On the international front, we welcome the
outcome of the Geneva conference on Afghanistan
held from 27 to 28 November, jointly organized by the
Government of Afghanistan and the United Nations,
which renewed the partnership and cooperation between
the Government of Afghanistan and the international
community towards peace, prosperity and self-reliance
in Afghanistan during the Transformation Decade
(2015-2024). We also commend the strong commitment
of the international community to continuing to support
the training, equipping, funding and capacity-building
of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces.
We emphasize that, in order to deal with the threat of
terrorism, there must be a collective commitment to
fighting and overcoming that scourge in the context of
the global counter-terrorism strategy.

In conclusion, we express our concern about
the rampant increase in the production of narcotics.
Narcotics provide significant financial support
for terrorists in Afghanistan. We are aware of
the connection closely linking cultivation, opium
trafficking and terrorism. In that regard, we commend
the counter-narcotics operations carried out by the
Afghan Government, supported by the international
community and in close cooperation with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, which resulted in a
high number ofnarcotics seizures, the arrest ofnarcotics
traffickers and the closure of heroin laboratories,
among other successful achievements. Accordingly, as
a problem with ramifications at the national, regional
and international levels, we encourage the international
community to continue to assist the Government of
Afghanistan in its national drug control strategy and
action plan.

I would be remiss were I not to conclude my statement
by expressing well-deserved praise to Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, and his entire team, and
expressing our appreciation to Ambassador Umarov for
sparing no effort in his work as Chair ofthe Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011).

