The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Ministers and other distinguished representatives
here in the Security Council Chamber. Their presence
today underscores the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Djibouti, Egypt, Estonia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Haiti, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Maldives, Mexico,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Norway, Pakistan,
Portugal, Qatar, Rwanda, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, Viet Nam and Yemen to participate in
this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-
General; Judge Hisashi Owada, Senior Judge on,
and President Emeritus of, the International Court
of Justice; and Judge Theodor Meron, President of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: Her Excellency
Ms. Joanne Adamson, Charge' d'Affaires ad interim of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, and Her Excellency Ms. Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

Iwish to also draw the attention ofCouncil members
to document S/2018/4l7/Rev.1, which contains the
text of a letter dated 3 May 2018 from the Permanent
Representative of Poland to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.

I now give the floor to Ms. Viotti.

