Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): The attack by the
Israeli military on a residential Palestinian
neighbourhood in Gaza deserves the strongest
condemnation by the Council. The decision by the
Israeli military to fire missiles from an F-16 jet into
private homes can be described only as reckless and
utterly inexcusable. The Israeli Government must have
known that the impact of its bombs was going to kill
and maim Palestinian civilians, including children. No
explanation, no matter how comprehensive, can justify
the use of the most destructive military weaponry in
such circumstances, especially if the target was a single
Palestinian.

This senseless act must be seen in the context of
the systematic Israeli plans to dehumanize and
dominate the Palestinian people. They include the
destruction of the homes of the families of those
accused of retaliatory attacks against Israel. There is
even a threat to deport the families of anyone involved
in such attacks.

We wish to remind the Council of its resolution
1402 (2002) of 30 March 2002, which calls for the
withdrawal of Israeli troops from Palestinian cities.
Instead, the Israeli army has reoccupied Palestinian
cities and enforced severe restrictions on the freedom
of movement of persons and goods, thereby further
aggravating the humanitarian crisis afflicting the
Palestinian people.

We are particularly frustrated by the timing of
this latest Israeli attack. It comes at a time when Israeli
and Palestinian ministers had initiated a dialogue
around concrete measures to de-escalate the security
situation. This makes us wonder whether there are
people who may be attempting to veto any peace-
building initiative between the Israelis and
Palestinians.

We wish to reiterate our support for the efforts of
the "quartet", made up of the United States, the United
Nations, the Russian Federation and the European
Union, as well as other interested parties, in building
an international consensus to reach, among other
things, a two-State solution; the end of the illegal
occupation of Palestinian territory; the end of
settlement construction and expansion; and the
negotiation of a permanent settlement to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

The work of the "quartet" has been seriously
undermined by this violence. The fact that Israel is also
allowed to ignore Security Council resolutions cannot
be helpful.

As we have stated many times before in the
Council, it is our firm belief that there can be no peace
in the Middle East as long as the Palestinian people do
not have a State of their own, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. We believe that the only solution lies in
negotiations and not violence, whether it be Palestinian
violence or Israeli violence.

