Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
would like first to thank the Polish presidency for
having organized this important debate on a topic
to which, as the Security Council knows, France is
resolutely, consistently and deeply committed. I would
also like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and the Force Commanders for their particularly
enlightening briefings.

Allow me to thank the Force Commanders for
their service, their professionalism and their daily
commitment to executing their mandates. I would like
also to pay tribute to all their military and civilian
personnel, ofwhose deep commitment all of us here are
aware. France would like once again to pay tribute to
the memory of all those who have sacrificed their lives
in their commitment to serving the United Nations. The
Force Commanders should know that their officers,
non-commissioned officers, airmen, sailors and
soldiers and, in particular, they themselves have our
full confidence.

As the Secretary-General recalled at the launch
of his Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which
France fully supports, peacekeeping is a particularly
complex, difficult, sometimes frustrating but crucial
and irreplaceable undertaking (see S/PV.8218). While
peacekeeping must above all be part ofthe political goal
of peacemaking, our ambition to protect civilians who
are victims of conflict, violence and massive violations
of human rights also demands that, together, we be
more effective and more able to make a real difference
on the ground.

Our collective ambition must therefore be that
our operations - the United Nations operations - be
conducted and implemented in optimal conditions. We
must therefore provide Force Commanders with the
necessary means and resources to execute their mandate
smoothly and effectively. As members knows, France
will continue to spare no efforts to that end.

It is therefore necessary that the troops that we
entrust to United Nations peacekeeping operations
be fully operational and effective. In particular, that
requires complete and high-quality predeployment
training. France is fully committed to supporting such
operations by training nearly 30,000 French-speaking
African soldiers each year, who themselves serve as
strong troops for peacekeeping operations.

The requirement for fully operational and effective
troops also implies better equipment that is adapted to
the terrain and the threat, as well as a better operational
posture. We fully believe that better operational
performance will reduce the number of Blue Helmets
killed or injured in operations, which is still far too high.
In that regard, we fully support the recommendations
of the Santos Cruz report.

Finally, we are convinced that effective
peacekeeping entails bolstering relations between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, in particular by strengthening African
peace operations. That is a key priority for us at the
highest political level. We would therefore be interested
in the opinions of our briefers on that issue.

In conclusion, my question today is addressed to
the three Force Commanders and focuses primarily the
deployment and use of new technology to better protect
their assets and their soldiers, while we are aware that
such technology will never replace the central role of the
men and women whom they command. Peacekeeping
forces are all too often targeted by armed groups with
indirect fire or improvised explosive devices, which,
as we all know, still cause too many casualties in
their ranks and prevent them from carrying out their
primary mission of protecting civilians. My questions
are therefore very simple and straightforward: How
can we help them better? What do they need to better
anticipate threats and indirect fire? What early-warning
and protection technology do they require?

On behalf of France, I would like to thank the
Force Commanders once again for their exemplary
commitment, with all our due respect.

