The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Bahrain,
Canada, Egypt, India, Iraq, Japan, Jordan, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand,
Pakistan, the Republic of Korea, Sierra Leone, South
Africa, Sweden, the Syrian Arab Republic, the United
Arab Emirates and Yemen, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cappagli
(Argentina), Ms. Wensley (Australia), Mr. Buallay
(Bahrain), Mr. Heinbecker (Canada), Mr. Aboul
Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Sharma (India), Mr. Al-Douri
(Iraq), Mr. Satoh (Japan), Prince Zeid Ra 'ad Zeid
Al-Hussein (Jordan), Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia), Mr.
Navarrete (Mexico), Mr. MacKay (New Zealand),
Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan), Mr. Lee Ho-jin (Republic of Korea), Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone),
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Schori (Sweden),
Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Samhan
(United Arab Emirates) and Mr. Al-Ashtal
(Yemen) took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 19 April
2001 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, which has been issued as document
S/2001/388, and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the

Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the forthcoming debate of the Security Council
regarding the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, which is to be held on Monday, 23 April
2001."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the current debate, in accordance with the
rules of procedure and the previous practice in this
regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
take the seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation to the Permanent
Observer of Switzerland to the United Nations to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Permanent Observer of Switzerland to
the United Nations to take the seat reserved for him at
the side of the Council Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 20 April 2001 from the
Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:

"I have the honour in my capacity as
Chairman of the Islamic Group at the United
Nations to request that the Security Council
extend an invitation to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, under rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Mokhtar Lamani,
Permanent Observer for the Organization of the
Islamic Conference to the United Nations, during
the Council's discussion on the agenda item
entitled 'Protection of civilians in armed

7s,

conflict .

That letter has been issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2001/389. lfI
hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Lamani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mrs. Mary Robinson,
High Commissioner for Human Rights.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mrs. Robinson to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General to the Security Council
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
document S/2001/331.

I should like to make some introductory remarks.
It is important that something solid and valuable
emerge from today's debate. In a moment, the Deputy
Secretary-General will introduce the Secretary-
General's report on behalf of the United Nations
system as a whole. This will be followed by a short
statement from the High Commissioner for Human
Rights on the specific human rights issues related to
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Other
Secretariat members will be present during the debate.
I intend, as appropriate, to invite them to answer any
questions which directly affect their areas.

I hope that the debate will see short, focused
statements from members of the Council and non-
members alike, concentrating on what the Security
Council can do in practical terms to further the
protection of civilians on the ground. The emphasis
should be on practical steps that will make a difference.
Broad statements of national positions were made in
the stages leading up to the adoption of resolutions
1265 (1999) and 1296 (2000), and detailed accounts of
conflict situations can be contributed when we address
those items specifically. We need to respect the
division of responsibilities in the United Nations
system, in particular between the Security Council and
other organs of the United Nations. The topic of
coordination will therefore be relevant.

Some key points for this debate might include the
following. Bearing in mind the Secretary-General's
comments in the report, what more can be done to
implement the provisions of recommendations that he
made in September 1999 (S/1999/957)? What are the
most operational recommendations in his present
report? How best can we implement Council resolution
1296 (2000) of 19 April 2000? What are members'
reactions to the recommendations in the Secretary-
General's report? What practical conclusions can
usefully be teased out from them? What sorts of
provisions should be included in peacekeeping
mandates to improve the protection of civilians? What
new capabilities are required in the United Nations
system to ensure that they are implemented? What
pressure can be brought to bear on the parties to
conflicts, including non-State actors, to live up to their
moral and legal responsibilities to afford protection to
civilians?

With that sort of focus on implementation, I am
sure that we can begin to make a difference.

I now give the floor to the Deputy Secretary-
General to introduce the Secretary-General's report.


