Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Chairs of the Security
Council Committees for their detailed briefings on
counter-terrorism activities.

To a great extent, the performance of Security
Council subsidiary bodies determine the credibility
and effectiveness of the Security Council as the key
coordinating platform in international counter-terrorism
cooperation. In recent years, the terrorist threat has
indeed become global. The swell in the radicalization
of public opinion, and in spite of the efforts of the
international community, has not yet been curbed.
The envoys of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
Al-Qaida, Al-Nusra and other terrorist organizations
continue to recruit fighters in many regions of the
world, flooding the Internet and other channels of
mass communication with their propaganda. Youth and
socially bereft groups of society are in the line of fire.

Exactly one year ago, on 11 May 2016, the Council,
under the presidency of Egypt, held an important debate
(see S/PV.7690) on the matter of countering terrorist
propaganda. Building on the outcomes of that meeting,
and in accordance with a chairman's statement adopted
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee a few days ago,
a comprehensive international framework has been
developed on the matter. We believe that it is a promising
basis for the further activity of the Committee and its
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate. We hope that
the document will be adopted swiftly as a Security
Council resolution, a draft ofwhich was proposed by the
delegation of Egypt. However, in the current context,
we are convinced that it is high time to strengthen the
legal and sanctions toolkit in combating the narrative
of terrorism.

We advocate the same approach with respect to
countering financing for terrorism. The results of the
December special meeting of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee on the matter demonstrated that resolutions
2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015) are not being implemented
fully or by all States. That type of situation must be
addressed immediately. The current regime of the
Council, in particular in combating the financing
and material support for terrorists, requires rigorous
compliance and strengthening. We are grateful to
the Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
Mr. Aboulatta, for his able steering of the Committee.
Over the past month, as before, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee has been drawing on expert support and
on the work of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate, which continues to play an important role
in addressing the multidimensional tasks of countering
terrorism facing the Committee and Security Council
as a whole.

We fully share the view that the main thrust of the
Committee's activities and its Executive Directorate
should be assessing States' implementation of resolutions
1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 2178 (2014). In this regard,
we have seen significant progress, particularly in the
growing number of monitoring Visits. However, there
is a need for clear delineation of priorities, focusing on
States that are at highest risk for terrorism in line with
Committee-approved classifications.

We note the usefulness of trips to Afghanistan in
that regard. Visits to Central Asian States are currently
the last stage of the cycle. Underestimating the threat
hanging over the region could lead to the most dangerous
consequences. We think that in the work in Central
Asian countries there should be integration of the broad
experience and ideas of such regional organizations
as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the
Commonwealth of Independent States, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization, and the Eurasian Group
on Combating Money-Laundering and the Financing
of Terrorism.

The Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) on sanctions
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
and Al-Qaida is the Security Council's most important
counter-terrorism mechanism. We pay due tribute
to Ambassador Kairat Umarov's able leadership of
the Committee. We think the sanctions list should
appropriately reflect the highly active and ever-
evolving terrorist threat. In this context, we support
the proposal for Member States to list new individuals
and entities. The Committee should consider the
relevant requests swiftly and, most importantly,
without politicization. Also important is increasing
the effectiveness of sanctions mechanisms, which
hinges on States' compliance with their international
obligations in this field. Unfortunately, today problems
remain on this score.

The powers of the Ombudsman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) have been set forth in resolution
2253 (2015). We think them most appropriate. However,
unfortunately, the practical activities of this institution
do not always address mandated tasks and are subject to
increasing criticism. Often, we see excessively focused
and short-sighted approaches, ignoring the views of
interested States. We support the work of the Monitoring
Team, whose reports are a major linchpin of the work of
the Committee. We call upon Member States to closely
cooperate with experts of the Team. Yet we do trust
that its reports will be as objective as possible and rely
solely on trusted sources of information.

With regard to the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we should first
and foremost like to extend our heartfelt thanks to
Ambassador Sacha Sergio Llorentty Soliz for his deft
steering of the Committee and for his contribution to
its activities. We also thank the Committee's group of
experts for the advisory support provided with respect
to components of weapons of mass destruction and
expert control.

We are essentially pleased with the work ofthe 1540
Committee, which is a solid buffer against components
ofweapons of mass destruction falling into the hands of
non-State actors, including terrorists. The Committee
continues its effective work in assisting countries in
carrying out the provisions of the resolution. There
are very few States left that have yet to present their
national reports. We think it would be justified to hold
official meetings of the Committee more regularly.
This year, a far-reaching programme, stemming from
the conclusions of the 2016 comprehensive review and
the resulting resolution 2325 (2016), is planned.
In the light of the unabated terrorist activity in Syria
and Iraq from ISIL and other terrorist groups that have
acquired technology for the production of chemical
weapons and actively use them, resolution 1540 (2004)
is more relevant than ever. Our idea is that the 1540
Committee should continue its cooperation with the
other Security Council counter-terrorism committees
on this matter in the framework of its mandate.

Violations ofresolution 1540 (2004) areinadmissible.
Information on non-State actors gaining access to
chemical weapons requires thorough investigation and
response from the Security Council. There is such an
urgent need to combat acts of terrorism that the toolkit
offered by resolution 1540 (2004), while carrying out
an important role, just like the toolkit offered by other
targeted resolutions, is simply not enough. What we
need today are global and comprehensive approaches.
We are ready to make this happen.

In conclusion, we would again like to underscore
our interest in strengthening the weapons of mass
destruction non-proliferation regime and our readiness
to spare no effort here, drawing upon close cooperation
with regional and international partners.

