Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): On
behalf of France, I would like to thank you, Mr.
President, for the briefing you have just given us about
the visit you recently made to the region. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
situation between Ethiopia and Eritrea.

Like those who spoke previously, we believe the
essential thing to be positively highlighted is the fact
that both parties have been respecting the ceasefire
since 18 June. We want to believe that this is a clear
reflection of their irrevocable commitment to peace.

France is very pleased to see that the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) is
being effectively deployed. Its growing strength is, in
our view, an effective guarantee for peace. We take this
opportunity to express our gratitude for the
contribution made by the Netherlands and other
countries to the United Nations operation in Ethiopia
and Eritrea. We also welcome the arrival of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to the region,
Mr. Legwaila, who arrived in Addis Ababa on 9
November and who is today in Asmara. We also
welcome the appointment of Major-General Patrick
Cammaert.

The President mentioned a number of confidence-
building measures recommended to the parties. My
delegation subscribes fully to those measures. We
would in particular like to appeal to the parties to
facilitate the repatriation of prisoners of war and
injured prisoners of war. They should also release and
repatriate all civilians who are being detained, of which
there are between 52,000 and 72,000, according to the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). It
would be desirable for the parties to generally facilitate
the humanitarian work of the United Nations, the ICRC
and non-governmental organizations active in the field.

Generally speaking, we agree entirely with what
the President has said. We must now ensure that the
parties commit themselves sincerely to negotiating a
comprehensive peace agreement which could resolve
all the bilateral disputes. No doubt, time will be
necessary in order to reach a good, solid agreement that
will not be challenged later, in particular with regard to
the very thorny question of delimitation of borders and
the role that can be played by the United Nations
Cartographic Unit in defining those borders.

In this spirit, we would be very happy to
participate in the drafting of the presidential statement
that may adopted early next week.

