Back in September, if members recall, I briefed the Security Council on worsening food insecurity in South Sudan (see S/2020/930, annex I), and one day after that, with David Beasley and Qu Dongyu, I warned the Council of multiple famines looming. Since then, I have also provided the Council with a detailed description of what a famine does to a human being's body and mind in a briefing I gave to members on Yemen (see S/2020/1109, annex II). Unfortunately, people in parts of South Sudan, as Special Representative David Shearer alluded to, are on the brink of famine today. The Real-Time Quality Review of the global Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC), which was just completed, identified five counties in Jonglei, Warrap, and Northern Bahr el Ghazal states - Akobo, Aweil South, Tonj East, Ton) North and Tonj South - where between 5 and 10 per cent of the population are living in IPC phase 5, meaning they face "catastrophic" levels of food insecurity. In some places, the number of people in IPC phase 5 is going to grow from now to July 2021. Although this analysis at the country level continues to be finalized, the IPC Review Committee also presented a "famine likely" situation in western Pibor county last week. It would therefore be fair to say that our fears from September have now materialized in these six counties. How did we get here? Millions of South Sudanese people have been pushed to the breaking point. Violence, flooding, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic anda deteriorating economy are making an already bad humanitarian crisis much worse, especially in the six counties that I just mentioned. Violence continues to be one of the main drivers of severe food insecurity in South Sudan, and, correspondingly, we see the highest levels of acute food insecurity in the places most affected by violence. In the first of half of the year, four successive waves of major violence in Jonglei and the Greater Pibor Administrative Area displaced nearly 160,000 people. In Warrap state, where three of the counties with IPC phase 5 classification are located, nearly 100,000 people were displaced, owing to violence from May to June. Two consecutive years of intense flooding have subsequently made the situation worse. More than half a million people in Jonglei and the Greater Pibor Administrative Area and close to 400,000 people in Warrap state have been affected by the compounded effects of flooding and fighting. On top of that, COVID-19, with its socioeconomic impact, has made life even harder. South Sudan's economy continues to contract, partly as a result of falling oil prices. Essential commodity and food prices are increasing in the face of a rapidly depreciating exchange rate and subsequent inflation. Overall this year, 7.5 million people in South Sudan - which, we should remember, is more than 60 per cent of the entire country - are in need of humanitarian assistance. That number is likely to increase once the IPC results are finalized. Considerably more than | million children under the age of five are predicted to be malnourished. That is the highest number in four years. Families facing the most severe food security problems have already exhausted their emergency coping strategies and consequently rely on food aid if they are going to survive. Under such extreme conditions, people, especially women and girls, are left with little choice but to adopt harmful coping mechanisms. Girls are more likely to be forced into early marriage or drop out of school. In many cases, as we know, when girls drop out of school, they never return. What are humanitarian partners doing to try to meet the growing need to stave off famine? The Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) and South Sudan Humanitarian Fund continue to play an important role. I have provided $39 million from CERF to South Sudan so far this year, a substantial proportion of which is for addressing rising food insecurity. That includes the $7 million allocation I made the other day as part of the overall special CERF allocation for dealing globally with food insecurity. Humanitarian agencies and non-governmental agencies (NGOs) in South Sudan are scaling up a response across sectors in all of the worst-affected six counties. Agencies working on food security were able to distribute emergency food to nearly 78,000 people in Pibor in November. The World Food Programme (WFP) has expanded its air fleet so that we can get food, nutrition and health-care services delivered more quickly in a challenging logistical and security environment. But we need to do more. We need more funding to ensure that food, livelihoods, health-care services and other life-saving programmes are supported in the six counties that I talked about earlier, as well as across the entire country. At nearly $2 billion, the South Sudan Humanitarian Response Plan for 2020 is the largest ever for the country. It is currently only two-thirds funded as we approach the end of the year. We expect needs to be even higher next year. Early funding would help a lot to get ahead of needs, which we can expect to see increase in early 2021 as a result of the dry season, as Mr. Shearer alluded to. I want to pay special credit to our humanitarian colleagues in South Sudan, led ably and with great dedication by Mr. Shearer's deputy, Alain Noudehou. Most humanitarian workers in South Sudan are themselves South Sudanese. The humanitarian response in country has kept millions from sliding into famine. Aid agencies have assisted more than 6 million people across the country this year. UNICEF, the WFP and the agencies, especially the NGOs they work with, have already treated nearly 600,000 children affected by acute malnutrition, and I am pleased to report that 94 per cent of those children have recovered. That shows how effective support can be if people get the help they need on time and aid workers are able to do their job. Once again, however, as Mr. Shearer also alluded to, it is getting harder for aid workers to deliver assistance in South Sudan, especially in the parts of the country that are facing the most severe food insecurity. Access in Greater Pibor Administrative Area has been particularly difficult this year. Health-care clinics and food warehouses have been looted on at least 20 occasions in Jonglei and Pibor. Some 144 aid workers had to be relocated this year because of threats to their security. Most abhorrently, as Mr. Shearer said, nine aid workers have been killed this year in South Sudan, eight of them in Jonglei and Pibor. Two more aid workers have been killed since I last briefed the Council in September. That is unacceptable. All aid workers, from local and international NGOs, the International Committee of the Red Cross and United Nations agencies, which continue to stay and deliver in an extremely challenging environment, must be protected. Let me conclude by reiterating three things that need to happen now to prevent the famine problem worsening. First and foremost, all actors with any influence must work to de-escalate the violence. Humanitarian partners are worried that a spike in violence in early 2021 is likely as the dry season starts, because we have seen such spikes in previous years and we worry particularly about their effects on people. That could be catastrophic and would push many more people to the brink. We also need to see efforts continue to find political solutions, obviously, in order to end the violence that causes such famine trends. Secondly, humanitarian agencies frankly need more support from the Government of South Sudan for safe and unhindered access so that they can reach people who desperately need help. Lastly, humanitarian agencies, if they scale up their assistance as necessary, need to receive all possible resources, particularly in order to deal with severe food insecurity. We therefore need additional resources for the Humanitarian Response Plan. And I once again urge donors to please give generously and quickly.
