Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of the Argentine Republic welcomes the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh
in the presidency of the Security Council. I would like to
thank you, the Permanent Representative of your country,
Mr. Chowdhury, and his delegation for having proposed a
topic for this open debate which obliges us to face a very
timely matter: the link between Security Council action and
emergency humanitarian situations stemming from conflicts
under its consideration.

The complexity and the magnitude of the emergency
humanitarian situations that surround many of today's
evolving conflicts constitute an aspect which must be
included when considering matters related to peacekeeping
and which demands the Security Council's attention. The
scale of the conflicts and their destructive impact on the
societies affected require that our Organization, in
confronting those situations, take an integral approach,
including aspects related to maintenance of peace and
security and those related to humanitarian assistance in
conflict and to post-rehabilitation and reconstruction of the
devastated communities. In accordance with the Charter, the
Security Council bears the primary responsibility for
peacekeeping-related matters.

The attacks, assassinations, abductions, harassment and
all kinds of physical and psychological violence directed
against United Nations and associated personnel and
humanitarian personnel that were considered during the
open debate in the month of February constitute one of the
more atrocious faces of the reality of conflicts. An
important task that the Security Council can carry out is in
the field of the security of United Nations and associated
personnel and locally contracted personnel engaged in
humanitarian activities. Of the ideas that were set forth on
that occasion, I will refer to two today.

The first is the formulation of clear and viable
mandates for peacekeeping operations, ensuring that those
operations include appropriate modalities for security
arrangements for humanitarian assistance personnel who
work in the area of activity of the authorized operation,
including free and safe access to the affected population.

The second is that the provisions set forth by the
Security Council in presidential statement S/PRST/2000/4
deserve to be particularly taken into account in
considering all appropriate measures within its scope to
ensure the security of humanitarian personnel.

At the same time, the proliferation of attacks on
defenceless populations and the use of attacks on
civilians - men, women, children, the elderly - as a
common tool in the struggle continues to cause grave
concern to my country's Government.

When the harm suffered by populations is not an
indirect result of a conflict between parties but rather the
very objective of the dispute, with the goal of shifting
support to one band or another or of eliminating a people
for ethnic, political or religious reasons, the need to
incorporate the humanitarian component of the
peacekeeping mission that is being dispatched then
becomes central to the operations. At the same time, there
are emergency humanitarian situations which can affect
the Council's actions to prevent or put an end to conflicts.

We must step up our efforts to continue to improve
the Security Council's coordination with the agencies and
bodies of the system engaged in humanitarian assistance
activities, without distorting the particular function of
each body or agency of the United Nations.

At the same time, new ideas need to be explored in
order to address the question of legal protection of the
populations affected by conflicts. In this regard, I would
like to highlight the work being done by the Security
Council working group responsible for studying the
Secretary-General' s recommendations on the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts, which may be a significant
contribution to the Council in an important aspect of
humanitarian actions.

Every moment in history holds its own particular
challenge for the actors of international life. My

 

delegation takes the view that the management of the
atrocious humanitarian consequences of conflicts is morally
the most pressing challenge that the United Nations faces.

The Argentine Republic undertakes to continue to do
its utmost to enable the Security Council to make a
contribution with the Organization in that work.

