Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): Like
other preceding speakers, my delegation is extremely
disturbed by the extremely serious situation in the
Middle East. Bulgaria agrees with the analysis of the
situation, contained in recent documents by the
European Union.

We have said here and elsewhere that our country
strongly condemns suicide bombings, which continue
to be carried out by members of extremist Palestinian
organizations. We launch an appeal to the Palestinian
Authority to take firm and specific steps to disarm
terrorist organizations and to dismantle their structures.
We also appeal to Israel to stop resorting to punitive
measures, including extrajudicial killings, and to act in
keeping with international law.

Bulgaria strongly opposes Israel's construction of
what is called a security wall, with a route that is
different than the 1949 green line of demarcation.
Construction of this wall sometimes involves
confiscating Palestinian land, blocks the free
movement of people and goods, and undermines the
Palestinians' hopes for the peace process and the road
map. For Bulgaria, the wall is unacceptable.

Bulgaria is convinced that the road map alone is
the answer to the problems of the Middle East. Both
parties must do their utmost to overcome their
differences, to resume their contacts and to continue
joint efforts to create two States living within
internationally recognized boundaries, as provided for
by Security Council resolutions.

At the same time, we believe that the problem of
the construction of the security wall is part of a
complex situation related to security.

Therefore, we believe that condemning specific
aspects of this overall picture in the Middle East is not
able to make a practical contribution to efforts to
resume the peace process and implement the road map.

Bulgaria believes that it is necessary for the entire
international community, and in particular the members
of the Quartet, to convince both parties to implement
the road map. At that point, there would no longer be
any reason to build the wall, and prospects for a
peaceful resolution would increase.

