Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
First of all, on behalf of the President and people of
Cote d'Ivoire, allow me to express our gratitude for
the numerous expressions of sympathy that followed
the deadly stampede that took place on the evening
31 December, which resulted in approximately 60
deaths.

My delegation takes note of the excellent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2012/964). We of course
endorse its conclusions and recommendations.
Moreover, my delegation would like to thank His
Excellency Mr. Bert Koenders, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for C6te d'Ivoire, whom I
greet here, for his outstanding briefing on the situation
in Cote d'Ivoire, which accords with the reality on the
ground. We commend him for his excellent work in
close cooperation with Ivorian officials.

I should like to make some brief comments on some
points that my delegation deems crucial.

My delegation agrees that, 18 months after the
end of the post-electoral crisis, Cote d'Ivoire has
made significant progress in various areas. We also
agree that Cote d'Ivoire finds itself at a crossroads in
its history - one that includes many challenges that
must be urgently overcome in order to capitalize on
the dividends of the enormous progress that has been
made in a short time thanks to the unstinting support
of the United Nations in general, and of the Security
Council in particular, as well as of friendly countries
and development partners.

Against the backdrop of the strenous efforts made
by all to ensure sustainable progress in Cote d'Ivoire, my
country would like to reiterate its resolute commitment
and the strong determination of the authorities and
people of Cote d'Ivoire, under the leadership of our
President, to continue to take concrete, resolute steps to
first, strengthen stability and security, including at the
subregional level; secondly, to ensure security sector
reform (SSR) and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration; thirdly, to expand the political dialogue
and hold local elections; fourthly, to strengthen national
reconciliation; fifthly, to promote respect for human
rights; and, sixthly, to reinvigorate the economy and
planning for development.

With regard to strengthening security and stability
in Cote d'Ivoire, including the subregional dimension,
in the face of the attacks on law and order forces aimed
at destabilizing the country, the Government has
taken robust measures through the National Security
Council, presided over by the country's President.
Moreover, closer cooperation on the political and
military levels with Liberia, as well as in the judicial
sector with neighbouring Ghana, have made it possible
to reduce that threat. In that regard, I should also
mention the outstanding inter-mission cooperation that
has prevailed between the United Nations Operation
in C6te d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). That has significantly
contributed to strengthening security, especially along
the Liberia-Cote d'Ivoire border. In that regard, my
delegation entirely agrees with the Secretary-General's
recommendation to

"defer the reduction of the military strength of
UNOCI by 955 personnel as reflected in the
authorized strength in Security Council resolution
2062 (2012) until after the assessment to be
conducted in early 2013" (S/2012/964, para. 55).

My delegation would also like to take this
opportunity to reiterate to the Government and
Parliament of Ukraine the gratitude of C6te d'Ivoire for
their decision to renew the deployment of three attack
helicopters to UNOCI, including their equipment.

All of those actions will contribute to significantly
reducing, and even bring to an end, the planned
attacks against Ivorian armed forces. For its part, the
Government will continue to pursue strengthening the
security of people and property, so as to maintain an
environment conducive for international investment.

With regard to security and the situation in the
subregion, current events have shown us that the
offensive carried out last week by terrorist groups
against southern Mali pose a real, direct and immediate
to international and regional peace and security alike.
Above all, that poses an immediate danger to all of
Mali's neighbours, including Cote d'Ivoire.

Cote d'Ivoire, which currently holds the
chairmanship of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), welcomes the swift response
of France following the request for counter-terrorism
assistance aimed at stabilizing the crisis and preserving
the territorial integrity of a United Nations Member
State. I should like here to express our sincere gratitude
to France for its leadership on managing the crisis in
Mali. I also wish to thank the United Kingdom, the
United States, Canada, Germany, Belgium, Denmark
and Spain for their varied support in the context of the
operations in Mali.

During an official visit to Berlin, in his capacity
as ECOWAS Chairman, President Alassane Ouattara
yesterday launched an appeal for all States to mobilize
in order to support the efforts being made by France in
Mali. The ECOWAS general staff has already met, on
15 and 16 January in Bamako, and are in the process of
finalizing their appraisal of the situation and making
operational plans for the effective deployment of the
African-led International Support Mission in Mali
(AFISMA) in conformity with resolution 2085 (2012).
This Saturday, an extraordinary summit of ECOWAS
Heads of State and Government will take place in
Abidjan against the backdrop of these developments.

ECOWAS is preparing for the imminent deployment
to Mali of the contingents made available by various
African States. On its part, cote d'Ivoire has made
available a 500-strong battalion in Abidjan to ensure
logistics at our international airport in the context of
deployments and rotations associated with the ongoing
operations in Mali.

It is important to underscore that Cote d'Ivoire,
which shares a border with southern Mali, is directly
concerned by the terrorist threat in the north, all the
more so given the numerous instances of infiltration by
terrorists in southern Mali, including along countries
bordering Mali. Ivorian authorities take that threat
very seriously, given that, owing to our chairmanship
of ECOWAS, our country plays a key role with regard
to the institutional and decision-taking framework
concerning the crisis in Mali.

With regard to counter-terrorism efforts,
discussions should be pursued in order to strengthen
security in States involved in resolving the crisis in
Mali, including those who share a border with that
brotherly country.

With regard to security sector reform and DDR,
the interministerial working group on SSR established
in April 2012 has now completed its work. That has
made it possible to put in place a national strategy
on the reform of the security sector. The goals are to
profoundly transform that sector while taking into
account the country's need and current circumstances.
The National Security Council has endorsed the group's
conclusions. What remains is to determine the cost of
the activities contemplated.

With regard to DDR, on 2 August 2012, the
Government adopted its national policy on DDR, which
sets up a single unit responsible for DDR. Known as
the Authority on DDR, that body will be led by the
Ivorian national Fidele Sarassoro, who assumed his
post on 1 October 2012 and once served as Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is important
to note that Mr. Sarassoro reports directly to President
Ouattara, so as to ensure the effectiveness of the duty
entrusted to him.

The Authority's task includes the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of approximately
100,000 former fighters. The Government is working to
update the existing database so that the list of persons
concerned is exhaustive, credible and transparent. As
mentioned by the Secretary-General in paragraph 69,
the database will of course be shared with ONUCI as
soon as it is available.

Along the same lines, it is worth mentioning the
outstanding work done by the national commission to
combat the proliferation and illicit circulation of small
arms and light weapons. That commission is working
throught the entire country to promote voluntary
disarmament. In that regard, my country would like
to thank the Governments of Germany, Australia and
Japan for their ongoing support for the commission.

With regard to expanding the political dialogue and
the holding of local elections, my delegation takes note
of the progress made in those areas as indicated in the
report of the Secretary-General.

The local elections, due to be held in February
2013, will be delayed by several weeks to allow all
political parties, including the Front populaire ivoirien
(FPI), former President Gbagbo's political party, to
participate effectively, in particular since President
Ouattara is determined to ensure that the elections are
inclusive, free, fair and transparent. As we approach
the local elections, which are a unique platform for
concrete action by all stakeholders in Ivorian politics,
Prime Minister Daniel Kablan Duncan has been
instructed by the Head of State to start a political
dialogue with the opposition through the Permanent
Consultative Framework. It should further be recalled
that the provisional release of some supporters of the
former President in December 2012 has helped to
reduce political tension, as has the facilitation provided
by the President of Senegal with regard to the FPI's
participation in the upcoming local elections.

On the basis ofsuch developments, the Ivorian Prime
Minister has met some of the political opposition groups
in order to discuss the conditions for the participation of
those political parties in the upcoming local elections.
The funding of political parties for their participation
in the said elections was the focus of that meeting.
Another meeting that, according to the President, was
crucial to the political parties taking part in the local
elections took place just this morning. A meeting is due
to be held tomorrow between Mr. Gbagbo's party, the
FPI, and a Government delegation, led by the Prime
Minister. The Council will be informed of the outcomes
of those meetings as soon as possible.

With regard to national reconciliation, the
Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation Commission has
received resources for its activities from not only the
Government but also development partners. In that
connection, I would like to note that the Commission
wishes to branch out at the local level so as to involve
the communities, young people and women. That
participative approach will therefore be supported by
the already existing non-governmental organizations
that are in daily contact with the people, helping them
to be a true catalyst for reconciliation. The Commission
will issue a report by the end of the year.

Regarding human rights, at the national level,
the Government has focused on educating all socio-
professional layers of Ivorian society, starting with
children and young people. The Government has
therefore introduced into the primary and secondary
curricula a course that is intended to teach children
about human rights and citizenship.

Concerning the security forces, capacity-building
seminars are being provided by the Government in
partnership with UNOCI. Also, the Ministry of Justice
and Human Rights has organized awareness-raising
courses within the country for the population.

With regard to the judicial proceedings following
the inquiry undertaken by the Government Prosecutor,
it was found that there was sufficient evidence to charge
all detainees and all those currently released on bail in
the context of that process. That allowed for the release
on bail of some supporters of former President Gbagbo.

Regarding the investigations under way concerning
displaced persons from the Nahibly camp, as I said
in my statement on the adoption of resolution 2062
(2012) (see S/PV.6817), the President of the Republic,
concerned about establishing the truth, ordered an
inquiry. The Government Prosecutor attached to the
trial court of Man therefore took up the case. However,
problems related to the security of those conducting
the investigation and of witnesses has hindered the
smooth proceeding of that trial. The issue was referred
to Mr. Koenders, and UNOCI has offered to help us to
overcome that problem.

With regard to developments in ratifying the Rome
Statute, the Ivorian Parliament has enacted a law to
amend the Constitution to enable the President to ratify
that treaty. It is now a matter of the Ivorian Parliament
adopting the draft law authorizing the Head of State to
ratify treaties.

I now turn to the economic recovery. Since the
completion of the Enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Initiative, Cote d'Ivoire has continued to
receive support from the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) and the World Bank. High-level officials from
both organizations have visited Abidjan, in particular
Ms. Christine Lagarde, Managing Director of the IMF.

The Ivorian authorities are aware that rebirth comes
in the wake of reconciliation, following a traumatic
period of division. That is why the President continues
to reach out to the opposition in order to ease political
tensions and at the same time urges all partners to
support Cote d'Ivoire in achieving the vision of its
becoming an emerging country by 2020.

The Ivorian authorities are making efforts to reduce
the debt to gross domestic product ratio, which went
from 80 per cent to 67 per cent, then to 18 per cent; the
standard is 40 per cent. Likewise, the Ivorian economy
saw a growth rate of 8.6 in 2012, and we expect a growth
rate of 9 per cent for 2013, rising to a double-figure
growth rate by 2014. In that respect, the President of
the Republic is determined that economic growth must
be inclusive. That is to say, it should focus on fighting
poverty through substantial social investment.

I would like to conclude by saying that the
foundations of Cote d'Ivoire remain sound and that
we have good prospects of overcoming the many
political, social and economic challenges facing us.
With the restoration of stability and the relaunch of the
economy, supported by the ambitious reconstruction
programme, Cote d'Ivoire, as President Ouattara said
in Germany, can once again become the driving force
ofthe West African economy and a political, economic The President: There are no more names inscribed
and cultural showcase. With the invaluable assistance on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
of our bilateral partners and international institutions to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
and organizations, including the Security Council, we the subject.

are sure that we can successfully meet those challenges. The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.
