Mr. Moriko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote
d'Ivoire commends Peru for organizing this Security
Council briefing, presided over by its Minister for
Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Nestor Popolizio
Bardales, whom we congratulate on his exemplary
stewardship of our work.

We also welcome the participation of Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres and congratulates him
on the quality of his briefing and the relevance of
his recommendations.

I welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia and take note of his contributions, in his
capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission.
I also welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Worship of Haiti and the Minister for Legal Reforms
and Parliamentary Affairs of Timor-Leste.

Finally my delegation welcomes the very
informative briefings of Mr. Franck Bousquet, Senior
Director of the Fragility, Conflict and Violence Group
of the World Bank, and Mr. Yero Baldeh, Director of the
Transition States Coordination Office of the African
Development Bank.

The issue of strengthening partnerships for national
ownership oftransitions is a part of my country's recent
history and is therefore an experience that it can share
during its term on the Security Council. After 13 years
on the ground, the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire, considered by many observers to be a success
story, ended on 30 June 2017. The transition in Cote
d'Ivoire was fuelled by strong national ownership of
the entire crisis recovery and peacebuilding process,
characterized by close cooperation between the Ivorian
Government and the entire United Nations system,
strengthened by strategic partnerships coordinated with
regional institutional actors and development partners.

Those factors have enabled the Ivorian Government
to take ownership of the priority transition areas
identified by the Security Council and the Secretariat,
including national reconciliation, social cohesion,
the establishment of security and defence institutions
to ensure peace and stability in the country, and the
strengthening of the rule of law and the protection and
promotion of human rights.

In the light of its experience, Cote d'Ivoire
stresses the need to define clear and specific priority
objectives in areas considered essential to the success
of the transition plan, while taking into account
vulnerabilities that could lead to a resurgence of the
crisis. Defining those objectives must be done at the
request of the Government of the host country, in
conjunction with all other relevant national actors and
in collaboration with the United Nations system on the
ground. The aim is to set forth a clear, shared political
vision for a transition that is regularly reviewed to take
stock of its implementation and make the necessary
adjustments to the mandate of the United Nations
mission. National ownership of the process is also the
best way to ensure that the most vulnerable segments
of the population are included in transition plans, and it
generates a shared vision of priorities by national actors
and development partners.

My delegation also believes that a successful
transition hinges on good communication on the
objectives and rationale of United Nations action, which
is essential for building the needed climate of trust

between the United Nations, the host Government and
local actors. In that regard, I would like to highlight the
role of ONUCI FM. radio, which helped promote peace
and social cohesion during the transition process in
Cote d'Ivoire, and today has been succeeded by Radio
de la paix.

My delegation also highlights the significant
contribution of regional and subregional actors, as
well as the United Nations regional offices, such as
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel, whose mediation and good offices missions have
buttressed transition plans. Regional and subregional
organizations also play a critical role, as demonstrated
by the support of the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States for the initiatives
undertaken as part of the implementation of the
transition plan.

In Cote d'Ivoire, the national development plans
implemented by the Government have enjoyed the
support of bilateral and multilateral partners, as well
as international financial institutions, all of which
facilitated the economic recovery, the fight against
poverty and better access to education and health.
In that connection, my delegation commends the
productive cooperation between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Government of Cote d'Ivoire,
which has enabled the mobilization of the necessary
resources for financing priority peacebuilding projects.

The success of any transition plan rests on a
multitude of factors, based on genuine desire to
emerge from crisis and robust national ownership of
the transition process. That ownership must also be
supported by a network of strategic partnerships with
the entire United Nations system, regional actors and
bilateral and institutional development partners. As
attention turns to other countries in transition, Cote
d'Ivoire hopes that their transition plans can benefit
from similar national ownership strategies and the
same support that my country received.

