Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting of Mr. Ivica Dacic', First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and we share the serious concerns
he has expressed about the situation in Kosovo. We
once again listened attentively to Ms. Vlora Citaku.
We thank Special Representative Zahir Tanin and his
team for their work and for his objective briefing on the
activities of the Mission, which shows that the serious,
deep-seated problems in Kosovo continue and require
urgent solutions and the oversight of the international
community.

We are not impressed by the rosy picture that
some in this Chamber continue to paint in meeting
after meeting. We have been compelled to conclude
that the European Union (EU)-mediated dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina remains mired in a deep
conceptual crisis, as the lack of any tangible results
from the contacts between the parties confirms. There
is still no progress towards the ambitious declared
goal of drafting a comprehensive agreement on the
normalization of relations. The main flaw is that the
key agreement reached previously on establishing an
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
in Kosovo is not being implemented. This is the sixth
year since the signing of the document, but Pristina
has been sabotaging the process while the Serbian side
has consistently upheld all of its commitments. Some
examples of that are the integration of Serbian judges
and prosecutors into the Kosovo justice system, the
inclusion of Serbian police officers in the north of the
province in a Kosovo-wide structure and the allocation
of a territorial dialling code for Kosovo.

We note the constructive position that Belgrade has
taken and the efforts of the Serbian side to find mutually
acceptable solutions. It seems, however, that Pristina
is hoping that under pressure from outside, Serbia will
recognize Kosovo's so-called independence. On top
of that, its response to the Serbian leadership's recent
compromise proposals came in the form of Kosovo-
Albanian leaders' laying unilateral claim to large areas
of southern Serbia. We want to point out that over and
over again, Pristina makes provocative moves as soon
as the possibility of resuming the negotiation process
arises. The latest example is the Kosovo-Albanian
authorities' recent imposition of a 10 per cent duty on
goods from Serbia in defiance of existing agreements,
including in the context of the Central European
Free Trade Agreement. Moreover, it was achieved
through Pristina's abuse of its function as Chair of the
Agreement, which it participates in only indirectly,
through the Mission, as resolution 1244 (1999) strictly
stipulates.

The situation in Kosovo is seriously worrying. In
September alone, the province teetered on the brink
of a relapse into conflict twice. That could have had
disastrous consequences for the entire Balkan region.
On 8 September, Kosovo Albanians took aggressive
action in trying to prevent the passage of Serbia's
President Aleksandar Vucie to a Serbian-populated
village in northern Kosovo, while on 29 September,
Kosovo's so-called President, Hashim Thaci, visited
the Gazivode reservoir without prior agreement with
the leaders of the Serbian municipality of Zubin Potok.
These were nothing but provocative acts that worsened
the already extremely low level of trust in the region.

We are disappointed by the passivity of the various
relevant international structures, particularly the
Kosovo Force (KFOR), which is directly responsible for
maintaining peace and security in the province. We also
want to point out that the incursion by armed Kosovars
into the north of the region was a direct violation of
the agreements reached with the participation of NATO
and the EU. We are particularly alarmed by Pristina's
efforts to transform the Kosovo security forces into
fully fledged armed forces with the support of the
NATO countries in KFOR. We have repeatedly drawn
the international community's attention to the fact that
these little infringements are direct gross violations
of resolution 1244 (1999), which stipulates that the
only presence permitted in Kosovo is of multinational
contingents under international control. The Kosovo-
Albanian authorities are already announcing the
deployment of one garrison of the future army to
northern Kosovo, which is a direct route to conflict.
We urge both Pristina and its international patrons to
stop before it is too late.

The slow pace of the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons to the region remains
unsatisfactory. The daily attacks on Kosovo Serb homes
and property and the cases of arson, physical damage
and acts of vandalism continue. Ensuring the reliable
protection of Orthodox structures in Kosovo needs
especially careful attention. Kosovars' usurpation of
Serbian Orthodox Church property continues, and in
particular, the church of Saint John the Baptist and
the Saint Paraskeva Pyatnitsa chapel in the town of
Pee are no longer listed in the local land register as
Serbian Orthodox Church property. There have been
attempts to build illegally in UNESCO-protected
areas near churches and monasteries. The international
presence in Kosovo, particularly the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
must keep the situation in this area under control. In
addition, the province is still a breeding ground for
recruiting radicals. Any attempts to put that problem
on the back burner could be very costly for the Balkans
and for Europe as a whole, especially considering that
terrorists fleeing Syria and Iraq are returning there.

We have to once again conclude that the Specialist
Chambers for prosecuting crimes committed by the
Kosovo Liberation Army insurgents has not begun its
real work, although it has already appointed its third
Prosecutor. This story looks more and more like a
mockery aimed at winding up the investigation into the
atrocities uncovered by the Council of Europe Special
Rapporteur Dick Marty. All those guilty of serious
crimes must be brought to justice and duly punished,
regardless of the positions they hold. There has also
been no progress in clarifying the circumstances
surrounding the murder in January of the Kosovo Serb
politician Oliver Ivanovie. We believe that has to do with
the fact that despite Belgrade's legitimate demands, for
some incomprehensible reason the investigation of the
crime was handed over wholly to Pristina.

A solution to the Kosovo problem must be found by
the parties themselves on the basis of our unanimously
adopted resolution 1244 (1999). The final agreement
must be reliable, with the proper international legal form,
and must have the broad support of the international
community. Despite our colleagues' assurances that
they support the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, we continue to see attempts to push for
Kosovo's membership in international organizations.
In particular, major efforts are being made, including
through financial leverage aimed at specific countries,
to round up a few more votes in support of Kosovo's
INTERPOL application. That is undermining the
mutual trust between the parties even more and may
have a destructive effect on INTERPOL'S work, as
happened before with the World Customs Organization.

It is clear to us that considering the serious problems
in the province and the realities on the ground, the
international community's attention to the situation in
Kosovo must not be distracted. We deplore the fact that
the quarterly meeting on Kosovo scheduled for August
did not take place. I am obliged to respond to my British
colleague, who told us about four options for holding a
meeting on Kosovo in August. We have another reading
of that proposal, which is that our British colleagues,
who presided over the Council in August, simply blew
off the meeting altogether. We believe it is essential to
maintain the quarterly Security Council meetings on
Kosovo and specifically to hold them in an open format.
It is also essential to maintain the budget and staffing
parameters of UNMIK, which plays an important role
in Kosovo as, essentially, the objective eyes and ears of
the international community, as well as doing important
work in the area of intercommunal reconciliation. We
want to point out that the Security Council alone is
authorized to make decisions about the fate of UNMIK,
as provided for in resolution 1244 (1999).

