I thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for her briefing. China welcomes the fact that the Syrian Government and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) have maintained communication and cooperation through letters and video-teleconferences. The two sides, continuing their engagement at the technical level, held a secure video-teleconference on 20 July. We call on the OPCW and the Syrian Government to continue that engagement and to resolve pending issues through cooperation. The chemical-weapons issue is of great concern to all. China objects to the hasty conclusions drawn and the accusations levelled, in the absence of solid evidence, concerning the alleged use of chemical weapons. Rushing to conclusions is not conducive to closing the Syrian chemical-weapons dossier and could even undermine mutual trust among the Syrian parties, thus harming the political process. The Syrian Permanent Mission to the United Nations has submitted a number of letters to the President of the Council offering information and expressing concern. We call on the OPCW and the international community to give attention to and respond to those letters. The OPCW should endeavour to strengthen mutual trust among States parties and maintain the tradition of taking decisions based on consensus. Questions and different opinions should be encouraged instead of neglected. All parties should engage in dialogue and consultation to reach agreement. Pushing for a vote while there is still significant divergence only causes confrontation and undermines cooperation. That is harmful to the OPCW's authority, operation and long-term interests. Unfortunately, such practices have been used several times in the OPCW. Many countries, including China, are seriously concerned. With regard to the decision to establish the Investigation and Identification Team and the recent decision taken at the ninety-fourth session of the Executive Council, China's position is firm and clear. I would like to emphasize that the OPCW should strictly comply with the provisions of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) in the conduct of its work instead of being used as a geopolitical tool by certain States parties. The international community should join hands to maintain the professionalism, objectiveness and impartiality of the OPCW and reject any attempts at politicization. As a CWC State party, China firmly opposes the use of chemical weapons for any purpose by any country, organization or individual, under any circumstance. Finally, I have two questions for Mrs. Nakamitsu. First, the latest report of the OPCW briefly mentions the technical meeting held on 20 July between the Technical Secretariat and the Syrian Government. We would like to know the agenda of that meeting and its outcome. Secondly, what role can the Technical Secretariat and the Director-General play to help the OPCW return to its consensus-based decision-making practice?
