Mr. Pascoe: Please allow me to provide a short
briefing this morning on the military, political and
humanitarian situation in Libya.

It has been almost five months since the political
crisis in Libya began, three months since the passage
of resolution 1973 (2011) and 100 days since NATO
operations began. While we do not have a detailed
understanding of the military situation on the ground, it
is clear that the initiative, although halting, is now with
the opposition forces and is supported at times by
NATO air power. Press reports point to heavy fighting
in the vicinity of Bir Al-Ghanam, some 50 miles from
Tripoli. There are also reports of some fighting in
Brega, shelling by regime forces in Misrata and NATO
air strikes in Tripoli.

We are continuing our efforts to implement the
provisions of resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011).
The Secretary-General has continued his discussions
with Libyan authorities, world leaders and the heads of
the African Union (AU), the European Union (EU), the
League of Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (01C) and NATO on the situation in Libya.
Recently, he participated in the second high-level
meeting of regional organizations, held in Cairo on
18 June, via videoconference. The representatives of
the AU, the EU, the League of Arab States and the
OIC, together with the Secretary-General and his
Special Envoy to Libya, exchanged views on the ways
and means to bring the current conflict to an end,
ensure the effective protection of the civilian
population and usher in a political process that would
make it possible to develop the legitimate aspirations
of the Libyan people. During that meeting, all
participating organizations were united in their resolve
2
to find a lasting solution to the crisis and issued a joint
press statement to that end.

The Special Envoy, Mr. Abdel-Elah Al-Khatib, is
today in South Africa to confer with President Jacob
Zuma following yesterday's meeting of the African
Union Ad Hoc High-Level Committee on Libya. He
will then accompany the Deputy Secretary-General to
Malabo to attend the AU Summit in order to discuss
with other African leaders, the African Union
Commission and the Libyan parties the next step in the
political process. He plans to Visit Libya in the near
future and will then travel to New York to brief the
Security Council.

The Special Envoy has made two additional trips
to Libya since I last briefed the Council, on 31 May
(see S/PV.6541). He continues to be in close contact
with both parties. He is trying to narrow the differences
between the two parties and to start indirect talks. On
7and 8 June, he met with Government officials in
Tripoli and Transitional National Council (TNC)
representatives in Benghazi and discussed with both
parties their views on a transition process. He is also in
frequent telephone contact with all of the relevant
parties. Discussions have revolved around the need to
end hostilities, agree on a transitional arrangement that
is linked to a political process and facilitate safe
humanitarian access.

In Tripoli, the Special Envoy encouraged the
regime to accept a transition and to define its
parameters. The authorities in Tripoli emphasized the
centrality of the United Nations in dealing with the
current crisis and their readiness to engage in a process
to implement resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011).
In Benghazi, he stressed to the TNC the importance of
engaging in a dialogue that would lead to a political
solution. The TNC reiterated its willingness to work
with, and through, the United Nations, including
engaging in indirect talks so as to define a transition.

I should also note that today, the International
Criminal Court issued arrest warrants for Colonel
Muammar Al-Qadhafi, his son, Mr. Saif Al-Islam
Qadhafi, and Mr. Abdullah Al-Senussi on charges of
crimes against humanity.

Let me now turn to the humanitarian situation. As
of 23 June, over 1.1 million people had crossed the
Libyan borders into Tunisia, Egypt, Niger, Algeria,
Chad and the Sudan. However, as the opposition takes
control of some of the towns and cities, there are
11-38899
reports that some migrant workers are actually
returning to Libya. An estimated 3,000 individuals
remain stranded at border points in Egypt, Tunisia and
Niger. Around 16,000 people have arrived by boat in
Italy and Malta. At least 1,400 people, mostly African
migrants, are also in the area. We are also concerned
about the many migrants, mostly sub-Saharan Africans,
who are sailing in dangerous conditions towards
Europe from Libya. Many of those migrants remain
unaccounted for, or have died at sea.

Several of the neighbouring countries have raised
serious concerns about the impact of the Libyan crisis.
The loss of remittances from migrant workers and
reports of flows of arms from Libya to the Sahel could
further complicate the already fragile situation in the
region. For instance, more than 70,500 Chadians and
82,000 people from Niger have returned to their
countries. The socio-economic strain is a serious issue.

I am pleased to report that since 29 May, United
Nations humanitarian agencies have been able to
access Tripoli, Al-Khums, Zliten and Gharyan, in the
Nafusa mountains, as well as opposition-controlled
areas in Misrata and Ajdabiya and the Dehiba crossing
point on the Libya-Tunisia border. This is largely due
to an agreement that was reached with the Libyan
authorities in April to provide security and other
necessary arrangements for humanitarian agencies in
accordance with the provisions of resolution 1973
(2011).

Since the adoption of resolution 1973 (2011), the
Secretary-General has received more than 45
communications from approximately 25 Member States
and regional organizations and arrangements,
informing him of actions taken with respect to the
implementation of the resolution. The majority of those
communications relate to paragraphs 4 and 8, and the
remainder relate to humanitarian exemptions under
paragraph 7, although they do not always fall under
specific provisions in all of the cases.

Last month, I provided the Council with an
update on the 26 April letter addressed to the
Secretary-General by NATO's Secretary-General
conveying their first monthly report. Since then, we
received three technical update reports - dated 6 May,
7 June and 15 June, respectively - in addition to a
second monthly report, dated 26 May, and a third
monthly report, which arrived today.
11-38899

I know the Chair of the Libya Sanctions
Committee will brief the Council separately, but I
would only like to underscore that, in accordance with
paragraph 24 of resolution 1973 (2011), the Secretary-
General has finalized the appointment of eight experts
to serve on the Panel of Experts to assist the
Committee in carrying out its mandate.

Let me conclude with the following points.

First, resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011)
are clear. We have an obligation to protect the people
of Libya, and that is the goal of the current
international efforts. We must ensure that the basic
rights and freedoms of the Libyan people are fully
respected and protected and that their legitimate
aspirations are met.

Secondly, we are concerned about all reports of
civilian casualties, whether resulting from the regime's
violence, which of course has been responsible for the
vast majority of civilian casualties, or from military
actions by opposition forces or NATO. The
Secretary-General has emphasized that every effort
must be made to avoid exposing civilians to risk.

Thirdly, we appreciate the full support of the
Security Council and the international community for
Special Envoy Al-Khatib as he works with the parties
on a political solution to end the violence in Libya,
allow us to provide humanitarian assistance to the
people in need and meet the legitimate aspirations of
the people of Libya. While an agreement is still far
from being concluded, the beginning of a negotiation
process is certainly under way. The process must be
given space to grow and bear fruit. It is important for
the international community to deliver a consistent,
clear and coherent message on a political solution to
both parties.

Fourthly, early preparations for post-conflict
peacebuilding and peace consolidation must clearly be
part of our planning. We will discuss that further in our
private meeting.

