Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I would like to welcome the new elected members of the Security Council - Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam - and to wish them every success in their work. I also commend Cete d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait, Peru and Poland, with which Kazakhstan worked in the Security Council, for their important contributions to the work of the Council during their tenure. I congratulate the delegation of Viet Nam on its assumption of the presidency in the Security Council for the month of January 2020 and, of course, on its successful start in convening this open debate on such an important subject. We consider today's debate to be very timely and valuable, taking into consideration the upcoming celebration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations and of the end of the Second World War. The United Nations Charter was meant to set up rules of work as the common endeavour of all nations in order to maintain the fragile peace and security following the Second World War. It is important to remember that the Charter was written in the blood of the millions of victims of world wars and armed conflicts. Any violation of its Articles, especially with respect to ensuring the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, could result in the tragic mistakes of the past being made once again. Unfortunately, the current world situation shows that the United Nations Charter as well as the principles of international law are being seriously tested, leaving the world on the verge of full-scale military stand-offs. In this regard, it is urgent to ensure a strict commitment by all Member States to the generally recognized norms and principles of international law. In order to uphold the United Nations Charter, my first President, Nursultan Nazarbayev, during his address to the General Assembly in 2015, proposed the convening of a United Nations conference at the highest level with the aim of reaffirming the basic principles of international law. We believe that that initiative, especially in this jubilee year for the Organization, continues to be relevant and can give fresh impetus to restoring dialogue, mutual understanding and trust in international relations among States. We call upon the Secretary-General and all Member States to consider convening such a high-level event during the General Assembly's session in September 2020. Let us be frank: the United Nations Charter and other norms and principles of international law were not imposed on us against our will. We all collectively and independently accepted and acceded to them on a voluntary basis. That is why it is the obligation of each and every Member State to comply with their provisions, even if at times it does not seem to align with its interests. We should avoid situations in which international law and the United Nations Charter are used selectively. The most efficient tool that the Security Council has in its possession to maintain international peace and security is the use of the potential of regional bodies. Strengthening cooperation with regional organizations, including mechanisms of preventive diplomacy, is very important for upholding the United Nations Charter. In that regard, I would like to recall another initiative of Kazakhstan's - the creation of the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia (CICA), which has been successfully functioning for more than a quarter century. In the current environment, which is characterized by a trust deficit, the confidence-building mechanism that CICA provides in the area of international relations has become the most potent instrument for the peaceful prevention of conflicts. Focusing on actions rather than on words, we are working to transform CICA into a full-fledged regional organization for security and development so as to stem conflicts and find ways to collectively prevent them altogether. Kazakhstan, as the next Chair of CICA, in 2020, will deploy every effort to that end. In conclusion, the erosion of international law and global institutions, including the United Nations, poses a great danger for all of us. It is our strong belief that the Security Council, especially the permanent members, should be at the forefront of upholding the United Nations Charter and the principles of international law, and we all must show the collective will to abide by them.
