Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to address the Security Council today, on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, about the threats
to international peace and security by acts of maritime
piracy.

At the outset, I would like to thank India, President
for the month of November, for proposing that the issue
of piracy be on the Security Council programme of
work this month and for arranging to convene today's
open debate.

The Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) notes with
appreciation the efforts of the Council in mitigating the
threats emanating from maritime piracy. At the same
time, NAM. remains concerned about the frequency
of pirates' attacks, which threaten safety and security
at sea. Despite international efforts in recent years to
curtail the threat, maritime piracy has remained a major
problem, with economic, commercial, humanitarian
and security dimensions. Several of the major maritime
trade routes of the world, in particular the Gulf of Aden
and the Gulf of Guinea, continue to be affected by
piracy, hampering international trade and commerce.
In the past couple of years, the plight of seafarers
taken hostage and held in captivity by pirates has also
become a matter of serious concern for the international
community.

At the Sixteenth Summit Conference of Heads of
State and Government of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, held in Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran,
from 26 to 31 August 2012, the Heads of State or
Government of the Non-Aligned Movement expressed
their concern at the continuing acts of piracy and
armed robbery off the coast of Somalia and the Gulf
of Aden, and condemned those acts, which hamper
the delivery of humanitarian aid and pose a threat to
commercial maritime and international navigation in
the region. In that context, they commended the efforts
of the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia
and the international community to fight piracy, while
reiterating the need to address the underlying causes of
piracy on the mainland.

Furthermore, the NAM. Heads of State or Government
welcomed the adoption of resolution 1816 (2008) and
stressed that the resolution should be implemented
in a manner fully consistent with international law,
including the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea. They also welcomed the serious efforts made by
NAM. countries, and other countries that have deployed
their naval vessels in the territorial waters of Somalia
and the Gulf of Aden, to assist in countering acts of
piracy and armed robbery. They further welcomed the
establishment of the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia, which held its first meeting in New
York on 14 January 2009, and urged the Contact Group
on Piracy to continue strengthening its work, with the
participation of all interested States, in the context of

countering piracy and armed robbery in the sea off the
coastal region of Somalia.

The NAM. Summit meeting also emphasized the
need to focus attention on the illicit financial flows
associated with piracy, with a view to disrupting the
financing and planning of piracy attacks.

The NAM. Summit welcomed the outcomes of the
high-level public-private counter-piracy Conference
convened under the title "Global Challenge, Regional
Responses: Forging a Common Approach to Maritime
Piracy", held on 18 and 19 April 2011, in Dubai, United
Arab Emirates, with the aim of bringing together
concerned parties from Governments, the private sector
and non-governmental organizations in partnership so
as to combat maritime piracy. It also welcomed the
outcomes of the pledging conference, co-chaired by
the United Nations and the United Arab Emirates and
held on 19 April 2011, in support of the Trust Fund to
Support Initiatives of States Countering Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia, established by the United Nations
Secretary-General.

With regard to acts of piracy and armed robbery at
sea in the Gulf of Guinea, the NAM. Summit expressed
its deep concern about the situation and welcomed
resolution 2039 (2012). NAM. affirmed its support for the
efforts made by the States of the region and subregional
organizations to hold a summit with the participation
of all States of the region of the Gulf of Guinea in order
to consider a comprehensive response to this threat in
the region, and also supported the request made to the
Secretary-General to support convening this summit.

The Movement remains resolved to continue
assisting the efforts of the international community in
its quest to mobilize international efforts to tackle the
menace of piracy, including through capacity-building
of the States in the region. Given that piracy is often
a transnational crime, with pirates operating across
national borders, the level of cooperation between
Governments, navies and law-enforcement agencies
has an important role to play. At the United Nations
level, the issue of piracy requires a strong inter-agency
approach that not only addresses the law-enforcement
andjudiciary aspects ofthe problem, but also formulates
solutions aimed at addressing its underlying causes.

I shall now speak in my national capacity.

The Islamic Republic of Iran welcomes the actions
taken at the international level aimed at strengthening
and assisting the countries affected by piracy and
improving their counter-piracy measures. We also
welcome the authorization by the Security Council of
measures to counter this crime and particularly armed
robbery off the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of
Aden.

After the hijacking of some Iranian ships by
pirates off the coast of Somalia and the Gulf of Aden,
Iran entrusted its navy with the mission of protecting
commercial fleets under the Iranian flag or under
Iranian ownership, as well as other ships in need of
rescue operations and requesting help from the Iranian
navy, in accordance with Security Council resolutions
that authorize Member States to send their warships
to the Gulf of Aden and coastal waters of Somalia to
fight against the pirates. These operations, in line with
the general fight against piracy, have been carried out
through active cooperation on the part of the countries
in the region. The Islamic Republic of Iran's navy
has helped and assisted ships in need of escort or in
danger of being overtaken by pirates, which amounts
to more than 100 cases. The latest such case was in
April 2012, during which an Iranian and a Chinese ship
were rescued and the attempt to hijack those ships was
thwarted.

We have carried out naval manoeuvres in order
to better familiarize our seafarers with situations
involving piracy. Iran participated in international and
regional meetings and workshops on piracy, including
the Djibouti meeting, the London Conference on
Piracy and Somalia, and the subregional meetings
held in Dubai, and has been active in the exchange of
information and the sharing of reports on piracy with
other countries and the relevant international bodies.

The rapid geographical spread of maritime piracy
and the complexity of the issue necessitate a deep and
more comprehensive look at the various facets of the
problem in order that a collective and more coordinated
response may be devised. We hope that this open debate
will provide Member States with a better look at the
needs at the international level in connection with
mitigating the threat of piracy and sharing experiences
for the purpose of improving the international response
aimed at curbing acts of piracy.

