Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
first of all to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Augustine Mahiga,
for the briefing he has just given on the situation in
Somalia.

Somalia turned a new page in its history with the
end of the transition, marked by the adoption of the
provisional Constitution, the holding of elections and the
establishment of new institutions. Indeed, the adoption
on 1 August of the Somali provisional Constitution by
the National Constituent Assembly moved the country
further towards lasting stability. It served as the basis
for elections of new Members of the Federal Parliament
and its principal organs, as well as the election of the
President of the Republic. The Constitution also calls
for the creation of many other institutions in the post-
transition period, and we hope that they will soon be
established.

My country welcomes Somalia's emergence from
institutional instability and the onset of the process of
creating a viable federal State, with more representative
institutions to guide it towards the change that will lead
to stability.

The encouraging results that Somalia has been
able to achieve in the political, security and other
areas are the fruits of the common efforts of the
Somalis themselves and other political actors, notably
the signatories to the road map of 6 September 2011,
regional and international partners, especially the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
other United Nations organs active in Somalia.

The London and Istanbul conferences, the meetings
of the International Contact Group on Somalia, visits
by several high-level international delegations to
Mogadishu, and the recent summit on Somalia in the
margins of the General Assembly are all evidence of
the international community's support for the political
process in Somalia. That international support, together
with the work and sacrifices of AMISOM. and the
Somali National Security Forces, led to the liberation
of a number of important areas in southern and central
Somalia. Recently, the recapture of the strategic port of
Kismayo, the principal income source and the centre
of operations for Al-Shabaab, was a death blow to
that insurgency. My country reiterates its gratitude to
AMISOM. for its remarkable work and the great sense
of responsibility and selflessness of its personnel.

Still, while A1-Shabaab has been routed from
strategic areas and towns and lost much territory,
and while some of its numbers are signing on with
Government forces and AMISOM, it is to be feared that
it will use its remaining destructive abilities to engage
in terrorist acts, as we have seen recently in the murder
of journalists and many human rights violations. My
country believes it urgent to safeguard Somalia's new
institutions so as to solidify the recent gains, given that
the post-transition period in Somalia remains fragile
and that the new institutions are vulnerable to threats
and face many challenges. They must be staunchly
supported in the push to stabilize the country, including
through dialogue with insurgents, because, as the
Secretary-General has noted, the peace process does
not end with the end of the transition.

Togo also urges the new Government to work
for transparency in the management of public funds
and of the aid it receives for reconstruction and
development. We hope that it will honour the need
for women's representation; work for inclusiveness,
openness and responsibility; and keep a broad view
of the goals to achieve beyond the establishment of
political institutions, such as social and economic
reconstruction, and the development of the country
after 21 years of civil war.

The political and security progress achieved
must not overshadow the humanitarian situation
in Somalia, which remains critical. Togo urges the
various humanitarian agencies to continue with their
assistance initiatives to help the thousands of displaced
persons, refugees and other people in need, despite
the difficulties of doing so, in order to reduce food
insecurity and serious child malnutrition in particular.

The protection of civilians and the issue of
human rights also remain serious concerns and must
be included as priorities in their reconstruction and
national reconciliation programme.

While it is clear that the number of acts of piracy
along the Somali coast has dropped significantly, the
increased criminal activity on the continent, in particular
the kidnapping of humanitarian workers and civilians
by pirate networks, remains a source of concern. The
problem of piracy has not disappeared with the end
of the transition, and the new Somali authorities must
take a comprehensive national approach to maritime
security in order to achieve the remaining objectives set
out in the road map. The international community must
also continue to support the Government of Somalia in
its fight against maritime piracy.

To conclude, we commend the invaluable
contribution of the European Union and the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia, which have
consistently supported AMISOM. and the Somali
authorities throughout the process. Togo welcomes
the very positive actions undertaken by other partners
that have steadfastly remained at Somalia's side. My
country also supports the extension of the mandate
of AMISOM. beyond 31 October 2012, as set out in
resolution 2036 (2012).

