Ms. Siider (Sweden): Let me begin by joining
the members of the Council in extending my sincere
condolences to the peoples of Afghanistan, India and
Nepal for the tragic loss of lives caused by the Taliban
attack yesterday in Kabul.

Let me thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2016/532) and not least Special Representative
Haysom for his briefing and all his endeavours. I

would also like to take this opportunity to thank him
for his outstanding service in Afghanistan and to wish
him very good luck in his new position. We also join
others in welcoming incoming Special Representative
Tadamichi Yamamoto, who will have our full support
in his important mission.

Sweden aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union
and would like to make some additional remarks,
mainly on the responsibility and role of the
international community.

Together with the Afghan National Unity
Government, which has our full support, the
international community should continue to invest in
sustainable peace in Afghanistan. Success will require
addressing the root causes to achieve peace, security
and development, with strong partnerships and national
ownership. We know that very well, since our assistance
to Afghanistan dates back more than three decades, all
over the country, with a focus on education and health,
women and girls.

Now we, the international community, stand before
two important milestones this year: the meeting of the
NATO Resolute Support Mission in Afghanistan, to be
held in Warsaw in July, and the donor conference to
be held in Brussels in October. At these conferences,
the future of the international community's support
to Afghanistan will be determined. Predictable and
sustainable funding is a prerequisite for success.
We have already declared our substantial long-term
commitment, with the ambition of contributing
approximately $1.2 billion during the transformation
decade, 2015-2024. We encourage all countries
that have been engaged in the region, and the wider
international community, to stay committed and to join
us in this long-term approach. Sustained assistance
to the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
is also needed. Sweden participates proudly in the
Resolute Support Mission.

The continued implementation of essential reforms,
as stipulated in the Self-reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework, is necessary. Respect for
the Afghan Constitution is key, and we encourage
the Afghan Government to continue reaching out to a
broad political base. Additional measures to counter
corruption and the illicit economy are particularly
important. All of these are critical to building a viable
democratic society and increasing confidence in the
Afghan State.

As we have heard, today security remains a basic
and serious concern. We are particularly disturbed by
the high number of civilian casualties and internally
displaced persons recorded in 2015, and by the fact
that the situation persists. The humanitarian situation
in the country continues to present serious challenges
and, as always, women and children are the most
affected. All actors need to make sure that civilians are
afforded protection in accordance with international
humanitarian law.

We all long for a peaceful solution to the conflict.
Therefore, we welcome the efforts made so far
throughout the year, most notably the work conducted
by Afghanistan, Pakistan, China and the United
States in the Quadrilateral Coordination Group, and
the clear ambition of President Ghani and the Afghan
Government to invite the Taliban to the negotiating
table. We encourage the Government to continue on
this constructive path. We of course stand ready to
support the process if called upon.

The sustained engagement of the countries of
the region is also essential. A conducive regional
environment is very much needed. We are particularly
pleased by the formation of a new High Peace Council
and by the fact that several women are included in
the new structures, including as a Deputy Chair. We
strongly believe that women's inclusion in a potential
peace process will greatly enhance the likelihood of a
successful outcome.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) continues to play a crucial
role in supporting the Afghan Government. Moreover,
the Mission and its leadership have been decisive
to efforts for peace, stability and development in the
country, as well as an important facilitator of dialogue
and discussion within the international community.
We support the important role of UNAMA with regard
to humanitarian access, the promotion of human
rights and in providing good offices in support of
the peace process. UNAMA will remain essential to
the international engagement in Afghanistan for the
foreseeable future.

Let us recognize that much progress has been made
in Afghanistan in the past decade, yet the challenges
require our continued attention and we must take a
long-term approach. As I said earlier, we have provided
assistance for a very long time - indeed, many decades.
The Afghan Government and people can certainly
count on Sweden's ongoing support in their quest for a
peaceful and more prosperous future. The international
community cannot afford to forget about Afghanistan.

