Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I deliver this
statement on behalf of the three humanitarian
co-penholders - Belgium, Kuwait and Germany.
We would like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, and
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, for their briefings
and updates.

The situation in north-western Syria remains deeply
unsettling. We reiterate our deep concern about the
continuing violence in recent weeks in north-western
Syria, including indiscriminate aerial bombardments
and heavy shelling. As a result, we have witnessed more
civilian casualties and displaced people. The number of
internally displaced persons since April has surpassed
300,000. We see people, including many children,
living without any shelter. We also condemn the loss of
innocent lives as a result of this escalation.

We are highly alarmed by the persistent attacks
on civilian infrastructure, including 26 health-care
facilities and 37 schools. This is appalling. It seems as
if we are losing the very essence of humanity.

The indiscriminate use of weapons, especially in
densely populated areas, is unacceptable. Such attacks
show complete disregard for human life and follow a
strategy of collective punishment.

In addition, the reported intentional use of
incendiary weapons to destroy farmland and
agricultural equipment adds a new horrific dimension
to the conflict and runs counter to resolution 2417
(2018). Farmers are already struggling to access their
land and harvest their crops.

We, the co-penholders, remind all parties of their
obligations under international humanitarian law,
based on the Geneva Conventions and its Protocols,
including the humanitarian principles to protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure. We once again
recall the obligations under resolutions 2286 (2016)
and 2427 (2018). Those who have committed violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights
law must be held accountable. We stand firm in our
commitment to fight impunity.

We welcome all sustained efforts and ongoing
dialogue to reinstate the ceasefire arrangements of
the Russian-Turkish memorandum of understanding
signed in September 2018. We call on all parties to
fully implement it in order to de-escalate the situation
and protect the lives of 3 million people, including
1 million children.

We echo the clear and repeated assessment of the
United Nations that any wide-scale military offensive
would lead to a humanitarian catastrophe for Syria
and the region. The co-penholders are unified in their
condemnation of any attack by members of United
Nations-designated terrorist groups, such as Hayat
Tahrir al-Sham. However, the fight against terrorism
can neverjustify indiscriminate attacks on civilians and
civilian infrastructure. Counter-terrorism operations
do not override the responsibility and obligations of
parties to protect civilians. Nor should they impede
impartial humanitarian action.

On the contrary, all parties to conflict must allow and
facilitate principled humanitarian action. Humanitarian
access must be provided in an unconditional, safe,
timely, unhindered and sustained manner. The United
Nations and its partners must be in a position to assess
needs properly and to deliver humanitarian assistance
without obstacles, including through the cross-border
mechanism in accordance with resolution 2449
(2018), which remains the crucial lifeline to millions
in north-western Syria. We sincerely thank the whole
humanitarian community for its efforts to continue to
bring life-saving assistance to people in need.

Last but not least, we reiterate our full support
to Special Envoy Pederson in his efforts to reach an
inclusive and credible political solution in Syria on
the basis of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communique of 2012 (S/2021/522, annex).

