Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like
to thank the Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, and the Director of Operations and Advocacy
in the United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Ging, for their
briefings. We understand their immense responsibility.
Let me reiterate my delegation's full support for
their work.

Once again, we underscore our concerns about the
possible escalation ofviolence in Idlib - a city home to,
as mentioned earlier, approximately 3 million people,
of whom 1.4 million are internally displaced. Many are
children who could face internal displacement. That
could lead to a humanitarian disaster and increase
the number of people who have lost their lives to the
conflict over the past eight years. In that regard, we
believe that there is an urgent need to fully implement
resolution 2401 (2018). We hope that the meeting taking
place among the signatories of the Astana agreements
will shed light on how the Security Council can meet
its aspirations. We call on the parties to continue to
monitor the implementation of those agreements.
We reiterate that we must prevent the escalation of
violence and instead provide humanitarian assistance
to the 2.1 million civilians in need in Idlib. Ongoing
coordination is essential in order to facilitate better
access for humanitarian convoys, including the cross-
border convoys.

We believe that any effort or measure to combat
terrorism necessarily requires protecting civilian
lives, including complying with obligations under
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant international conventions
and protocols. We are keen to hear the suggestions of
Mr. De Mistura with regard to protecting civilians.

We stress the need to ensure that populated
areas and the entire territory are cleared of explosive
remnants of war, including in the city of Raqqa. That
is a crucially important and urgent task, not only to
reduce the risks posed to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance but also since steps must be taken to avoid
fatalities among medical crews, humanitarian workers
and ultimately the civilian population as they return
to their cities of origin, including in Idlib province.
Moreover, we underscore that any returns must be
voluntary, unimpeded, dignified and secure.

We reiterate the importance that all parties respect
their obligations under international law, especially
international humanitarian law. When we say "all
parties", we intend what was noted by the representative
of Equatorial Guinea: not only those States directly
involved but also those States financing the armed
groups present in Idlib.

We must ensure the protection of civilians, schools
and hospitals. It is imperative that such civilian objects
not be used as the targets for attacks, and likewise the
workforce of the various humanitarian agencies on the
ground must be protected.

We reject any attempts to split up Syria. It is up to
the Syrian people to freely determine their future and
their political leadership in a context of sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. We must
therefore continue supporting the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria.

In conclusion, we stress that there can be no military
solution to the conflict in Syria and the only alternative
is through an inclusive political process of dialogue
negotiated, agreed and led by the Syrian people through
the implementation of the final statement of the Syrian
National Dialogue Congress, held in Sochi in January,
and the establishment of a constitutional committee, a
process that should be facilitated by the United Nations
in keeping with the Geneva process and in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015).

Finally, while underscoring this matter is the
responsibility of the Security Council and its 15
members, as the Permanent Representative ofPeru said,
the permanent members bear particular responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
We can only hope that in their decision-making it is
not their military interests that prevail but rather the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.

