Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks Mr. Michel
Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Burundi, and Ambassador Jiirg Lauber, Permanent
Representative of Switzerland to the United Nations, in
his capacity as Chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings.

Bolivia appreciates the efforts by the Special
Envoy to continue the inter-Burundian dialogue in an
inclusive atmosphere. With respect to the fifth dialogue
session in particular, we hope its subsequent road map
and final report will provide a basis for reflection on the
way forward. We also appreciate the respective efforts
of the facilitator and the mediator, former President
Benjamin Mkapa of the United Republic of Tanzania
and President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda. We
acknowledge the work of the East African Community,
which should continue to lead the inter-Burundian
dialogue process in order to preserve the progress made
under the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement.
We also appreciate the work being done in Burundi by
the Special Representative of the African Union for the
Great Lakes Region, the United Nations country team
and, especially, the Chair of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, whom we commend
for his efforts in organizing and facilitating dialogue on
socioeconomic issues between the Government and its
international partners.

We are pleased that the security situation in the
country continues to improve and that the referendum of
17 May was held in an atmosphere of calm and inclusion,
without major incidents and with the participation of
all political parties. We also welcome the appointment
of new members to the national independent electoral
commission, as well as the Burundian Government's
adoption of a road map for the upcoming elections.
We encourage all the parties to work to create the
conditions necessary for an atmosphere of peace and
trust during the upcoming 2020 elections by reinforcing
a spirit of tolerance, taking conciliatory measures and
maintaining a dialogue process with the opposition.

We commend Burundi's launch of its national
development plan and call on all its partners to work
together with the Government to forge links that
will enable its implementation for the benefit of the
Burundian people. We also note Burundi's contribution
to peace and security through its deployment of troop
contingents, a testament to its institutional capacity.
The international community should support Burundi
in strengthening that capacity, which goes hand in hand
with its socioeconomic development and its ability to
address its persistent humanitarian challenges. We
encourage the international community to continue to
provide funding for the humanitarian response plan
in Burundi, and we are pleased that 52 per cent of the
required amount has been achieved so far.

We highlight the voluntary return home of more
than 52,000 refugees and encourage the Government,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the United Nations Development
Programme and other United Nations entities to
continue working for the voluntary, safe and dignified
return of the hundreds of thousands of refugees who
remain in neighbouring countries. We call on the
international community to support those efforts and in
particular to provide assistance for the refugees' return
and reintegration.

If these challenges are to be overcome, we need to
create an atmosphere of trust, which involves lifting
the unilateral sanctions on Burundi in accordance
with the appeal by the Heads of State of the African
Union at its July summit. The situation in Burundi
has harmful consequences for the civilian population,
especially vulnerable groups, and negative effects on
the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals. In conclusion, I believe that the Security Council
and the international community in general should
pursue a dialogue in a constructive manner and deal
with the areas where there is still a lack of convergence
for the sake of a peaceful solution based on respect for
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Burundi.

