Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your country's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month, and
I wish you and the friendly delegation of the United
Kingdom all the best. I would also like to thank
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Yemen, and Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for their
valuable briefings.

The Yemeni Government has expressed its
sincere and serious desire to achieve a just and lasting
peace based on the three agreed terms of reference,
namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
its Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of
the National Dialogue Conference, and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015). The Government has sought
to prioritize the interests of Yemen and its people in
the fulfilment of their aspirations to build a new and
federal Yemen based on the outcomes of the National
Dialogue Conference - a new Yemen that would serve
Yemeni interests and play a major role in assisting
our regional partners to combat the terrorism and
sectarianism schemes that seek to spread chaos, destroy
our nation's aspirations and undermine the foundations
of our society.

The Yemeni Government greatly values the
determined efforts of Saudi Arabia, with the King
and the Crown Prince of the country at the helm of
the coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen, Their
efforts have played a significant role in the signing
of the Riyadh agreement, which is an important step
upon which to build in making future progress on
a comprehensive peace based on the agreed terms of
reference while maintaining the fundamentals of our
national identity.

The agreement seeks to ensure the full restoration
of the Yemeni State with the operationalization of all
of Government powers and institutions in Aden, the
temporary capital, as well as in liberated governorates,
while committing to full citizenship rights for all
Yemenis and to eliminating sectarian discrimination.
The agreement also seeks to place all military
formations outside of State institutions under the
control of the Ministries of Defence and of the Interior
so as to contribute to liberating the governorates
remaining under the control of the Houthi militias and
to solidifying efforts aimed at expediting the disruption
of the Houthi-Iranian scheme in Yemen. The agreement
also seeks to usher in a new era of stability and security
in Yemen and neighbouring countries and to serve
the interests of our country and the Yemeni people
while preventing divisions, creating a united front,
initiating a new era of construction and development
and combating extremist terrorist groups.

The President onemen has called for the immediate
and full implementation of the Riyadh agreement and
for the Prime Minister and the Cabinet to return to Aden,
the temporary capital, this week. These steps would
ensure that the root causes of the current problems and
their repercussions are addressed, namely, the presence
of military formations operating beyond State authority
that have prevented the Government from exercising its
full sovereignty and authority in the temporary capital
of Aden.

We welcome the statements expressing international
support for the Riyadh agreement by our brotherly
and friendly States members of the Security Council,
which we all welcome as a positive step towards lasting
peace in Yemen. We look forward to the support of our
brothers and friends in the international community for
efforts made by the Yemeni Government to overcome
the challenges, improve the economy and consolidate
security and stability.

The Stockholm Agreement is almost a year
old. However, no progress has yet been made on its
implementation. We must reflect on the reasons for
delay and exert pressure on the party obstructing
implementation of the Agreement. The implementation
of the Al-Hudaydah Agreement, especially its
provisions related to the local security forces, local
authorities and the withdrawal from the port and the
city of Al-Hudaydah, as well as opening humanitarian
corridors, will be an important confidence-building
measure that points the way towards possible
lasting peace.

Any attempt to circumvent the Agreement would
undermine the efforts of the United Nations and hinder
the political process. It would play into the hands of the
party that has undertaken the coup, allowing it to avoid
fulfilling its obligations. We must clearly and decisively
condemn the Houthis for their non-compliance with the
ceasefire and for their continued military escalation.
The foregoing violations unequivocally affirm that the
Houthi militias are not ready for peace. They do not
care about the humanitarian suffering caused by their
unjust war against the Yemeni people, as they use the
humanitarian situation as a tool for blackmail and other
forms of political pressure.

The Yemeni Government condemns the Iranian
regime's recognition of the representative of the
Houthi coup and its handover of diplomatic buildings
in Tehran belonging to the Republic of Yemen to him.
This handover is in flagrant violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and of the Vienna Convention
on Diplomatic Relations, as well as relevant Security
Council resolutions related to Yemen, notably resolution
2216 (2015). We call on the Security Council to condemn
this blatant and flagrant violation of international law
as a dangerous precedent in international relations. We
stress that legal action declaring this irresponsible act
null and void must necessarily be taken.

The Yemeni Government is making tremendous
efforts to revive the economic situation in the country.
We have achieved positive results through the
implementation of Decree No. 75 of 2018 and Decree
No. 49 of 2019 on collecting taxes, customs duties and
other legal revenues from the imports of oil derivatives
for the purpose of paying the salaries of civil servants.
During the past month, we have facilitated the entry
of oil derivatives into the port of Al-Hudaydah, which
has generated legal revenues of more than 15 billion
Yemeni rials in just two weeks. The Houthi militias
must deposit these revenues into a temporary account
at the Central Bank of Al-Hudaydah branch under the
supervision of the United Nations in accordance with
the Government initiative. These revenues will be used
to pay the salaries of civil servants in areas under the
control of the Houthi militias. We warn that, as has
happened with past revenues, these revenues might be
diverted and used to enrich warlords engaged in the
conflict at the expense of the suffering Yemenis.

The Yemeni Government calls once again on the
international community and the Security Council
to exert continued pressure on the Houthi militias to
allow the United Nations technical team access to
the FSO SAFER oil tanker so that an assessment of
the damage may be conducted, rather than waiting
until a preventable serious environmental disaster for
which the Houthi militias would be morally and legally
responsible takes place.

In conclusion, the Yemeni Government reiterates
its commitment to fully implementing all elements
of the Stockholm Agreement and the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement, as well as to releasing prisoners and
detainees as part of its apolitical humanitarian approach.
We also call for lifting the siege on the city of Taiz.

