Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to thank and commend Malaysia for
convening this important meeting to address the issue
of children and armed conflict.

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report of 20 April (S/2016/306). We further thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
and the Executive Director of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony
Lake, for their informative briefings to the Council and
for their references to the joint efforts of the Sudan and
the United Nations to protect children in conflict zones
in the Sudan.

We should like to provide the Security Council
with clarifications concerning a number of paragraphs
of the Secretary-General's report.

First, paragraph 135 refers to documented cases
of rape by Sudanese Armed Forces elements and
aligned militias. We note in that regard that the relevant
Sudanese civil and military law imposes maximum
penalties for proven violations. Cases are referred to the
judicial authorities, where they are speedily investigated
regardless of the position of the accused. It is also
worth noting that the Independent Expert, Mr. Aristide
Nononsi, issued a report on the humanitarian situation
in the Sudan, covering the period from October 2015 to
June 2016, that points to a decrease in cases of rape to
the lowest level recorded in any conflict zone. That is
testimony from an official who is authorized to conduct
monitoring and surveillance in my country.

Secondly, paragraph 136 notes that two schools and
three hospitals were attacked by the Sudanese Armed
Forces without specifying the names of the hospitals,
despite the fact that in Darfur, like elsewhere in the
Sudan and throughout the world, hospitals are clearly
marked and known. Nor does the report mention the
date of the attack or the number of casualties. Also, the
report does not cite the source for its information or
whether it is a United Nations source or a source of the
opposition forces or of the 22,740 non-governmental
organizations that operate in the conflict zone. We
note with satisfaction the increased interest among
United Nations States Members to cite the sources of
information in full transparency and clarity. In that
regard, I would like to refer to the statements made by
the representatives of Egypt, the Russian Federation,
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and other States at this
crucial meeting on an important issue.

Paragraph 140 of the report refers to the recruitment
of four boys by the Sudanese Armed Forces in West
Darfur. I should like to clarify the following.

First, since the establishment of the Sudan Defence
Forces before the Second World War - even before
independence - our country had in place laws and
regulations banning the recruitment of children under
the age of 18. The recruitment form, knows as Form
5-A, includes a paragraph stipulating the age of the
applicant and requesting the submission of a birth
certificate or an age estimation certificate as further
proof to confirm the information. The recruitment
procedures for our Rapid Support Forces are based
on the merits of each individual case. Similarly, we
require birth certificates or age estimation certificates.
Applicants also undergo medical exams, which makes
us confident that there are no minor children in the
ranks of the Rapid Support Forces.

Secondly, the reports claims in paragraph 140 have
not been verified. We therefore wonder why unverified
information is included in the report. Furthermore,
children captured in the battles of Goz Dongo and Fanga
were conscripts in the armed movements. They are still
in the ranks of the armed movements and are being
used by them. The Government has dealt with those
children in accordance with national and international
humanitarian law. We have provided them with the
necessary humanitarian and psychological support.
And we have developed a plan for their reintegration
and rehabilitation. We would like to reiterate that we
have taken steps on the ground and at the highest levels
to release the detained children. We will soon provide
the Council information on the steps taken. I would
like to thank Special Represenative of the Secretary-
General Zerrougi for her full cooperation, which
produced excellent results.

Paragraph 145 of the report states that the leaders
of the Justice and Equality Movement, the Sudan
Liberation Army/Minni Minawi and the Sudan
Liberation/Abdul Wahid issued a join statement
promising to desist from grave violations against
children. We think this is meant only to cover up the
actual violations they commit against children. That
can be seen in their forced recruitment and abuse of
children in armed conflict. It is a statement without
weight that will not positively change the policies and
behaviours of the armed movements, nor influence our
unwavering commitment to end the recruitment and
use of children.

The report of the Secretary-General indicates that
we have signed a joint plan of action with the United
Nations to protect children in armed conflict. The
Special Representative visited the Sudan in March as
part of the joint cooperation between the Government
of the Sudan and the United Nations to pursue efforts
to protect children. The Executive Director of UNICEF
commended the signing of the plan of action during the
high-level event heald at Headquarters on 11 July on
the theme "Rehabilitation and reintegration of children
affected by armed conflict: sharing best practices in
psychosocial rehabilitation and social reintegration".

That was an illustration of the positive development with
regard to the situation of children and armed conflict.

My delegation avails itself of this opportunity
to renew its commitment to implement the plan of
action, which was reached thanks to the commendable
efforts of the Special Representative. We also take
this opportunity to thank the individual countries and
groups of countries that have expressed their apreciation
for the signing of the plan of action. We think that such
positive comments serve to place great responsibility
on our shoulders. We are aware of that and are ready to
assume that responsibility so that we can cooperate with
the United Nations and the international community in
this area. We reiterate the importance of supporting
technical cooperation to achieve the noble joint goal of
protecting children from all types of violations.
The report also includes paragraphs concerning
violations against children by the Arab coalition in
Yemen. We would like again to emphasize the important
positive role of those forces in restoring legitimacy in
Yemen and protecting civilians, especially children,
following the military escalation that undermined
security, peace and stability in the country and the
region as a whole. We stress the noble objective of
the Arab coalition to achieve a political transition in
Yemen in accordance with all the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council. Restoring legitimacy quite
simply means restoring peace, which in turn means the
sustainable and full protection of children in Yemen.

In conclusion, my delegation will continue to
cooperate with the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and her team to protect the
rights of children and enable the provision of correct,
accurate information and data. My country also
reaffirms its commitment to implement all regional
and international instruments on protecting the rights
of children. We are party to all such instruments. We
also reiterate our commitment to the implementation to
the plan of action signed with the United Nations to
protect children.

