Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We appreciate the presence
of your Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. President,
today in the Council for the deliberations on this vital
issue. We have heard the statements of the Secretary-
General and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights with great interest.

The recent escalation of Violence and terrorism
against religious and ethnic groups in the Middle East
is an affront to humanity and all civilized norms. We
endorse the calls for relief and redress for the victims
of these atrocities, who have suffered grievously from
religious and ethnic bigotry and extremism. Throughout
history, millions have been killed, tortured, maimed
and dispossessed by the venom of religious and racial
hatred. Violence and atrocities against minorities
and other vulnerable groups must be unequivocally
condemned.

What is deeply offensive and unacceptable is that
some vested interests attempt to blame our great faith,
Islam, as the source of the current chaos, rather than
recall its historical and political roots. The current
chaos in the Middle East contrasts sharply with the
history and ethos of Islam. The Middle East, as many
speakers before me have pointed out, is a cradle of
major religions and civilizations. Islamic history in
the region is replete with examples of what true Islam
preaches: love, brotherhood, tolerance and humanity.
Over the course of history, the rights of minorities
have been preserved and prosperity promoted when
effective authority and order have combined with an
enlightened governance of nations, empires or States.
The weak 4 minorities, women and children 4 have
suffered the worst excesses whenever order and justice
have collapsed.

It is now clear that disorder and the collapse of
State authority across North Africa and the Middle East
have transformed the Arab Spring into a brutal winter.
The partial or complete breakdown of State authority in
Iraq and Syria has allowed for the rise of violent groups
such as Daesh, which are inured to extremist ideologies
and radical agendas. The quest for power by cynical
and brutal leaders wrapped in religious cloaks is not
surprising under the circumstances. What is surprising
and alarming is the fatal attraction that some of those
groups hold for disaffected and alienated youth within
and outside the Middle East.

Military and police action can deal with the
symptoms of the phenomena, but not the disease. That
requires a more comprehensive approach, one that offers
a path for the constructive involvement and engagement
of young people in the economic, social and political
life of their societies and States. Most importantly, it
requires an effective and thoughtful response to the
narrative of many of these extremist groups, a narrative
that they cynically seek to deploy. That narrative is
that Muslims have been historically oppressed and can
regain their rights and freedoms only through violent
means. The narrative will not be neutralized by solemn
declarations alone. It can be credibly countered only
through genuine efforts to resolve the underlying
political problems, among them, a solution for the
Palestine issue and other conflicts raging across the
Levant and beyond.

Historical and recent experience has demonstrated
that the challenges posed by the current chaos in
the Middle East will not be overcome by foreign
intervention. The sovereignty and territorial
integrity of countries will have to be fully respected.
Ultimately, durable peace can be restored through
national reconciliation in each affected State and
can be encouraged and promoted with regional and
global support. The Security Council can contribute
to restoring peace and defeating the extremist and
violent groups by helping to develop a global consensus
on the principles and structure for the solution to the
challenges confronted in Iraq, Syria, Yemen and, most
importantly, in Palestine. To achieve that, the Council
must adhere to the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and its own unimplemented resolutions.

