Mr. Kamaldinov (Kazakhstan): We truly
commend the Senagalese presidency for drawing
attention to the issue of water insecurity, which poses
new threats to which the Security Council must begin
to pay urgent attention.

Scientific studies have indicated a fourfold increase
in violent confrontations over water during the past
decade. The risk of conflicts over water is growing
because of increased competition, inadequate or poor
management and, ultimately, the impacts of climate
change. Shortages, poor water quality or floods will
risk creating instability and State failure, increase
regional tensions, and divert countries from global
cooperation. Water on its own is unlikely to bring
down Governments. What is dangerous are shortages
that threaten food production and energy supply and
put additional stress on Governments struggling with
poverty and social tensions.

As water shortages become more acute beyond
the next 10 years, tensions arise over control and
distribution of water resources. Water supplies or
resources are used for political or military goals by
State and non-State actors. We also witness disputes in
which water resources are a major source of contention
and conflict in the context of economic and social
development. The urgency of this situation demands
timely information-sharing, early warning and the
prompt and appropriate use of existing available
mechanisms and entities, with key stakeholders to be
mobilized. Best practices and lessons learned would
help strengthen the approaches devised.

Kazakhstan faces a high degree of environmental
pollution, with some parts of the country still suffering
from shortages of water. The drying up of the Aral
Sea - 70 per cent ofwhich has already been lost) - and
the Syr Darya riverbed negatively impacts ecosystems
in Central Asia. Both of these situations call for close
cooperation and coordination among the various
countries of the region.

We commend the work of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia on water-related issues. The Centre efficiently
promotes dialogue and build trust within the region.
The United Nations Economic Commission for
Europe's Convention on the Protection and Use of
Transboundary Watercourses and International Lakes
also works actively to create a global framework for
dealing with transboundary water issues and strengthen
transboundary water cooperation and sound water
management in the region and beyond.

Kazakhstan has initiated the creation of the
Central Asian Investment Fund to implement water
projects in order to co-finance the construction and
renovation of water facilities and infrastructure. We
have also proposed establishing a regional centre for
water security, as well as the joint development and
signing of a pact on water and environmental security
in Central Asia.

Water security is increasingly becoming one of
the defining factors for human progress and stability.
Kazakhstan, as a member of the Group of Friends of
Water, is committed to championing water security
for the benefit of all. This commitment will continue
during our term in the Security Council in 2017 and
2018 and beyond, and we will be active players in all
multilateral actions that promote water security, peace
and development.

