Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): As this is the first
time I am speaking in the Chamber under your
presidency, Mr. President, allow me to start by
thanking Ambassador Dabbashi and Ambassador
Shalgham for their stewardship of the Council this past
month, by welcoming you, Sir, for this month and by
pledging our support to you in all your endeavours.

Turning to Haiti, we welcome the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/ 129) and the
fact that he and former President Clinton were able to
visit. We are also very grateful for all the efforts from
the Special Representative, Mr. Hedi Annabi, who has
given us such a thorough and comprehensive briefing
today.

We concur with the Secretary-General's
assessment, and, I think, the emerging assessment from
this Council, that there have been some very positive
advances. However, sadly, overall progress has fallen
short of that which we had hoped to see. In part, this
can be attributed to the devastating blows dealt by the
hurricanes and tropical storms of August and
September 2008. We hope that, with the support of the
international community, the efforts of the Government
that were so seriously undermined by these calamities
will be pursued with new vigour.

The installation of the new Government and the
appointment of Prime Minister Pierre-Louis in
September was an important step forward. It offers the
potential for much-needed progress in a number of
areas. We urge the Haitian authorities to seize the
opportunity and to continue their work proactively and
constructively to address the constitutional, legislative
and budgetary issues that are currently preventing
progress in key sectors. We also strongly encourage the
authorities to use the expertise offered by the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and other agencies on the ground to take early and
concrete steps in the key areas.

As other speakers have noted, securing lasting
stability in Haiti depends ultimately on socio-economic
development. As the Secretary-General says in his
report, the current levels of poverty are incompatible
with long-term stability. Cooperation with the
international community is an essential part of making
progress in this area. At the same time, we do need to
recognize that it is not the role of MINUSTAH to
deliver development, and that the lead must therefore
be taken by other actors and organizations based on a
sensible division of labour, no duplication, and proper
coordination.

Lasting stability does, however, depend very
heavily on security, and I would like to take this
opportunity to put on record our admiration for the
work of the outgoing Force Commander, Major-
General Dos Santos Cruz. During his time in Haiti we
have seen a significant improvement in the security
situation. The re-establishment of government control
in former no-go areas is a particularly significant
achievement.
MINUSTAH, under the Special Representative's
able leadership, plays a significant role in the daily life
of Haiti, and we acknowledge the Mission's support to
the efforts of the Government. For the time being, the
presence of MINUSTAH remains essential to the
maintenance of security and stability. But it is also our
overall objective to ultimately enable the Haitian
authorities to assume responsibility for their own
security. We urge MINUSTAH to continue to monitor
and measures its progress against the existing
benchmarks. This is vital to measuring progress in
Haiti overall and achieving greater mission efficiency,
and it is the only way that we can sensibly and
carefully plan the next step. We look forward to
reviewing progress against those benchmarks in six
months' time.

I would like to take this opportunity, however, to
welcome the progress made in improving the capacity
of the Haitian National Police. It is important, in our
View, that the pace of recruitment and training is
maintained and, where possible, accelerated.

The approaching Washington donor conference
represents an important opportunity to underline that
the international community needs to help the people
of Haiti to stand on their own feet. We encourage all
those involved to improve the engagement between the
Haitian leadership and the international community on
aid issues. Our objective will rightly be to secure a
reliable flow of funding to Haiti. But it is also
important that donors be coordinated and that
assistance be well organized and targeted at priority
sectors.

Let me conclude by repeating our thanks to
Special Representative Annabi and his entire team in
MINUSTAH. We express our hope that he will pass on
our thanks to the team. We also fervently hope that his
assessment of an imminent turning point is fulfilled.
We will work in the Council and with him to help bring
that about.

