Mr. Guterres: First of all, I want to thank the
Security Council for this new opportunity to address it
on the Syrian refugee crisis.

Re-reading what I said in my last intervention,
in February, I am almost tempted to limit my present
statement to just 10 seconds. Everything that I said
last time is still true, but it has all got much worse. If
nothing politically dramatic happens, things will go on
getting worse for the months to come.

Refugees were fleeing Syria at a rate of about
3,000 a day in December. That number grew to 5,000
in January. Eight thousand people have crossed Syria's
borders every single day since February. That totals
400,000 new refugees in the seven weeks since my last
briefing.

As of yesterday, counting only those registered or
waiting to be registered, there were 1,367,413 Syrian
refugees across the Middle East and North Africa.
Including the internally displaced, a quarter of the
entire population of Syria has been forced to leave their
homes. The plight of Palestinian refugees remains as
dramatic as I last reported.

However, such stark numbers say little about the
horrendous suffering of a people, the progressive
collapse of a State and the physical destruction of a
country.

Let us be very clear: there is no humanitarian
solution for the Syrian crisis. That is why it is so tragic
that we are not even seeing an inch of progress towards
a political solution. We as humanitarians, therefore, are
forced to go on planning for the impossible. Together
with our 60 partner organizations and the host States,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees is now preparing the fifth version of
our regional response plan to assist the ever-growing
number of refugees. Valerie Amos, the Emergency
Relief Coordinator, is leading similar efforts to update
the humanitarian assistance plan inside Syria.

That process is still ongoing, but the preliminary
planning figures are terrifying. If nothing changes, at
the current pace there may be up to 3.5 million Syrian
refugees by the end of this year, and probably up to
6.5 million people in need of humanitarian assistance
inside the country. That is not just frightening; it risks
becoming simply unsustainable. There is no way to
adequately respond to the enormous humanitarian
needs those figures represent, and it is difficult to
imagine how a nation can endure so much suffering.

I know that, as High Commissioner for Refugees, I
should confine my remarks to the scope of my mandate.
As a citizen of the world, however, I cannot refrain
from asking: is there no way to stop this fighting so as
to open the door for a political solution? But while we
continue to wait for a miracle to happen, it is our duty
to do everything we can to protect, assist and respect
the dignity of all those Syrians who have sought safety
abroad, mainly in Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey and Iraq.

For that to be possible, all of the humanitarian
actors involved need levels of financial support that
are out of proportion with the established humanitarian
aid budgets of traditional donors. Together with my
colleagues from UNICEF, the World Food Programme
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, I have been asking Governments and
parliaments to establish extraordinary funding
mechanisms for the Syria crisis. I am also extremely
grateful for the generous recent contribution from the
Government of Kuwait to multilateral aid agencies, and
I hope others will follow that example. We cannot let
the Syrian people down. The Syrian people, who have
always been extremely generous in hosting refugees
from Palestine and Iraq, always sharing their resources
with them, now need our support.

Syria is much more than a humanitarian crisis. In
my last intervention before the Council, I spoke about
the real risk ofthe conflict spilling over across the region
and of the situation escalating into a political, security
and total humanitarian disaster that would completely
overwhelm the international response capacity.

The first step necessary to avoid such an escalation
is for the international community to provide massive
support, especially to the two countries that are the
most dramatically impacted by the Syrian conflict and
the refugee outflow it has caused: Jordan and Lebanon.

All of Syria's neighbours need international
solidarity, and one should not forget that Turkey in
particular has been making an enormous financial
investment of more than $750 million in direct
assistance alone to over 300,000 Syrian refugees.
However, Jordan and Lebanon, each hosting about a
third of the registered refugee population in the region,
must be provided especially solid support.

For Lebanon, the Syrian crisis has become an
existential threat. The population has grown by more
than 10 per cent, if one counts the registered Syrian
refugees alone. Most ofthem are staying in the country's
poorest regions. Taking into account the refugees
who are not seeking registration and Syrian migrant
workers, some even estimate that up to a quarter of the
population of Lebanon may now be Syrian.

Refugees are staying with local families and
scattered across nearly 1,200 towns and villages.
Some Lebanese households host more than 25 Syrians
under their roofs. The political wisdom of Lebanon's
leadership has so far kept the country out of the Syrian
conflict. But security incidents along the border pose
a serious challenge for Lebanon. In addition to facing
dire economic consequences because of its neighbour's
internal turmoil, Lebanon has not received any direct
international support in many months. That has to
change urgently. International solidarity must match
the enormous effort that the country has been making
to step up the response to the Syrian crisis and to
deal with its staggering implications for the Lebanese
economy and delicate social and political balance.
Jordan is also coming under tremendous pressure
as a result of the conflict next door. Completely
dependent on energy imports, and with water scarcity
becoming a major problem, the Jordanian economy was
already struggling before turmoil broke out in Syria.
But the situation has become increasingly fragile since
2011. Like in Lebanon, the Syria crisis has caused a
significant drop in revenues from trade, tourism and
foreign investment, compounded by the impact of a
very large refugee influx.

Jordan's economic indicators are worrying, with
unsustainable public and external deficit levels, and the
country has had to apply tough austerity measures. My
appeal to the international community is to extend the
massive financial support that Jordan needs, with the
understanding that its economic adjustment requires
sufficient flexibility to prevent levels of social unrest
that could entirely jeopardize the stability of the
country.

I know from the experience of my own country what
austerity means, and what impact it has on society. But
in Jordan, the regional context is infinitely more fragile
than in southern Europe, and the social and political
risks are incomparably higher.

Helping Syria's neighbours deal with the human
fallout of this terrible conflict is crucial for preserving
the stability of the entire region. This is not just
another refugee crisis; what happens in Syria and in
the neighbouring countries potentially has much wider,
even global, implications. By keeping their borders open
to thousands of refugees fleeing day after day, Jordan,
Lebanon, Turkey and others are doing an extraordinary
service to the international community. Failure to give
those countries the support that they need to continue
providing sanctuary to so many suffering Syrians
would not only mean abandoning a people and a whole
region. It would be the world's blindness to its own best
interest.

