Mr. Pleuger (Germany): First, Mr. President, I
would like to join you and the Chinese Ambassador in
thanking Ambassador Greenstock for his cooperation
in the Council and for his personal friendship. We will
miss him when he is gone, and we wish him well in his
new and very important job.

I wish to welcome His Excellency Prime Minister
Diarra to the Security Council and to thank him for his
readiness to personally inform the Council about the
progress in inter-Ivoirian reconciliation process. I also
wish to thank him for the warm hospitality he extended
to the Security Council mission that visited Abidjan at
the beginning of this month and for the substantial
discussions the mission was able to have with him.

We recognize the important reconciliatory role
that the Prime Minister has played to this point. We
hope that the progress attained so far solidifies to the
point of restoration of State unity, and that the process
will gain momentum. We are cautiously optimistic,
although some important open questions - such as the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme, the amnesty law and citizenship - still
have to be resolved. In that context, we appreciate very
much the briefing on the implementation of DDR this
morning.

Together with our European partners, and as a
member of the Security Council, Germany will
continue to accompany and support the peace process.
Only yesterday the Council discussed the follow-up to
the mission to West Africa and endorsed its
recommendations. The message this mission conveyed
to all its interlocutors remains the same - the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement has to be implemented, and the
Security Council therefore intends to keep the
developments in C6te d'Ivoire under close review.

We thank the Prime Minister for the
comprehensive briefing on the current situation. With
his permission, I would like to follow up with a few
questions. In his view, when will the nomination of the
definitive Ministers of Defence and the Interior take
place? Secondly, what effects does the 4 July joint
declaration by the Forces armees nationales of Cote
d'Ivoire and the Forces nouvelles have on the work of
the Government, and is there now a prospect that
through a joint military course of action the partition of
the country will end soon? What will be the effects on
the re-establishment of State and administrative
structures in the part of the country controlled by the
Mouvement patriotique de Cote d'Ivoire (MPCI)? Are
there concrete plans that have been accepted by the
MPCI for reconstruction in the north? My last question
pertains to the amnesty law that the Prime Minister
mentioned would be discussed by the Ivoirian
parliament on 4 August. Could he tell us what are the
chances that this law will be adopted quickly, and
which acts will be granted amnesty and for which
period?

I wish to thank the Prime Minister again for his
important visit and for his commitment, under
sometimes difficult circumstances, to move the
implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement
and the reconciliation process forward. I can assure
him he has our full support.

Lastly, I wish to support the draft presidential
statement prepared by France.

