Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese): In
principle, China is not in favour of easily resorting to
sanctions or of their repeated use. We have always
maintained that sanctions should be adopted with great
caution and prudence. Sanctions, as a tool available to
the Security Council, are a double-edged sword,
especially in cases where they are being strengthened.
Even though their effects may be limited, they can also
easily harm innocent people. Therefore, sanctions
should be adopted or strengthened only when
circumstances make it absolutely necessary.

As a friendly neighbour of Afghanistan, China
has closely followed developments in the situation in
that country. As a result of protracted war and the most
severe drought in nearly 40 years, coupled with United
Nations sanctions and many other factors,
Afghanistan's humanitarian situation has become
extremely serious.
According to the report of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance, the direct
impact of the current sanctions on the humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan is obvious, and substantial
indirect effects are evident as well. A new round of
sanctions would undoubtedly make the situation even
worse. The innocent Afghan people are increasingly
feeling abandoned by the international community,
isolated and in an extremely vulnerable state. They
cannot cope with the effects of any measures that could
lead to the further deterioration of the situation. We
deeply sympathize with them and feel strong concern
at their situation.

China supports the Afghan peace process. A
fundamental improvement in the humanitarian situation
there will be possible only when a ceasefire is achieved
and negotiations resumed. As a result of the good
offices of the Personal Representative of the Secretary-
General, the belligerent parties in Afghanistan are now
prepared to resume peace talks. A new round of
sanctions at this time will naturally have a negative

S/PV.4251

 

impact on the Afghan peace process. Furthermore, a
unilateral arms embargo simply cannot achieve the
objective of enhancing the peace process in
Afghanistan. We are deeply concerned about this.

China is firmly opposed to all forms of terrorism
and illegal drug trafficking. Bearing in mind this
principled position, we participated in consultations on
the resolution before the Council in a constructive
spirit. Regrettably, however, our main amendments
have not been accepted. Therefore we were compelled
to abstain in the vote on the draft resolution.

