Mr. Benitez Versen (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The Cuban delegation has been compelled to take the
floor once again in order to answer the comments made
by the delegation of the United States. We would like
to apologize for the late hour, but Cuba will not allow
that manipulation and deception to prevail. The truth
has to be told.

As happened in May of this year, the United
States delegation repeated on that occasion that, with
respect to the case of Posada Carriles, its authorities
acted in a manner consistent with international law.
That is completely false. If the Government of the
United States had acted consistently with international
law and the relevant resolutions adopted by the
Security Council, including resolution 1373 (2001),
instead of continuing to protect Luis Posada Carriles,
they would have prosecuted him and tried him for his
many acts of terrorism, or they would have extradited
to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

We draw attention to the fact that, in her
comments, the representative of the United States did
not deny any of the statements made by Cuba.
However, she omitted many details that are extremely
relevant. I would like to remind participants of a few of
these details.

Certainly, as the representative of the United
States said, Posada Carriles was detained by the
authorities of that country on 17 May 2005. What the
representative of the United States did not say is that
the terrorist was caught after months had gone by
during which the United States authorities denied the
presence of Posada Carriles on United States territory,
despite the many public denunciations by President
Fidel Castro of the entry of that terrorist into this
country. It was only when the press published
interviews with him, including coloured photos on the
front page while he was taking advantage of the Miami
sun, they had no other alternative but to arrest him.

It is also true, as the representative of the United
States said, that Posada Carriles has been subject in the
United States to criminal proceedings. But what she
did not say is that her authorities have never tried him
for his terrorist activities, despite the fact that they had
all of the information and evidence for doing so.
Instead, they dealt with the case as a simple
immigration violation, and they thereby guaranteed the
protection of the terrorist and his release, which took
place on 8 May.

There are many questions on the table. Why did
the United States Government allow Posada Carriles to

enter its territory with impunity, despite the many
warning calls that were made by President Fidel
Castro? Why did the United States Government protect
for months those terrorists who were on its territory
illegally? Why, having all the evidence needed to
charge him criminally, did they simply charge him on
11 January with minor immigration offences? Why in
its appeal to the Federal Appeals Court, presented at
the last minute on 6 November, did the United States
authorities continue without mentioning one word
about the terrorist activities of Posada Carriles and
insist on dealing with it as a simple immigration case?
Why do the immigration and customs authorities
within the Department of Homeland Security of the
United States not use the tools at their disposal to keep
the terrorist in prison? Why did the United States
Government overlook the extradition request presented
with all the requirements duly satisfied by the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela?

We know very well that the United States
representative is not going to answer all of these
questions, but that does not matter. The truth could not
be clearer. The plan has always been that Posada
Carriles would not speak in public about the terrorist
acts he committed against Cuba, Venezuela and many
other countries, when he acted under the orders of the
Central Intelligence Agency of the United States for
25 years.

Allow me to conclude by stressing the fact that in
order to seriously fight terrorism, political will is
required. It is impossible to eliminate terrorism, while
we condemn a few terrorist acts and we tolerate or
justify others or pass over them in silence. Once again,
Cuba has launched an urgent appeal to the Security
Council to consider the claims made by our country
and to act accordingly. The shameful conduct of a
number of Council members, as powerful as the
Council may be, must not continue to so seriously
affect the credibility of this body, which, under the
Charter, must act on behalf of all of Member States.

