Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Once
again, within the space of a week, the Security Council
is meeting to consider another issue and another
obstacle to achieving peace in the Middle East, a peace
we thought was close. Today, the Security Council is
considering the issue of the expansionist wall, which
marks a new phase in the ongoing series of Israeli acts
of aggression and Israel's attempts to avoid
implementing the road map.

The issue of the Israeli-Arab conflict has indeed
become an ongoing concern of the Organization. Many
people consider it to have affected the credibility of the
Security Council, given the Council's inability to deal
with the issue effectively and resolutely. The Security
Council and the other relevant United Nations bodies
have studied the various aspects of this question in the
past and present. Therefore, there is no need to go over
the issue now.

However, it is extremely important to recall that
the Government in Tel Aviv is justifying its policy of
aggression today - as it has always done - with the
pretext of defending Israel's borders and the security of
its people. Israel's frenzied building of the expansionist
wall reveals how false those security arguments and
peace requirements are. The facts on the ground
unequivocally demonstrate, among other things, that
for practical purposes the building of the wall in the
occupied territories means the annexation of further
Palestinian territory in the West Bank to Israel, land
which is added to the other land annexed by the Jewish
State since the decision to partition the territory in
1947.

Moreover, building the wall will destroy the
Palestinian entity and its ability to survive, which is
dependent on Israel's good will. Everyone is aware that
Israel's ultimate objective in building the wall has
nothing to do with its security. It is really an attempt to
create facts on the ground that will have a direct impact
on the nature and contents of any lasting settlement in
the future.

We should question the reality of the objectives
alleged by Mr. Sharon's Government. That Government
continues to work to found further colonial settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including in East
Jerusalem. Israel also continues to kill Palestinian
leaders even while the Palestinian side has complied
with the ceasefire agreed upon by the two parties.

In that context, we need to question the
continuation by Mr. Sharon's Government of its
aggressive policies and its frenzied efforts to build the
expansionist wall at a time when Mr. Sharon is
declaring that he is working for peace and that he
hopes to coexist with his Palestinian neighbours once
Israel's security is ensured. Do Mr. Sharon's actions
lead towards peace? We think the contrary is true. If
Israel truly aspires to peace, the path to peace does not
lie in confiscating lands to establish settlements,
sowing hate and discord, demolishing homes,
uprooting trees, imposing one's will on the occupied
Arab and Palestinian territories or building the
expansionist wall deep within the occupied Palestinian
territories, straying far from the Green Line, namely
the 1967 borders.

We believe that genuine security is based on
mutual trust and respect and the recognition of the
legitimate rights of all. It is also based on respect for
international borders. History has shown us that peace
does not last if it is imposed by force. It is true that, in
today's globalized world, there is no room for entities
that build walls, barriers and other obstacles, rather
than exchange viewpoints and interests, and that do not
respect dialogue, openness and the requirements of
humanistic cultural interaction.

For more than four decades, we have been urging
the Security Council to call upon and pressure Israel to
cease its expansionist and aggressive practices. But we
have now realized that those appeals have been futile
and that the Security Council must adopt a resolution
to be implemented to force Israel to immediately halt
the construction of the wall on occupied Palestinian
territory and far from the Green Line, and to strictly
respect its commitments, in keeping with international
law and norms and with the Fourth Geneva
Convention.

