Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): To comply with your wishes, Mr. President, we
have summarized our statement as much as possible.
We have followed with great interest the briefings
during this meeting by the Chairs of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011), 1373 (2001), 1540 (2004). We thank them
for their briefings and you, Sir, for your outstanding
work as Chair of the 1540 (2004) Committee.

The number and severity of terrorist acts in Syria
have lately been on the rise. Extremist terrorist groups
have continued their criminal operations using bloody
methods, including booby-trapped cars and explosive
belts, as well as planting explosives that are directed
at essential facilities and targets, in order to destroy
the infrastructure of many areas. Such operations
seek to spread terror among civilians, to completely
destroy the structure of the State and society, and to
kill and wound the largest possible number of innocent
civilians, particularly in densely populated areas. That
has become clear from the many terrorist bombings that
have targeted various areas in Syria.

Most terrorist acts that have taken place in my
country bear the hallmark ofjihadi, Wahhabi and Salafi
ideologies, known in short as the Al-Qaida network, in
terms of killing, dismembering and mutilating corpses
and murdering entire families. Such acts are carried out
on the basis of extremist religious beliefs and bloody
sectarian fatwas issued by instigators residing in some
Gulf countries.

Since such incidents began, we have stressed that
armed terrorist groups affiliated with Al-Qaida are
committing the most heinous crimes in Syria. However,
many political groups embroiled in the Syrian crisis,
backed by media organs under their influence, have
hastened intentionally to cast doubt on the veracity of
such information. Today, as a direct result ofthatpolitical
and media manipulation, we are seeing Al-Qaida-
affiliated networks clearly declare responsibility
for the terrorist acts carried out throughout Syria in
response to calls from Al-Qaida leaders, such as people
like Al-Zawahiri and other religious fanatics residing
in some Gulf countries, for people to head to Syria to
wage terrorist jihad there.

It has become clear to all which countries and which
parties are behind those armed terrorist groups adopting
jihadi, Salafi, takfiri and Wahhabi ideologies, such as
the Al-Qaida network and related jihadi bodies and
groups. Those terrorist groups claiming responsibility
for the killing of innocent civilians and the sabotage of
infrastructure regularly appear on the news after every
terrorist operation or bombing.

We have even seen the unprecedented phenomenon
of some Security Counil members objecting to the
Council issuing press statements condemning the
terrorist bombings that struck Syria four times - on
15 August, 10 September, 22 October and 26 October.
It is indeed puzzling to see that choice to turn a blind
eye to terrorist acts that flagrantly violate international
counter-terrorism agreements have been unanimously
adopted by all Member States.

We have recently seen the very worrying trend
of terrorist organizations and groups active in Syria
threatening to commit terrorist acts against civilian
aircraft in Syria. They are also threatening members
of diplomatic missions in Damascus and warning them
to leave Syria within 72 hours or risk being killed.
There is also a tendency to ignore ongoing incitement
to undertake terrorist operations against infrastructure
and densely populated civilian areas.

Moreover, we wonder whether it is really a
coincidence that hundreds of prisoners linked to
Al-Qaida have escaped from prisons in Libya, Yemen,
Iraq, Lebanon and Afghanistan during the Syrian crisis.
Is it really a coincidence that all those Takfiri andjihadi
terrorists have easily found their way to Syria in order
to wage a holy war there?

Let us hypothetically put the Syrian element aside
and imagine, for example, that the United Nations is
dealing with a crisis in a country facing terrorists who
have come to its territory from throughout the world
in order to spread violence, terrorism and extremism
and to destroy a Member State that has abided by
the counter-terrorism mechanisms endorsed by the
Organization. That Member State has provided the
Council with all the necessary information, leaving no
doubt that organized terrorism is being conducted on
its territory.

Other States Members of the same Organization
constantly aver their readiness to implement United
Nations counter-terrorism instruments and to defend
human rights. Some are even willing to establish
a counter-terrorism centre with the blessing of the
United Nations, while their top officials claim that
they support terrorism in Syria and send weapons and
money to the terrorists in that targeted State. What
would the Council do in that situation? Would the
solution lie in ignoring such information, in simply
continuing to monitor the events on the ground in that
State and in holding one meeting after another among
those who claim friendship with the people of that
country, yet seek to entrench terrorism and violence
in the country? Or does the solution lie in establishing
specialized Security Council committees to closely
review the terrorism that is rampant in that country
in order to determine the identity of those who are
inciting, financing and justifying it, in order to take
urgent measures to end it and to hold the countries and
groups behind it accountable?

The hypothetical Member State that I am talking
about, and where some influential members of the
Council and beyond are trying to ignore the terrorism
that is taking place, is Syria. As for the perpetrators,
their identity is known to all.

In conclusion, the Security Council must now
more than ever shoulder its responsibilities to combat
terrorism in Syria, in implementation of the resolutions
adopted by the Council itself. From here in the Chamber,
we call upon the Security Council to promptly take the
measures needed to put an end to all terrorist operations
under way in Syria and to exert the greatest possible
degree of pressure on the States that facilitate, finance
and incite the groups that are perpetrating terrorist
acts, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of
the Council, whether or not they pertain to counter-
terrorism or Syria.

The terrorist acts that have been committed by
armed groups in Syria have shed the blood of our
people. One day, we will hold accountable all those
who have incited, financed, facilitated or participated
in these acts of violence.

