Mr. Ryan: I thank you, Sir, for inviting the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to
address the Council on this important report
(S/2009/304). We in UNDP warmly welcome the
report, as well as this opportunity to add the
perspective of UNDP to the statement of the Secretary-
General.

Under the leadership of UNDP Administrator
Miss Helen Clark, we are committed to working with
partners both within and outside the United Nations
system to ensure the smooth and effective
implementation of the recommendations contained in
the report, under the guidance of the Secretary-
General. The Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Support Office will play an important
role in facilitating the follow-up process, and UNDP
pledges its close cooperation with both.

UNDP contributes to peacebuilding through our
presence in all conflict-affected countries, including
countries going through conflict, countries that have
recently emerged from conflict and countries that are
moving into a longer-term recovery.

Many post-conflict countries are struggling to
make progress towards the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs), and effective and quick peacebuilding
action is essential if countries are to succeed in their
MDG effort. Development of national capacities must
remain a core peacebuilding objective.

In moving the peacebuilding agenda forward, we
must strive to effectively link short-term peacebuilding
activities with longer-term recovery and development.
We also need to remember that peacebuilding does not
start from scratch when a conflict is over. It should
always build on existing national capacities and draw
on the expertise of the in-country United Nations
presence, including the humanitarian and development
actors.

At the country level, United Nations funds and
programmes work together for peacebuilding under the
leadership of a resident coordinator. When the Security
Council provides a mandate, the United Nations
country team works with other system partners as part
of an integrated mission.

The Secretary-General's report suggests new
steps to take the integration process forward and to
strengthen the coordination and accountability of the
United Nations country presence. The report's
emphasis is rightly focused on the need for stronger
and more coherent United Nations leadership teams,
with the right support staff, to plan and coordinate the
joint effort.

Women and youth require special attention.
Peacebuilding efforts should make sure that they
benefit from peace dividends and that they are fully
engaged in planning and decision-making processes. In
this respect, UNDP is currently deploying Senior
gender advisers in 10 post-conflict countries. They will
support the Organization's system-wide efforts to
implement Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008) in an effort to stop sexual violence
against women.

The World Bank is an important partner for the
United Nations in post-conflict situations. We have
gained significant experience working together on the
ground in a number of post-conflict countries, but we
can do even better based on recognition of each other's
strengths and a continued commitment to putting
global agreements for cooperation into practice at the
country level.

An effective United Nations response will require
active support from Member States, including the
necessary funding. With this support, we in the United
Nations will do our utmost, under the leadership of the
Secretary-General, to match expectations of quick and
effective implementation of peacebuilding activities.
UNDP looks forward to contributing actively to this
effort as part of the implementation of the
recommendations of this report.

