Mr. Brammertz: In accordance with my dual role,
I will report today about both International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals activities
in Arusha and The Hague.

My Offices are firmly focused on three priorities:
expeditiously completing trials and appeals; locating
and arresting the remaining eight fugitives indicted by
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR);
and providing assistance to national jurisdictions
prosecuting war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide.

I first turn to trials and appeals. In The Hague,
the ICTY is in the final phase of its mandate. Only
two cases remain, and it continues to be expected that
the Tribunal will complete its work before the end of
next year. This week, my Office is making its closing
arguments in the trial of Ratko Mladie, one of the most
complex and important cases in the Tribunal's history.
Mladie was one of the Tribunal's last fugitives, and
his arrest in 2011 was a significant moment for the
victims and for international criminal justice. Over
the course of his trial, my Office submitted evidence
from more than 150 witnesses and more than 7,800
exhibits to prove Mladie's guilt on all 11 charges in
the indictment, including genocide in Srebrenica and
in the municipalities of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
delivery of the judgment in the Mladic' case is expected
in November 2017.

In relation to ICTY appeals, the judgment in

Stanisie and Zupljanin was issued on 30 June 2016,
confirming the sentences of 22 years of imprisonment
imposed by the ICTY Trial Chamber. In the Prlie case,
my Office is continuing preparations for the appeal
hearing, which is expected to take place next spring.

During the reporting period, the case against Goran
Hadiie was terminated, following his death in Serbia.
My Office deeply regrets that the case was not brought
to an end with a verdict on the charges. We share the
dismay and disappointment of the victims. It would be
beneficial to identify and reflect on lessons learned
from that case.

With respect to Mechanism trials and appeals in
The Hague, pretrial proceedings remain under way
in the Stanisie and Simatovic' case, with the retrial
expected to commence sometime in the first quarter
of 2017. In the Seselj' and Karadeic' appeals, we filed
our appeal briefs on 18 July and 5 December 2016,
respectively. We are now intensively working on our
response to the 50 grounds of appeal raised by the
Karadzic' defence team.

Regarding the Arusha branch, no trials or appeals
are currently ongoing. However, during the reporting
period, my Office conducted two investigations, one in
relation to a contempt case and the second in relation to
a completed case. Furthermore, my Office is monitoring
five ICTR cases that have been referred for trial to the
national courts of Rwanda and France.

In a notable development during the reporting
period, the Mechanism Appeals Chamber issued its
decision in the Uwinkindi case, rejecting the accused's
application to revoke the referral of his case to Rwanda
and reaffirming that conditions exist for fair trial in
Rwanda. My Office hopes that positive development
will support continued cooperation by third-party States
with Rwanda in extradition and related proceedings.

Cooperation by the countries of the former
Yugoslavia with the ICTY and Mechanism Offices
of the Prosecutor remains critical to the completion
of our mandate, including in particular our trials and
appeals. My Office echoes President Agius' grave
concern that Serbia continues to ignore and breach its
legal obligation to cooperate with the ICTY. We join the
President in again urging Serbia to return to the path of
full cooperation.
Our second priority is locating and arresting the
remaining eight ICTR fugitives. All victims share the
same hope of seeing those responsible for the crimes
against them brought to justice, so it remains of critical
importance that these eight fugitives be arrested and
stand trial.

During the reporting period, we completed our
overall review of tracking efforts to date, and major
steps are now being undertaken to resolve the challenges
identified. My Office hopes to be able to report positive
results in the future from our renewed efforts.

Our final priority is assisting national judiciaries
prosecuting war crimes committed in the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda. In relation to Rwanda,
my Office continued its close cooperation with
the National Public Prosecution Authority and the
Prosecutor-General. This cooperation remains smooth
and effective, and there are no issues to report. My
Office underscores, in that regard, that the search for
fugitives is not limited to the eight remaining ICTR
indictees. Rwandan authorities have identified more
than 500 suspects who are present in other countries.
These case files must be processed and prosecutions
must be brought where there is sufficient evidence of
guilt. My Office encourages third-party States to work
with Rwandan authorities and ensure that those cases
are completed.

In relation to the former Yugoslavia, the situation is
unfortunately more mixed. While judicial accountability
for war crimes continues, political trends are moving
in a negative direction. My Office recognizes that
results are being achieved in national prosecutions of
war crimes. As one notable example, the Prosecutor's
Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina has been building on
past results in the Category II cases by continuing to file
significant indictments against senior- and mid-level
suspects, as well as for historically under-addressed
crimes such as conflict-related sexual violence.

However, during the reporting period regional
judicial cooperation experienced a significant setback
with the failure of Serbian authorities to enforce the
war crimes conviction in the Djukic' case for more than
a year. Serbia adopted its National Strategy for the
Prosecution of War Crimes and Chapter 23 Action Plan,
which my Office has welcomed on several occasions,
but so far there has been little evidence that these
commitments are being implemented. The Serbian
Government has failed for almost a year to appoint
a new Chief War Crimes Prosecutor. The promised
and much-needed additional staff and resources for
the War Crimes Prosecutor's Office have not yet
been provided. Activities to strengthen the Special
Investigative Service for War Crimes within the police
remain pending. During my last Visit to Belgrade, I
underscored that progress on war crimes justice will
not be achieved if Serbia does not put into practice
the steps it identified in the Strategy and Action Plan.
Serbian authorities gave me assurances that immediate
action would be taken, but unfortunately none of those
commitments has been honoured.

With respect to Croatia, there continues to be
a disconnect between the official commitment to
supporting war crimes justice and what is happening in
practice. As previously reported, Croatian Government
policy is obstructing judicial cooperation in certain
war crimes cases, including Category II cases prepared
by my Office. We have listened to Croatia's concerns,
but it must be emphasized that, whatever the intention,
current policy represents political interference with
the justice process. My Office again urges Croatia to
bring its policies in line with its commitments. These
and similar political issues are negatively impacting
national war crimes prosecutions, as my Office
warned six months ago. Concrete cases are not moving
forward, and regional judicial cooperation is under
significant stress.

My Office is further concerned that politicians
and Government officials from the region are still
undermining trust in judicial accountability for war
crimes and calling into question the independence and
impartiality of the judiciary. This poses a real risk to
the rule of law throughout the region. Reactions to
the recent arrests of 10 suspects in Orasje, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, starkly illustrated this worrying trend.

The glorification of war criminals also continues
throughout the region, as demonstrated by Republika
Srpska National Assembly's decision to officially
decorate convicted war criminals. As long as the political
environment and mindset do not support war crimes
justice, it will be extremely difficult to meet the public's
legitimate expectations for meaningful accountability.

Let me be clear that it is possible to reverse these
negative political trends. My Office calls upon officials
in the region to act responsibly and refrain from
politicizing ongoing investigations and prosecutions.
My Office also urges Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia
and Serbia to return to constructive regional cooperation
and swiftly undertake steps to rebuild trust in judicial
accountability for war crimes. The international
community can help by providing positive incentives and
utilizing conditionality policies. As always, my Office
stands ready to work with the countries of the former
Yugoslavia and support initiatives to improve mutual
trust and move the accountability process forward.

On a more positive note, the Office ofthe Prosecutor
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals continues to receive numerous requests
from colleagues and Governments around the world to
assist in strengthening domestic accountability for war
crimes. At a time when international justice is the topic
of much discussion, there should be agreement that one
step forward is to ensure that national judiciaries are
able to prosecute international crimes.

We feel privileged that colleagues and partners
throughout Africa fully support the work of the
Office of the Prosecutor of Residual Mechanism and
are eager to work with my Office to develop national
judicial capacities. As just one example of what can be
done, my Office, with the generous financial support
of partners, was recently able to train 30 prosecutors
and professionals from Kenya, Rwanda, South Sudan,
Tanzania and Uganda on the prosecution of conflict-
related sexual Violence.

Similarly, during my missions to the former
Yugoslavia, victims associations and prosecutors
expressed their appreciation for my Office's support
and engagement in strengthening national capacities.
Reflecting this commitment, our publication on lessons
learned in the prosecution of conflict-related sexual
Violence will now be translated for national prosecutors
in the countries of the former Yugoslavia.

With the presentation of final arguments in the
Mladie case, ICTY took another significant step closer
to completing its mandate. My Office is continuing
its downsizing accordingly. At the same time, the
transition of responsibilities from ICTY to the
Residual Mechanism continues as foreseen in Security
Council resolutions.

I would like to close by expressing my Office's
gratitude to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. Since
his first visit to ICTY in early 2007 until today, the
Secretary-General has provided steadfast support for
my Office's work and the fight against impunity. On
behalf of the Offices of the Prosecutor of the ICTR,
ICTY and the Residual Mechanis, I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for standing behind us and giving
us his full support, and I look forward to our continued
cooperation with Secretary-General-designate
Antonio Guterres.

