Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom):
Mr. President, I wish to thank you for having chosen this
imaginative and important theme for today's debate.

Applying our conflict-prevention responsibilities
effectively requires us to have the deepest possible
understanding of conflict. Too often the Council's
attention is focused on the proximate causes and
immediate triggers of conflict. This debate, Sir, and
your thoughtful concept note (S/2014/30, annex)
encourage us to look deeper and more searchingly into
the underlying causes and historical roots of conflict.

Historical understanding is a key component of
productive diplomacy. Cicero famously said that not
to know what took place before you were born is to
remain forever a child. Understanding history deepens
our understanding of the contemporary challenges
confronting the Security Council. It helps us to
determine better the right policy responses, to draw
conclusions from what has happened in the past, to
avoid repeating past errors, or, to paraphrase Einstein's
definition of insanity, to do the same things and expect
different results.

As diplomats and representatives of our Goverments,
we have important responsibilities towards history. Our
national histories are important parts of our identities
as nation States. All countries rightly take pride in their
achievements as nations, in the sacrifices made by their
armed forces and in the distinguished individuals who
have shaped their culture and history, who may appear
on banknotes and as statues in their squares.

Treated responsibly, these histories can bind us
together. But we also have a responsibility to address
our history in an objective and unprejudiced way that
does justice to the truth and that, by acknowledging the
mistakes of the past, contributes to a secure and stable
future. That is important not just because historical
truth has a value in its own right, but also because
addressing the past honestly provides a basis for shared
understanding, healing divisions, reconciliation and
moving forward.

The Truth and Reconciliation Commission in
South Africa provides a powerful example of the value
of confronting a painful period of a country's past
in a transparent and fearless manner. In the United
Kingdom, the Saville Inquiry, completed in 2010,
provided a full picture of the tragic events of 30 January
1972 in Northern Ireland, known as "Bloody Sunday".
In presenting the results of that inquiry to Parliament,
and in apologizing on behalf ofthe Government and the
country, Prime Minister David Cameron voiced a wider
truth about historical responsibility. He said, "Openness
and frankness about the past, however painful, do not
make us weaker; they make us stronger".

Just as a responsible approach to history can
contribute to peace and security, so, sadly, the opposite
is true. The conflicts in the Balkans in the 1990s provide
an object lesson in the consequences ofpolitical leaders
abusing history by harnessing a skewed historical
narrative to fuel extreme nationalist ideologies and
promote hatred and tension between different ethnic
or religious communities. Or, as Sir Winston Churchill
put it, the Balkans produce more history than they can
consume.

History should never be treated as a form of
intellectual ammunition to incite conduct or prolong
conflict. Historical disputes should not be perpetuated
or used for political ends. We should never forget or
dismiss the past, but we should be ready to move on
from it.

We have another important responsibility: to draw
appropriate lessons from the past. The United Nations
itself exemplifies this. A profound understanding of the
consequences of two World Wars and the inadequacies
of the inter-war League of Nations informed the
structure and founding principles of the United Nations.
An understanding of the lessons of the past helped
to give rise to an enduring and resilient multilateral
Organization which has made an incalculable
contribution to international peace and security.

But the United Nations, too, needs to look self-
critically at its history and draw the necessary lessons.
This year will see the twentieth anniversary of the
genocide in Rwanda. Next year will see the twentieth
anniversary of the genocide carried out in Srebrenica.
Both are tragic stains on the reputation of the United
Nations and the Security Council. That is why it is
right that we now seek to embed policies such as
the protection of civilians - the responsibility to
protect - and welcome new approaches such as the
"rights up front" into our work.

This year also marks 100 years since the start of the
First World War, the defining moment of the twentieth
century. That was the first war on a truly global scale,
unleashing casualties in numbers never seen before.
What is striking about 1914 from today's perspective
is the absence of any kind of multilateral framework
that was able to check the descent into war by the major
European Powers. A situation had arisen in which, at a
point of international tension and dispute, the default
was towards conflict rather than dialogue, negotiation
and mediation. The generals stepped forward, and the
diplomats stepped back.

One hundred years later, that is a lesson that we
must never forget. This body, the Security Council,
has a primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. We must discharge
that responsibility in its fullest sense, bridging our
differences to arrive at a common purpose, drawing on
the deepest possible historical understanding, heeding
early warnings, actively anticipating conflict and using
all the tools at the Council's disposal to deliver effective
conflict prevention.

