Mr. Heusgen (Germany): At the outset, let me too
thank all of the briefers. In particular, I would like to
thank Ambassador Yamamoto for his very profound
briefing. I also want to highlight the briefing delivered
by Ms. Haress.

These are once again crucial and testing times for
Afghanistan. We are entering what has been called the
second half of the transformation decade. Germany
will remain very active. Germany is the second-largest
donor and troop contributor to Afghanistan.

Let me briefly turn now to the Geneva Ministerial
Conference, held under the auspices of the United
Nations, which we found to be very timely and
important. It sent a clear signal of international
commitment to Afghanistan and, at the same time,
highlighted the expectations of Afghanistan. As others
have mentioned, it also demonstrated that this is a
moment of opportunity for progress towards peace.

With regard to international commitment, on the
one hand, and expectations, on the other, they were
both reflected in the Geneva Mutual Accountability
Framework, which set both a clear sign of international
commitment and the expectations of the Afghan
Government with regard to reforms. I acknowledge the
efforts mentioned by the Ambassador of Afghanistan,
which we must commend. In particular, I want to
highlight what he said with regard to economic
connectivity and all the different initiatives he has
been taking. I also note the need for reform, to fight
against corruption and to build functioning institutions
in Afghanistan, as mentioned by previous speakers.

On the elections, I would like to echo what was
said very eloquently by my Canadian colleague with
regard to encouraging signs, including the high-level of
participation in the elections and the number of women
who have been elected. I think that that is remarkable,
and we must commend the courage of each individual
voter who went to the polls despite the threats that they
all faced. There were shortcomings, which have been
noted, and we would urge the Afghan Government
to take an in-depth look at those. Mr. Yamamoto and
Ms. Haress both said that those are irregularities that
are unacceptable for presidential elections.

On the peace process, there have again been
encouraging signs and there may be a real opportunity
to achieve a substantial peace process. We welcome
the efforts of the Afghan Government, including
the appointment of a peace negotiation team, and we
understand that its advisory board met for the first
time today. We hope that the Taliban will do likewise,
heeding the call from the Afghan people to come to the
negotiating table.

With regard to negotiating, I can echo only what has
been said by many, including my Canadian, Swedish
and Dutch colleagues, namely, that the peace process
has to be inclusive. Women, children and ethnic-group
minorities have to participate. Of course, as a result of
the peace process, we need a guarantee that what has
been achieved in the country, in particular with regard
to women's rights, is not redressed.

On women, peace and security, from my perspective
let me also highlight the importance of peace processes
being inclusive. Women need to be included in
peacebuilding at all levels. Studies show that peace
processes that include women as witnesses, signatories,
mediators or negotiators lead to a 35 per cent increase
in the probability of a peace agreement lasting longer
than 35 years. Strengthening the role of women in peace
processes is therefore of the utmost importance.

The drought and climate change that have
been mentioned by several speakers, including
Mr. Yamamoto and Mr. Fedotov, are devastating.
The Chinese Ambassador also just highlighted the
contribution that China has made to alleviating the
situation. Climate change affects us all, but in a country
hit by violent conflict and poverty, its consequences can
be even more devastating. We must not let that happen.
As a Security Council member, Germany will put an
emphasis on the security effects of climate change.
The situation in Afghanistan is a case in point, as the
Secretary-General's report (S/2018/1092) has shown.

Finally, Germany, together with Indonesia, will
take over the role of co-penholder on Afghanistan. We
know that we have some big shoes to fill. I would like
to commend the Netherlands for its wonderful work
and engagement this year, as well as Kazakhstan for
the work in the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011). As I said, they are tough acts
to follow. Germany will continue to stand by our
Afghan friends in the Security Council, the General
Assembly, the European Union and, most importantly,
in Afghanistan.

