The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Afghanistan in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhadi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/102, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to the following other documents:
2

S/2006/89, which contains a letter dated 9 February
2006 from the representative of Afghanistan; and
photocopies of a letter dated 9 February 2006 from the
representative of Afghanistan transmitting a copy of
the Afghanistan Compact adopted at the conclusion of
the international London Conference on Afghanistan,
which will be issued as a document of the Council
under the symbol S/2006/90.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, Denmark, France,
Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1659 (2006).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.25 am.
06-24487

