Mr. Panayotov (Bulgaria): Bulgaria thanks you,
Madam President, for convening this important
debate and commends Poland's strong commitment
to the topic. Today's briefers' valuable presentations
demonstrate that almost 20 years after the adoption of
resolution 1265 (1999), on the protection of civilians,
this agenda item continues to be highly relevant to the
Security Council's work.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union
and its member States, and I would like to make the
following additional remarks in my national capacity.

We all agree that the best way to protect civilians
is to prevent conflicts from erupting or recurring in the
first place. In that regard, the concept note (S/2018/444, annex) for today's debate offers a valuable opportunity
for considering the broader scope, including its
preventive and humanitarian aspects, of the concept of
the protection of civilians. The human costs of armed
conflicts can be seen in all too many places. In order
to address the numerous humanitarian challenges
around the world, we must ensure the basics, which
include respecting and implementing international
humanitarian law. Sieges, starvation and unacceptable
restrictions on humanitarian access are clearly
unlawful. When compliance fails, accountability must
be ensured. If the States involved do not want, or are
not able, to bring those responsible to justice, we have a
very important tool at our disposal - the International
Criminal Court, which can ensure that such crimes do
not go unpunished.

Another basic aspect of the protection of civilians
is prevention. In that regard, Bulgaria shares the view
that implementing the concept of sustaining peace is a
cost-effective way of finding viable political solutions
to armed conflicts by addressing their root causes,
reducing fragility in post-conflict situations and
combining humanitarian and development efforts. My
country is following up on its humanitarian development
commitments made at the World Humanitarian
Summit and continues to give financial support to
United Nations-related activities in Iraq, Afghanistan
and elsewhere. We also believe that strengthening
the mediation capacity of the United Nations is key,
and Bulgaria has therefore made another voluntary
financial pledge to the United Nations Mediation Trust
Fund this year.

In the wake of the recent reviews of the peace and
security architecture, United Nations peacekeeping
has evolved, giving priority to the broader scope of
tasks related to the protection of civilians, particularly
the protection of women and children in conflicts. In
that regard, Bulgaria, as a police-contributing country
to United Nations peacekeeping operations, has
endorsed the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping
and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of
Child Soldiers. However, the challenges are many,
and we therefore recognize that there should be better
coordination and greater efficiency and effectiveness
with a view to strengthening the role of the United
Nations. To that end, Bulgaria supports the Secretary-
General's reform proposals for restructuring the United
Nations peace and security pillar and welcomes his
Action for Peacekeeping initiative (see S/PV.8218) and
strong commitment to the zero-tolerance policy on
sexual abuse and exploitation.

