Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): I want to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his very
sobering briefing. It is a reminder to all of us that even
though East Timor is not on the front pages, as it was last
summer, I think it continues to be a very difficult mission,
and I think Mr. Annabi's briefing underscores the need to
remind ourselves of the difficult job we have given the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) and of the need to commend the members of
UNTAET, and in particular Special Representative Vieira
de Mello for his leadership and his determination to
ensure that UNTAET is successful. It is obviously a very
difficult situation and needs the continued involvement of
this body and the Security Council. So I commend the
President for holding this open meeting. I think it is
important to shine light repeatedly and openly on the
problems that are occurring in East Timor and to
continually discuss how we as the body that has given
UNTAET the job that it is struggling to do can assist
UNTAET in this effort.

We are certainly deeply disturbed by the reports that
we have heard this morning, as well as others, of the
Indonesian military's continued support for the militias
operating in West Timor refugee camps and along the
East-West border. I think we have to realize that the
Indonesian military as an institution has done little to
address the recent militia attacks against United Nations
personnel and East Timorese civilians. We understand
that there is evidence that elements of the Indonesian
armed forces (TNI) may be supplying arms and
equipment to the militias as well.

I think this is obviously of deep concern to Council
members. It is obviously unacceptable. It should be
strongly condemned. I think that it would be useful for
the Council to address this particular issue in another
session in the very near future and see what steps we
could take to try to address this very serious situation.

We, the United States, and, obviously, other
members of the Council have repeatedly urged the
Indonesian Government to disarm and disband the militia
groups. We have been given assurances that these steps
would be taken; yet we have yet to see decisive action.
We are deeply disturbed by the increase in militia attacks
against United Nations peacekeepers.

We call on the Indonesian Government to fulfil its
responsibility and put an end to all militia activity along
the East Timor border. In order to resolve the refugee
problem once and for all and to put a stop to incursions
across the border, Indonesia must disarm and disband the
hard-core militias and move them, especially their leaders,
away from Timor. The Government must also reassign
remaining East Timorese members of the TNI to other
parts of Indonesia and end any TNI collaboration with the
militias.

These are not new ideas. Ambassador Holbrooke
made these very points upon returning from Indonesia in

 

November of last year and repeated them during the 3
February briefing to the Council by the Special
Representative, Mr. Vieira de Mello. More than enough
time has elapsed for the Council to see concrete action.

There is some positive news. We welcome the recent
rise in return numbers. But we also urge Indonesia to meet
its stated deadlines for ending support to the East Timorese
refugees currently in West Timor and for closing the camps
by the end of June.

The United States has done its part in trying to help
East T imor. We have provided contributions for a wide
range of needs, including humanitarian needs and the needs
of displaced persons. This has been our first priority. We
spent over $20 million in 1999 on relevant humanitarian
assistance. This year, we expect an additional $49 million
in multilateral and bilateral humanitarian assistance,
including aid to East Timorese refugees still in the camps
in East Timor. I think we all need to heed the calls we
heard this morning to provide adequately for refugees, and
I would encourage all Member States to do their fair share,
as well.

The United States is supporting the multilateral effort
in East Timor, with contributions to the UNTAET Trust
Fund and to the World Bank reconstruction trust fund
totalling $4.5 million. We believe that the UNTAET Trust
Fund is vital to ensuring that basic public services are fully
restored in East Timor and that the East Timorese develop
the skills to provide those services on a continuing basis.
We also believe that the World Bank, with its trust fund
and its coordinating role, will play a vital part in building
East Timor's long-term, self-sustaining economy.

The United States will also spend about $20 million
this fiscal year in expanding United States Agency for
International Development projects in East Timor. These
include coffee-growing projects and a variety of quick-
impact projects that we believe will help generate
significant employment opportunities. These and other
programmes will help address East T imor's urgent needs
for forensic human rights training, private sector projects
and those programmes that will focus on civil society and
the institutions critical to democratic government.

As we heard today, internal security is another
immediate priority in East Timor, and the United States will
increase its civil contingent in support of UNTAET and,
consistent with our laws and regulations, help establish
local police capabilities.

In closing, I would note that the UNTAET Trust
Fund currently has only a small portion of the money
pledged to it in Tokyo and that donor pledges are only
slowly being converted into real assistance to address East
Timor's burning needs. We would certainly echo the call
of the Secretary-General upon his return from East Timor
in urging donors to get aid into East Timor quickly. The
United Nations has put an enormous amount of resources
into trying to help the people of East Timor, and unless
we give the international community the resources to
complete that job and provide the resources to the people
of East Timor, we will not be able to meet the
expectations that we in this body have created.

