Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to thank the Chairmen of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) for the
information that they provided us today.

However, as at similar public Security Council
meetings held in April and July 2005, my delegation
feels obliged to focus its statement on an issue of deep
concern. While we are meeting here today to discuss
effective measures to prevent and eliminate terrorism,
the notorious international terrorist Luis Posada
Carriles remains on United States territory without the
Government of that country complying with its
obligation to prosecute or extradite him for the
horrendous crimes he has committed.

The Government that has unleashed wars in the
name of the fight against terrorism is the same one that
now, in blatant violation of its international
obligations, protects and provides refuge to the
Western Hemisphere's main terrorist, the perpetrator of
the mid-air explosion of a Cuban airliner with 73
passengers on board, who is responsible for many other
killings of Cuban citizens and citizens of other nations.

On 27 September 2005, a spokeswoman of the
United States Bureau of Immigration and Customs
Enforcement announced in El Paso, Texas, the swift
decision of Judge William L. Abbott not to deport the
terrorist Luis Posada Carriles to either Venezuela or
Cuba, using the cynical and false argument that there
was a danger of torture if he were to be detained in
either country and resorting in a manipulative manner
to the exemptions provided for in the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Are not
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1566 (2004), adopted by
the Council under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, applicable to the Government of the
United States? How long will the Council tolerate the
super-Power's double moral standard in the fight
against terrorism?

On 9 August 2005, the three judges of the Court
of Appeals for the Eleventh Judicial Circuit, in Atlanta,
who were presiding over the case of five Cuban citizen

anti-terrorist fighters - Gerardo Hernandez, Ramon
Labaflino, Fernando Gonzalez, Rene Gonzalez and
Antonio Guerrero - being held in United States

prisons, announced their unanimous decision to revoke
the sentences and to order a new trial. The court
recognized their right to be tried fairly and impartially
in a non-hostile atmosphere, as provided for in the
Constitution of the United States.

Despite the fact that there is now no conviction
against those Cuban citizens, the Government of the
United States holds them hostage in its prisons.
Allowing confessed terrorists such as Posada Carriles
to enjoy absolute impunity while subjecting the five
Cuban anti-terrorist fighters to arbitrary imprisonment
is an immoral act of great irresponsibility and an
affront to all Victims of terrorism and their families
throughout the world.

As it has done in the past, my Government
reiterates its request to the Security Council's Counter-
Terrorism Committee to review the information
presented by my country, inter alia in documents
S/2002/15, S/2004/753 and S/2005/341, in the hope
that its work can lead to an ending of the impunity
enjoyed on United States territory by those who have
carried out terrorist acts against Cuba.

Cuba reaffirms its principled position against all
acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, wherever, by whomsoever and
against whomsoever they are committed, including
those in which States are directly or indirectly
involved.

