Ms. Ashipala-Musavyi (Namibia): Let me also start
by thanking Mr. Annabi for the comprehensive briefing he
gave us on East Timor.

At the outset, my delegation would like to pay tribute
to Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and the staff of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) for their accomplishments so far and for the
solid foundation created to date for the reconstruction and
administration of East Timor. We recognize indeed the
daunting task that they and the international community
face, a situation that is exacerbated by, among other things,
the very high expectations of the East Timorese people. In
this regard, the constant efforts of Mr. Vieira de Mello and
the East Timorese leaders to promote confidence-building
and reconciliation are noted and are very welcome. At the
same time, the consultations and participation of the East
Timorese at all levels in decision-making mechanisms
remain crucial to ensure the success of future projects.

My delegation is glad to note a recent report of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, which states that life has returned to normal in
most areas in East Timor and that children attending school
is a familiar sight in villages. However, we also recognize
the other socio-economic problems that remain, such as
large-scale unemployment and the potential consequences
this situation can have on security. I believe this point was
adequately elaborated on by Mr. Annabi. No doubt there is
an urgent need to address the situation, and the continuing
efforts of UNTAET through job creation and other
empowerment projects are welcome.

My delegation is satisfied with the general security
situation, although cross-border incidents remain a concern.
We are, however, confident that the measures being
adopted, such as the recent signing UNTAET and Indonesia
of a Memorandum of Understanding on security, boundary-
crossing, the passage of refugees and the provision of
humanitarian assistance along the border of East and West
Timor will indeed go a long way towards improving the
situation. We therefore hope that improved border safety
will further speed up the safe repatriation of refugees to
East Timor.

