Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation supported the
adoption of resolution 2483 (2019), on the extension
of the mandate of the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP), in unchanged form.
We are convinced that the mission plays a key role
in strengthening stability, which is a prerequisite for
direct dialogue among the Cypriot communities.

We cannot but be concerned that, following
the Conference on Cyprus, held in Crans-Montana,
Switzerland, there was a "period of reflection", as
noted by the Secretary-General in one of his reports
(S/2018/25). However, the United Nations mission
should not be used as an instrument to exert political
pressure on Cypriots; its purpose is to ensure security
and monitor compliance with the buffer zone.

With respect to the political settlement, as is known,
only the Cypriot communities themselves, through
direct dialogue, can reach an agreement on a unified
State - a bicommunal, bizonal federation. Given that
sensitive matter, external interference, the imposition
of any concepts or pressure and the establishment of
artificial timelines are absolutely unacceptable. Such
an approach in no way helps the painstaking search for
compromise solutions.

We believe that strengthening the role of the
Security Council with regard to international assistance

for this process is long overdue. As is well known, one
of the most important aspects ofa settlement is effective
security guarantees for both communities. Clearly, the
current system of guarantees, with the participation
of three foreign States, objectively does not help the
Cypriots to arrive at an independent settlement for
themselves. I will be frank - the existing Cypriot
system of external security guarantees has become
largely anachronistic. The most effective way to ensure
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of a united Cyprus would be guarantees from the
Security Council. Ultimately, it is the Council that will
have to approve the final agreement reached by the

parties.

In conclusion, I urge those who may be tempted

to draw Cyprus into geopolitical games in an attempt
to push out traditional players from the eastern
Mediterranean to refrain from doing so. That tactic
is fraught with the risk of a dangerous escalation of
tensions in that very sensitive region and will certainly

do nothing to advance a Cypriot settlement.

The meeting rose at 3.15 pm.
