Mr. Ouch Borith (Cambodia): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the members of the Association
of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) - namely,
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao
People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar,
the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam -
on this matter which is of great importance to all of us.

Seven months after resolution 1373 (2001) was
adopted, ASEAN notes the hard work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) under the stewardship of
Sir Jeremy Greenstock. At this juncture, ASEAN
wishes to acknowledge Chairman Greenstock's
leadership, his commitment to an active and
transparent dialogue between the CTC and Member
States, and his determination to pursue what the
Committee has set out to accomplish. ASEAN
welcomes the establishment of a directory of technical
assistance. ASEAN also encourages the Committee,
through Chairman Greenstock, to continue networking
efforts with various regional and international
organizations, which we consider relevant and useful.

I am pleased to inform the Council that since our
last meeting ASEAN has further stepped up its
commitment to combat terrorism. At the political level,
I am happy to say that our foreign ministers discussed
this crucial issue at great length during their retreat in
Phuket, Thailand on 21 February 2002. They took that
opportunity to update each other on their countries'
counter-terrorism efforts, and they stressed the
importance of closer cooperation and joint efforts
among ASEAN member countries, especially in
intelligence and information sharing.

At the same time, ASEAN has also undertaken
practical measures. Our law enforcement agencies have
deepened their cooperation through sharing
information and best practices. We also recognize the
importance of developing regional capacity-building
programmes to enhance members' capabilities in
countering terrorism. ASEAN has also increased its
role and involvement with the international community
within existing frameworks such as "ASEAN + 3", the
ASEAN dialogue partners and the ASEAN Regional
Forum.

ASEAN is mindful of the importance of
enhancing the relevant channels of cooperation - such
as through bilateral and multilateral arrangements -
within and outside ASEAN. Furthermore, we continue
to learn from other regional and international
organizations in the efforts to combat terrorism in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
other international laws.

The successful conclusion of the ASEAN ad hoc
experts group meeting held in Bali, Indonesia, from 21
to 23 January 2002 on the work programme to
implement the ASEAN plan of action to combat
transnational crime is another crucial step forward. The
meeting involved eight task forces, which dealt with
combating terrorism, trafficking in persons, arms
smuggling, sea piracy, money laundering, illicit drug
trafficking, international economic crime and cyber
crime, respectively.

Furthermore, ASEAN member countries also
participated in the regional ministerial conference on
people smuggling, trafficking in persons and related
transnational crime held in Bali from 26 to 28 February
2002. There the ministers expressed deep concern
about the possible links between terrorist elements and
people smuggling and trafficking operations and stated
that these activities were now rivalling narcotics in
profitability.

Another important mechanism for us is the
ASEAN Regional Forum - ARF. Under this forum,
the ARF members recently participated in a workshop
on financial measures against terrorism in Honolulu
from 24 to 26 March. I would like to take this
opportunity to sincerely thank the Governments of the
United States and Malaysia for this initiative. The
outcome of the workshop was very productive. At the
workshop, ARF members had an opportunity to discuss
such vital issues as terrorist financial activities and an
international framework for combating them, the roles
of regional and international multilateral organizations,
and national implementation of the international
framework of financial measures against terrorism.
Another ARF workshop on the prevention of terrorism,
which is being organized by the Thai and Australian
Governments, is scheduled to be held in Bangkok from
17 to 19 April. In order to build further on the
outcomes of the workshops, their results will be
reported to ARF members when they meet again, in
Hanoi, from 22 to 24 April for the ARF inter-sessional
support group meeting.

In addition, a special ASEAN ministerial meeting
on transnational crime will be held on 21 May in Kuala
Lumpur. This signifies the firm commitment of
ASEAN members to implement the ASEAN
Declaration on Joint Action to Counter Terrorism. The
meeting will also represent a significant step by
ASEAN to heed the call of the CTC to enhance
coordination of national, subregional and international
efforts to strengthen a global response to this serious
challenge and threat to international security.

I am gratified to say that ASEAN member
countries, though faced by myriad constraints and
challenges resulting from the recent and devastating
regional and global economic downturn, have done
their best to implement Security Council resolution
1373 (2001). The most evident step in that direction, is,
among other things, that all ASEAN members have
submitted their reports in compliance with paragraph 6
of the resolution. We hope that those who have not
done so will be encouraged to follow suit without
further delay.

Finally, Mr. President, let me assure you of
ASEAN's continued cooperation to counter, prevent
and suppress all terrorist acts in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, taking into account
resolution 1373 (2001) and all relevant United Nations
resolutions.

