Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): As
my first order of business, I would like to convey my
thanks to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his very comprehensive
and detailed briefing and update on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo report
(8/2016/901). We would like to once again underscore
our support for his efforts to strengthen security and
stability and the respect for human rights in Kosovo.
I would also like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dacie, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Citaku. I
thank both of them for their statements.

We strongly support efforts to implement the
agreements reached between Belgrade and Pristina
under the auspices of the European Union (EU). We are
nonetheless disappointed to learn of the delay in the
implementation of the provisions of those agreements.
We nonetheless commend to the progress that has
been achieved, most notably, in the recent agreement
concluded between the two parties pertaining to
telecommunications, which we note was reached under
EU supervision.

There can be no alternative to dialogue, and we call
on leaders in Belgrade and Pristina to relaunch high-
level dialogue without further delay in order to achieve
consensus, find fair solutions and guarantee the full
implementation and roll-out of the agreements reached
in August 2015. We hope that the recent agreement
on telecommunications will breathe new life into the
process of addressing outstanding issues, particularly
the issue of heritage assets.

We also welcome the positive signs highlighted in
the report, indicating the genuine desire of both parties
to establish the association/community ofSerb-majority
municipalities in order to protect the freedoms and
rights of the Serb populations. We call on both parties
to fully implement the association/community of Serb-

majority municipalities as quickly as possible in order
to strengthen regional stability and further the process
of reconciliation. We attach a great deal of importance
to enhanced cooperation with the Council with regard to
reporting. We call on all parties to enhance and extend
their dialogue in order to include more people in the
decision-making process, particularly those that have a
direct impact on the lives of the people concerned, so
that their voices are heard.

We support efforts to improve regional stability and
security. That is one of the pillars of Egypt's foreign
policy, because we believe it is important to enhance
the political and economic future of the region. Against
that backdrop, we are concerned by the current political
stalemate with regard to the delineation of the border
between Kosovo and Montenegro. We call on both
parties to find a solution to the stalemate as soon as
possible so as to resolve the border delineation issue
and strengthen domestic and regional security.

We must also ramp up efforts for regional integration
and reject speech aimed at stoking animosities in the
region and sowing further division. Egypt supports
the efforts and work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
all regional and international organizations. We firmly
welcome the key role played by UNMIK in Kosovo as
it seeks to strengthen security, respect for human rights
and stability. We also welcome the very important
role played by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe.

