Mr. Motoc (Romania): We too are grateful for
the briefing by Mr. Jessen-Petersen, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. Mr. Jessen-
Petersen has a firm grip on the job in Kosovo, as has
already been demonstrated by the good results
achieved. I would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate Romania's full support for Mr. Jessen-
Petersen as he tackles this year's many challenges. As
always, we would also like to express our highest
appreciation for, and encouragement to, the men and
women of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), as well as the staff of other international
organizations and agencies working in Kosovo. I also
thank Mr. Nebojsa Covic', President of the
Coordination Center for Kosovo and Metohija, for his
briefing.

Romania associates itself fully with the statement
that will be delivered later by the Ambassador of
Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union.

The year 2005 is a significant one for Kosovo and
the whole region of the Western Balkans. We need
stability and security in Kosovo. But above all, we
need a tolerant and democratic society there. Dialogue
and thorough implementation of standards are
essential. We welcome the signs of progress described
in the report of the Secretary-General. There are
indications of growing political maturity in Pristina, as
proven by a rather smooth electoral process and the
energetic approach to standards by the new
government. We appreciate in particular the efforts
made to disseminate the message on standards as
broadly as possible among the population.

However, we will know that standards have
succeeded when Serbs no longer fear for their lives in
Kosovo. We recall the document on standards for
Kosovo, which states that the future of Kosovo must be
one in which all people - regardless of ethnic
background, race or religion - are free to live, work
and travel without fear, hostility or danger, and where
there is tolerance, justice and peace for everyone. That
is not yet the case in Kosovo.

We are aware that standards have multiple and
complex dimensions. There are painful problems
related to the economy, the rule of law, corruption,
organized crime and so on. Children going to school
under military escort, as described in the Secretary-
General's report, is not a sign of normalcy, nor is it
something that one can durably build upon. Fear for
one's life and security - especially if that fear is
ethnically motivated - must be addressed politically
and in an urgent manner. That makes it one of the
biggest challenges ahead for the political leaders of
Kosovo. It will also be a clear and objective test of the
implementation of standards. We also call on Serbs
living in Kosovo to work with UNMIK and the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to find
ways to end such fears.

Dialogue at all levels, between all communities in
Kosovo and between Belgrade and Pristina, is crucial
at this moment. Romania notes the impediments to
dialogue thus far. Nevertheless, we echo the call by the
Council of the European Union and the High
Representative, Javier Solana, to all communities in
Kosovo and to authorities in Belgrade and Pristina to
engage in substantial dialogue.

Romania continues to promote the idea of a
Security Council mission to Kosovo in the course of
this year. We believe in the importance of such a
mission, as it has been more than two years since the
last one took place, in December 2002. Although the
best moment for such a mission is yet to be
determined, the Council needs to take its messages
closer to all actors involved. It must also find ways to
stimulate cooperation and dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina.
In that regard, I am pleased to welcome the
comments made today by Mr. Jessen-Petersen and
Mr. Covie with regard to prospects for the resumption
of direct dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. We
hope that such a dialogue will be a meaningful one this
time.

As for what needs to follow the standards
evaluation, we reiterate our belief that a solution for
Kosovo must flow from and be based on the broader
European and Euro-Atlantic integration processes.
Romania welcomes the recent confirmation of such a
policy by the EU Council. Moreover, we believe that
the legitimate concerns of countries in the
neighbourhood should be duly taken into account.

