Ms. Amos: Nine months ago, the Council adopted
resolution 2139 (2014), which set out a comprehensive
series of proposals to tackle the significant protection,
access and humanitarian challenges facing civilians
and humanitarian partners in Syria. After several
months of detailed reporting to the Council setting
out the continued horror of the situation inside Syria,
with thousands of people trapped in besieged and hard-
to-reach communities and the lack of implementation
of the provisions contained in resolution 2139 (2014),
the Council adopted resolution 2165 (2014), aimed at
increasing access to the people most in need. The purpose
was to support a "whole of Syria" approach, which
would enable United Nations agencies and international
and national non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
to choose the best method for the delivery of desperately
needed assistance across conflict lines inside Syria or
cross-border, including through four additional border
crossing points, as authorized by the Council.

Resolution 2165 (2014) has helped the United
Nations overcome some of the challenges we faced by
permitting direct delivery to hundreds of thousands
of people, complementing the considerable cross-
border deliveries conducted by NGOs. Collectively,
since the adoption of the resolution and primarily
through cross-border deliveries, we have delivered
to nearly all the hard-to-reach locations in the four
governorates - Aleppo, Idlib, Daraa and Quneitra.
This expanded reach has already led to a more effective
response. That is why I hope that the Council will renew
the provisions contained in resolution 2165 (2014). They
have made a difference.

But despite the progress we have made, it is still
not enough. We have faced considerable challenges in
implementing resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014)
and continue to fall short of meeting the humanitarian
needs of all the people we aim to reach in Syria. No
more than two besieged locations have been reached in
any month since the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014),
and only one location has been reached in each of the
past two months.

This is a conflict that is affecting every Syrian.
Syria's economy has contracted some 40 per cent since
2011. Unemployment now exceeds 54 per cent. Three
quarters of the population lives in poverty. School
attendance has dropped by more than 50 per cent.
Young people have few prospects of a bright future.
We have lamented the possibility ofa lost generation of
Syria's children; it is now a reality.

One ofthe consequences ofresolution 2165 (2014) is
that we now have better data with respect to the number
of people in need. Some 12.2 million people are now
in urgent need of humanitarian assistance throughout
the country. More than five million of those in need are
children.

Violence has forced nearly half of Syrians from
their homes, many of them multiple times. There are
now some 7.6 million people displaced inside Syria. In
addition, more than 3.2 million people have fled the
country, and countries in the region and communities
hosting refugees are bearing an enormous burden. This
is the largest number of people displaced by conflict in
the world.

Despite the repeated calls from the Council for
the fighting to stop and hard-hitting reports from the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic of ongoing abuses of human
rights, civilians continue to be killed and injured every
day. The Commission's recent report documented the
brutality of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
including its barbaric treatment of women and children
and the systematic use of torture, murder, rape and
enslavement. Opposition groups, including designated
terrorist groups, mete out brutal punishment and attack
civilian services. The Government's aerial attacks,
including with barrel bombs, have pounded civilian
areas, civilian facilities and camps for internally
displaced persons.

Today - the International Day for the Elimination
of Violence against Women - we particularly
remember Syria's women and children. Sexual violence
has been used as a form of torture to injure, to degrade
and to intimidate and as punishment.

As detailed in the report of the Secretary-General
to the Council this month (S/2014/784), United Nations
organizations and their partners continue to work in
extreme and dangerous circumstances. Sixty-nine
workers have been killed since the beginning of the
conflict. We should all be humbled by the commitment
and bravery of the thousands of workers who risk their
lives to deliver much-needed aid to people throughout
Syria. As the situation on the ground becomes more
dangerous and difficult, it is even more important
that humanitarian actors be able to use all tools at
their disposal to reach people in need, from within the
country and across borders. I hope that Member States
will continue to use their influence with the parties to
the conflict to remind them to uphold their obligations
under international humanitarian and human rights law
and guarantee regular and unhindered access.

The Council must also continue to call for an end
to the bureaucratic steps that hinder the delivery of
assistance, push for the inclusion of medical supplies
in convoys, and call for the lifting of sieges. When
resolution 2139 (2014) was adopted in February, there
were 220,000 people besieged by either Government
or opposition forces. Some 212,000 remain besieged
today - 185,500 people by Government forces and
26,500 people by opposition forces. The Council must
also push for an end to the violence that is destroying the
people and the country and having such a destabilizing
impact on the region.

Humanitarian appeals for Syria and the region
remain critically underfunded. I again appeal to donors
to do more to fund humanitarian action in response to
the Syrian crisis. The appeal is less than half-funded.
Every day that passes, more Syrian children, women
and men die. More look to the international community
for help and support. We on the humanitarian side
will continue to do all we can. But as I have said to
the Security Council on many occasions, this crisis
requires a political solution. I hope, for the sake of the
people of Syria, that one is found soon.
