The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Croatia.
I join others in thanking Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for
his briefing and offer both him and the International
Criminal Court (ICC) Croatia's full support.

This morning we heard yet another very
disturbing report which not only conveys a lack of
substantive progress in bringing to justice those
responsible for atrocities in Darfur but also the threat
of ongoing violence. Shocking and abhorrent crimes
continue to be committed against innocent civilians,
mostly women and children. Equally deplorable is a
string of attacks against peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers. We take note of the latest application
presented by the Prosecutor against three rebel
commanders in connection with the Haskanita attack
and the application against Omar Al-Bashir.

It is regrettable that the Government of the Sudan
continues to refuse to cooperate with the Court despite
its prosecutions, many of which engage the
Government in the judicial process. The principle of
complementarity is the cornerstone of the ICC. It is
disappointing to note that, despite its rhetoric, the
Government of the Sudan has not made any genuine
effort to comply with the complementarity test and
allow the Court to examine the admissibility of the
applications.

While we appreciate the ongoing efforts aimed at
securing a peaceful solution to the conflict in Darfur,
and the sensitivities of that process, Croatia believes
that it would be tragic if this should lead to
accommodating permanent impunity by interfering
with the ongoing independent judicial activities.

As regards the lack of cooperation of the
Government of Sudan with the International Criminal
Court, this, in our View, represents the Sudan's
disregard of its international obligations as specified in
Security Council resolution 1593 (2005). As such, it
also represents the disregard of the Security Council
itself. The constant defiance of the Sudan towards the
Court shows contempt for the multitude of victims in
Darfur, as well as for international order and the United
Nations Charter. The crimes committed in Darfur, and
the impunity associated with these acts, as
demonstrated by the Government of the Sudan, is
intolerable and must be brought to an end.

We reiterate the clear message that this Council
reaffirmed in its presidential statement last June
(S/PRST/2008/21) and call upon the Government of
the Sudan, all parties to the conflict in Darfur, as well
as United Nations Member States, to extend their full
cooperation to the Court.

Croatia takes seriously and supports the
Prosecutor's recommendations on bilateral and
multilateral actions that need to be taken in order to
ensure enforcement of the Court's decisions in the
future, in the hope that these can be endorsed by all
members of the international community.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to Mr. Moreno-Ocampo
to respond to comments and questions raised.

