Mr. Cabral (Portugal) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of May and to express gratitude
to the delegation of Colombia and to Ambassador
Osorio for their outstanding work during the month of
April. Unfortunately, my statement was prepared in
English, so I will speak in English.

(spoke in English)

I wish to thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, for his
report and for his comprehensive and informative
briefing today. I wish also to commend him and all his
staff for the significant investigative work he was able
to carry out in such a short period of time, under
difficult circumstances.

We are very troubled by the humanitarian
situation in Libya, with persistent violence against
civilians and serious violations of international
humanitarian law. We wish to express our serious
concern at the information on crimes against
humanitarian, further acts of violence and continuation
of war crimes, as described in the Prosecutor's report
and highlighted here today by Mr. Moreno-Ocampo.

We are also disturbed at recent statements by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict pertaining to serious violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law,
widely echoed in the international press.

Under these circumstances, a political solution is
becoming all the more pressing. In that sense, it is
indispensable to reach a ceasefire that is both verifiable
and sustainable. We thus commend and fully support
the role and the endeavours of Special Envoy
Al-Khatib in reaching an agreement on a ceasefire and
on the launching of an inclusive political process.

However, we cannot forget the importance of
justice as a fundamental value of human society and as
an inherent part of the process to achieve a sustainable
peace and bring confidence to the affected
communities victimized by the persistent violence.
The International Criminal Court has an
important role to play in this regard not only in
investigating the most serious crimes and in judging
and punishing the perpetrators most responsible, but
also in preventing the escalation of violence as a
dissuasive instrument for potential perpetrators and
sometimes the only source of hope for endangered
civilians and communities in conflict zones. We
therefore express our full support for the continuation
of the efforts made in the context of the investigation
and commend the support provided to the Prosecution
by States and organizations in these endeavours.
Cooperation with the Prosecutor and the Court is
essential to the success of the criminal investigations
and judicial proceedings.

We also wish to highlight the importance of the
protection of victims and witnesses, and commend the
prosecution for exercising the utmost caution in this
phase in order to avoid putting at risk persons and
humanitarian personnel who have given testimony.

We see an important role in this context for the
United Nations International Commission of Inquiry
established by the Human Rights Council, which
recently started its investigation in Libya, and we
welcome the Prosecutor's intention to liaise closely
with it. However, we are worried about the impact of
the work of the Commission on the situation on the
ground. We hope that the Commission can conclude its
work soon.

Finally, we would like to seize this opportunity to
express Portugal's support for the ICC and its
fundamental role in fighting impunity and promoting
peace and security.

