Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I warmly
thank Ms. DiCarlo, Ms. Mueller, Mr. Apakan and
Mr. Sajdik for their informative briefings on the tragic
situation facing Ukraine. Allow me to express our
heartfelt gratitude to Mr. Apakan and Mr. Sajdik for
their excellent work.

France condemns in the strongest terms Russia's
decision to facilitate the granting of Russian nationality
to Ukrainian citizens residing in certain areas of the
Ukrainian oblasts of Donetsk and Luhansk. In so doing,
Russia is deliberately undermining the spirit of the
Minsk agreements.

That provocative decision comes on the heels of the
election of a new President in Ukraine, who made the
policy of reaching out to the people of eastern Ukraine
one of the central aspects of his election campaign.
Five years after the beginning of the destabilization of
Donbas, Russia, on the other hand, is showing its lack
of political will to contribute to the implementation of
the Minsk agreements, as well as its disregard for the
commitments to which it has subscribed. The decision
to facilitate the granting of Russian passports to
Ukrainian citizens is a flagrant violation of Ukraine's
sovereignty, as was the holding of pseudo-elections in
territories under separatist control last 11 November. In
that regard, I would like to emphasize three points.

First, the alleged humanitarian grounds presented
by the Russian side are baseless. While several million
people in Ukraine today are in need of humanitarian
assistance, the de facto separatist authorities continue
to obstruct humanitarian access to the territories under
their control, thereby further aggravating the situation
of the most vulnerable people. Concrete actions must
now contribute to improving the humanitarian situation.
I refer in particular to the renovation of the Stanytsia
Luhansk bridge and the opening of new crossing points
on both sides of the line of contact to facilitate the
movement of hundreds of thousands of people. A new
prisoner exchange must also be prioritized, with the last
conflict-related prisoner exchange dating back to 2017.

Secondly, it is also urgent to sustainably improve the
security situation. The ceasefire is still not being upheld
by the parties, nor is the withdrawal of heavy weapons.
Mines continue to claim casualties indiscriminately on
both sides of the line of contact. Russia has an undeniable
responsibility, given its considerable influence over the
separatists, which it continues to support financially
and militarily.

The Minsk agreements provide for the monitoring of
the situation and the implementation of the agreements
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, whose Special Monitoring Mission must enjoy
free and unhindered access to the entire conflict zone,
as provided for by its mandate. We strongly condemn
the impediments to its movement and the attacks on
the security of its personnel and equipment that are
observed on a daily basis on the ground, particularly in
the separatist zone.

Lastly, the solution to the crisis is not to give
Russian passports to Ukrainian citizens; it is to respect
the commitments undertaken in the Minsk agreements
to end the conflict. The latest alarming developments
are giving rise to uncertainty, even as the new Ukrainian
President-elect Volodymyr Zelensky has shown his
determination to relaunch the implementation of the
Minsk agreements and engage in closer relations with
the populations residing in areas currently outside the
control of the Ukrainian Government.

In addition to the Donbas issue, we have not
forgotten the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the
city of Sevastopol. Five years after the illegal annexation
of that Ukrainian peninsula, we are witnessing a steady
deterioration in the human rights situation, particularly
with regard to the Crimean Tatar community. We are
also facing a deteriorated security situation in the Sea
of Azov and the Black Sea, following the serious naval
incident of November 2018. The 24 Ukrainian sailors
detained since 25 November have still not been released,
despite our repeated calls for their unconditional
release, which I reiterate today.

In conclusion, I reaffirm France's commitment to
the territorial integrity, independence and sovereignty
of Ukraine, as well as our readiness to pursue our
efforts, together with Germany, to resolve the conflict
in the context of negotiations in the Normandy format.
While the coming months offer us an unprecedented
opportunity to relaunch the negotiation process, Russia
must now make a gesture of goodwill to honour the
commitments to which it has subscribed, with a View
to adopting a positive outlook on settling the conflict.

