Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Croatia welcomes this
discussion. Following the statement by the observer of
the European Union (EU), I shall make some additional
remarks in my national capacity.

Let me start by welcoming the High Representative
for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, and by
thanking him for his report (S/2017/922, annex) and
briefing today.

The period ahead of us will be of key importance
for Bosnia and Herzegovina. With that in mind, we need
to emphasize once again that a stable, peaceful and
united Bosnia and Herzegovina, based on the genuine
institutional equality of its three constituent peoples
and all citizens, is a generator of stability for South-
Eastern Europe and beyond. Against that background,
the full implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement
was, and still is, the anchor of stability and peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The Dayton Peace Agreement codified the
fundamental principle upon which Bosnia and
Herzegovina stands: there are three constituent peoples
who are equal owners of sovereignty and political
legitimacy in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Serbs, Croats
and Bosniaks should be equal in every respect, including
exercising the same responsibility in safeguarding the
functionality and stability of this multi-ethnic and
multi-religious country The Dayton Peace Agreement
provides a pivotal institutional and constitutional
framework for that.

Croatia was among the first States to recognize the
independence and the territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina at the hardest of times during the
aggression of the Slobodan Milosevic regime and the
Yugoslav People's Army in the first half of the 1990s.
Croatia played a crucial role in the birth and survival
of Bosnia and Herzegovina as an independent State.
That is an established historical fact. We must look
towards the future, but history should not be forgotten:
during the war in the 1990s Croatia sheltered hundreds
of thousands of refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina
and provided humanitarian assistance in many ways,
from logistics and equipment, to medical care. Upon the
request from the leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and in accordance with our bilateral agreements,
Croatia provided decisive military assistance, thereby
preventing the fall of the city of Bihac' and a repetition
of the Srebrenica genocide. In a word, Croatia played a
pivotal role in ending the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and enabling the Dayton Peace Agreement.

As a signatory of the Dayton Peace Agreement,
Croatia bears special responsibility for the well-being
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and remains unequivocally
committed to the territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a sovereign and united country, as well
as to the equality of its three constituent peoples with
full respect towards the rights of the others. Bosnia and

Herzegovina's integration in the European Union and
NATO remains our strategic goal.

Today Croatia provides Bosnia and Herzegovina
with strong assistance in education, health care and
basic services. Our trade exchange amounts to almost
€2 billion per year, making Croatia the first trade
partner of Bosnia and Herzegovina in terms of imports
into the country, and the second regarding exports from
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Croatia is also the leading
foreign investor, with over €1 billion in investments
in the real sector in Bosnia and Herzegovina. That all
points towards one conclusion: for Croatia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina is much more than a neighbour. Bosnia
and Herzegovina is our partner, and we wholeheartedly
support it in building a better future for all its citizens.

As an EU and NATO member State, Croatia will
continue supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina in its
EU membership ambition, while extending our full
political support and technical expertise and assistance.
Advancement in that process is of the utmost
importance - not only because it is the best investment
in the country's future, but because it is also a way to
help to overcome difficult burdens of the past.

Bosnia and Herzegovina's road towards the
European Union is of the highest order, but it is
burdened with many hurdles. In that regard, Croatia
would like to echo the European Parliament's
resolutions on the progress of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in 2015 and 2016, which point out that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will not be a successful candidate for EU
membership until appropriate institutional conditions
have been established based on the principles of
federalism, decentralization and legitimate and
proportionate representation.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is fast approaching general
elections in October 2018. This period is crucial for
delivering results of inter-party dialogue for electoral
reform. The urgent adoption of that reform, following
the rulings by the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the Ljubie case and in the case of the
city of Mostar, is not just necessary but of paramount
importance for the stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the post-election implementation of electoral
results. That reform should ensure proportionate and
legitimate representation of the constituent peoples
at all levels of Government, enforcing in particular
specific electoral provisions on the Federation House
of Peoples, as well as the election of members of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Therefore, an
overarching electoral reform is needed in order to keep
the pillars of the peoples' equality alive and preserve
the stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

As mentioned in the EU statement, the election
of the members of the Presidency will be addressed
after the October elections. Let me add to that: it
could and should be addressed even sooner - as soon
as possible - with all due urgency. That will depend
primarily on the genuine readiness of all parties
concerned, and Croatia strongly supports efforts in
that regard.

What Bosnia and Herzegovina needs today is not
the inflammatory rhetoric of certain political groups,
but the Wisdom to embrace the fundamental principles
and political features of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which are deeply rooted in the country's complex
history and essential for its prosperous future. The
country's Central Election Commission has called for
the October general elections. The holding of elections
and the implementation of their results, including
proper functioning of the institutions, is an essential
democratic requirement for any country. Therefore, the
political leaders should be aware of the responsibility
they carry for the future of their homeland. People
today, especially the young, are voting with their
feet. Political apathy will only add to the sense of
despondency caused by the socioeconomic situation, as
the economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina is still falling
short of the expectations of its citizens. Bosnia and
Herzegovina deserves a better future.

In conclusion, we sincerely hope that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will find the strength and the prudence
to overcome the present political impasse and proceed
more efficiently on the path of EU and NATO
integration. For that, a comprehensive electoral process
in October is indispensable. Croatia will continue
to advocate a sharp and permanent focus on Bosnia
and Herzegovina at the European and international
levels. Bosnia and Herzegovina deserves our constant
attention and assistance in order to unleash its full and
untapped potential.

