Mr. Simonovie: I appreciate this opportunity to
address the Security Council on the issue of ensuring
greater protection of civilians in situations of armed
conflict, on behalf of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights. Since this matter was last discussed at
the Council, in November 2010, the dramatic unfolding

of events in the Middle East, North Africa and Cote
d'Ivoire has clearly illustrated that the denial of human
rights - including civil, cultural, economic, political
and social rights - is a root cause of discord, unrest,
violence and, ultimately, armed conflict. Protecting
human rights prevents conflicts, and accountability for
violations of human rights breaks the cycle of violence.

Let me start by turning to three situations where
the United Nations has no peace mission but where
there is an immediate risk to human life or a need to
establish accountability for human rights violations.

The first of these is Libya. Concern for the safety
of civilians in Libya led this Council to authorize all
necessary measures to protect civilians and to refer the
situation to the International Criminal Court. In order
to minimize civilian casualties, it is critical that all
parties to the conflict fulfil their obligations to confine
any attacks to military objectives.

In a related effort to establish accountability, the
Human Rights Council mandated an international
commission of inquiry to investigate alleged violations
of international human rights law. Supported by a
secretariat led by the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR), the commission of
inquiry recently concluded investigative missions to
Libya, Egypt and Tunisia. The commission will submit
its report to the Human Rights Council next month.

In Syria, we must prevent the ongoing violent
suppression of mass protests from plunging the country
into a full-fledged armed conflict. At the request of the
Human Rights Council, our Office is preparing to
dispatch a mission to Syria to investigate alleged
violations of international human rights law. A
preliminary report will be provided to the Human
Rights Council in June, and full findings in September.

Also in the context of the fight against impunity,
we welcome the recent release of the report of the
Secretary-General's Panel of Experts on accountability
in Sri Lanka, which concludes that there are credible
allegations of a wide range of serious violations of
international law committed by both Sri Lankan
Government forces and Tamil Tigers in the final stages
of the conflict. We urge the Government to implement
the measures recommended by the Panel in order to
bring relief to victims and advance longer-term
reconciliation. We fully support the recommendation to
establish an international mechanism to monitor

national investigations and undertake its own, as
necessary.

I would now like to mention briefly several other
situations of current concern, where United Nations
missions mandated by this Council already exist but
where civilians remain at risk and where the question
of accountability for violations of human rights
requires attention.

The first is Cote d'Ivoire, where we remain
concerned about reports of sporadic fighting between
pro-Gbagbo militias and the Forces Republicaines and
of associated civilian casualties, including in the
Yopougon district of Abidjan, where on Friday the
human rights division of the United Nations Operation
in Cote d'Ivoire found 68 bodies in several mass
graves. The Government of President Ouattara must
urgently adopt measures to restore the rule of law
throughout Cote d'Ivoire and to investigate and
prosecute all those responsible for the recent and
ongoing violations, regardless of their political
affiliation.

The international commission of inquiry on Cote
d'Ivoire that was mandated by the Human Rights
Council arrived in the country on 4 May. It will
conduct field investigations across C6te d'Ivoire and
neighbouring countries and will present its findings to
the Human Rights Council in June. OHCHR has
established a secretariat to assist the commissioners,
comprised of staff from our Office, the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, and UN Women. As
requested in Security Council resolution 1975 (2011),
the report of the commission of inquiry will be
transmitted to this Council.

These accountability measures must be
accompanied by further reconciliation efforts.
President Ouattara has requested OHCHR to advise the
Government on the establishment of a truth and
reconciliation commission, and we are in contact in
this respect.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
follow-up to the recent mapping report, the
Government is preparing to establish a special chamber
to investigate serious violations of international law,
including mass killings, sexual violence and
displacement, and to prosecute the perpetrators.
However, as we have recently discussed with the
Minister of Justice, the current draft law needs to be

amended to guarantee the inclusion of a sufficient
international component and to protect the
independence and integrity of the process.

Let me now touch upon two further situations
ahead of the Security Council's upcoming mission. In
the case of Somalia, there is an urgent need to identify
ways to strengthen protection of civilians in a highly
insecure environment, including through reinforcing
the capabilities of the existing peacekeeping forces on
the ground. In the case of South Sudan, in defining a
new mandate, detailed information on the human rights
situation in all parts of the country should be taken into
account. Equally important is the inclusion of robust
language on human rights protection and promotion.

Let me conclude. In recent years, almost every
integrated peace mission has included a human rights
component, appropriately reflecting our shared
conviction that the maintenance of peace and security
depends upon respect for human rights. This positive
development must continue. The human rights
components contribute to the protection of civilians in
numerous ways, including through monitoring, public
reporting and building the capacity of national
authorities to strengthen respect for human rights and
the rule of law. As far as sexual violence is concerned,
the scale of the problem requires reinforced efforts. In
accordance with the letter and spirit of Security
Council resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010),
OHCHR is in discussion with all relevant United
Nations partners regarding the possibility of women
protection advisers being located within the human
rights components.

Finally, let me commend this Council for its swift
and decisive actions to promote the protection of
civilians and to ensure accountability, which have
undoubtedly helped to prevent further violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law.
Wherever the Council establishes or renews the
mandate of a peace mission, it is important to take into
account the human rights situation. OHCHR stands
ready to provide such information through the various
Security Council mechanisms, especially the Security
Council's informal Expert Group on the Protection of
Civilians.

