I would like to start by thanking the Special Envoy for his briefing and enduring commitment. I will make three points. We are relieved about the relative calm that has held in the north-west since the Russian-Turkish ceasefire arrangement in the beginning of March. This is important, especially as many internally displaced persons remain in the region, following the continuous military attacks at the end of last year. Renewed military action would further jeopardize the situation of those who are already vulnerable and who are preparing for a difficult and long winter ahead. We are therefore worried at the various reports of continued attacks, which illustrates the fragility of the situation. Any counter-terrorism activity should respect human rights and international humanitarian law. In the south, the situation continues to be volatile, as a result of kidnappings and targeted killings. We ask that all parties anywhere in the country refrain from violence, reduce tension and exercise maximum restraint. The United Nations should play a central role in the implementation of a nationwide ceasefire, and in the monitoring thereof, and we support the call of the Secretary-General and of the Special Envoy to this end. Since the start of the Special Envoy's mandate, the Syrian-owned, Syria- led and United Nations-facilitated Constitutional Committee has been one of his priorities and constitutes a door-opener to a wider political process. Recent developments, including the third round of negotiations that took place in Geneva last month, leave us both hopeful and worried. We welcome the fact that a third round of talks could take place in a climate that was, overall, constructive, despite many challenges. We also welcome the continued engagement by the Special Envoy with the Syrian Women's Advisory Board, especially in the context of the meetings of the Constitutional Committee. This is positive news indeed. Nevertheless, the way ahead is fraught with obstacles. We are very concerned about the seemingly slow dynamics of this process. The Committee was set up over a year ago, thanks to the Special Envoy's personal commitment and efforts. However, by now, only three rounds have taken place and the Committee has yet to discuss the more difficult subjects related to constitutional principles. An urgent agreement on the agenda for the next round is crucial. We hope that this round can take place by the beginning of October. We encourage all parties, in particular the Syrian authorities, to fully engage in upcoming meetings of the Committee. We also call upon all actors to exert their influence over the parties so that they fully engage on this track, which is crucial, and to engage closely and cooperatively in order to reinvigorate the wider political process. Urgent progress must also be made on other tracks, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). The time for positive actions and confidence-building measures is now. Tangible progress must urgently be made with respect to political prisoners and missing persons. The Syrian authorities must urgently move beyond one-for-one prisoner exchanges, release those arbitrarily detained and share information on all missing persons. In line with international regulations, access to detainees must be ensured. Women, the de facto heads of households, should be actively supported on an administrative level, wherever necessary. We encourage the sustained engagement of the Special Envoy in this regard. Victims must be fully acknowledged and receive the assistance they need in their quest for justice. This is an absolute necessity in order to break the cycle of violence. Belgium therefore fully supports all accountability initiatives, including the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and its support to criminal proceedings in national and international courts. Finally, Belgium will not accept the groundless accusations that the current state of the Syrian economy is a consequence of European Union (EU) sanctions. EU sanctions have targeted those who ordered or carried out human rights attacks or built their personal fortune on the war economy. The sanctions should not have any adverse humanitarian effects or unintended consequences for persons who are not targeted. On the contrary, the EU and its member States have continuously supported the Syrian people and remain Syria's most important humanitarian donor.
