Mr. Jurica (Croatia): At the outset, I wish to
thank the United Kingdom presidency for the
opportunity to discuss here in the Security Council this
most important issue of the protection of civilians
during armed conflict. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Holmes for his informative
and important briefing.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement by the
European Union that will be delivered later by the
representative of Slovenia.

In our opinion, the question of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict deserves more consistent
attention in this Council. The statistics over the past
20 to 30 years clearly show that civilian casualties in
conflict areas have consistently outnumbered and still
outnumber military casualties.

In the twenty-first century, we are still witness to
gross violations of international humanitarian law, in
which civilians are increasingly and deliberately
becoming the prime targets of armed groups. Too many
parties to an armed conflict see civilians as a method,
rather than a by-product, of war. For example, they do
not hesitate to use rape and other forms of sexual
violence to destroy the most fragile parts of the society
against which they are fighting.

We have read or heard many reports of children
under five being raped, and we have to take decisive
collective action against such atrocities. We have heard
many reports of children being killed, maimed and
illegally recruited as soldiers. That goes directly
against our commitments of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document (General Assembly resolution 60/1) as well as against Security Council resolution
1674 (2006), which reaffirms the provisions of
paragraph 138 and 139 from that document.

The international community should encourage
and help States to exercise their responsibility to
protect their populations against genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. The
international community has already expressed its
readiness to take collective action through the Security
Council when national authorities manifestly fail to
protect their populations from the above-mentioned
violations of humanitarian law. We should not be seen
wanting in the implementation of our commitments.

The protection of civilians comprises the
protection of their lives and well-being. Even in the
case of natural disasters, civilians deserve protection.
My Government strongly supports the efforts of the
wider international community in assisting and
attempting to protect the victims of Cyclone Nargis in
Myanmar/Burma.
On the other hand, if humanitarian access is
denied in conflict areas, it is civilians who suffer the
most. In such cases the vast majority of victims are
women and children, the elderly and the disabled. We
are therefore naturally concerned when we hear of
cases of Governments and armed groups denying
access to humanitarian assistance or using such
assistance for political manipulation, including attacks
on humanitarian personnel and looting of humanitarian
supplies.

We believe that condemnation is not the only
collective action that the Security Council has
committed to taking. We would encourage all its
members to do everything in their power to ensure that
parties to armed conflicts worldwide cooperate
adequately with the United Nations and other
humanitarian organizations.

Another matter of concern is the growing number
of internally displaced persons and refugees from
armed conflicts. Croatia is very concerned by the
security situation in and around refugee camps,
especially at those in some areas of Africa - for
example, the Democratic Republic of Congo and the
Sudan, where children are still being recruited as
soldiers and fall victim to rape and other grave
violations.

Those situations require peacekeeping missions
with a strong, clear and goal-oriented mandates,
including the authorization of the use of force, if
necessary, to protect civilians. That is just one of the
many lessons that the international community has
learned from past armed conflicts.

Let us also not forget the importance of the
implementation by the Security Council of smart
sanctions and other targeted measures against
dissenting Governments and armed groups. When
taking into account the immediate impact that
hostilities can have on civilian populations, it is
increasingly important that the Council use its mandate
to truly address the underlying causes of conflict so as
to help enact real change on the ground for those who
truly require it.
If used in conjunction with a holistic approach, as
described in our previous debate this month on post-
conflict peacebuilding (5895th meeting), the Security
Council can be the tool that helps foster or, if need be,
coerce lasting change for the betterment of civilian
populations.

I would like to add two short comments before
ending. First, Croatia understands the impact of cluster
munitions on civilians, and our remain concerned about
their use in armed conflict. We therefore add our
support to efforts being undertaken in the international
community to negotiate in 2008 a legally binding
instrument that would prohibit the use, production and
transfer of cluster munitions.

Moreover, Croatia strongly believes that when
Governments fail to investigate, prosecute and punish
violations of humanitarian law against civilians by
members of their own armed forces or committed on
their territory, recourse to the International Criminal
Court should be considered.

The question of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is a serious matter that requires our
serious attention and is, without question, of concern
for international peace and security. My country is part
of a region that has suffered from armed conflict, and
thus we ourselves have witnessed what international
will can do for the protection of civilians.

