Mr. Kadurugamuwa (Sri Lanka): Sri Lanka wishes
to congratulate you, Mr. President, for convening this
important debate on children and armed conflict, with
particular emphasis on children who are victims of
non-State armed groups.

As a country that has experienced the agony of
children being forcibly recruited by non-State actors
in the past, we would like to highlight the relevance
of today's debate coinciding with the tenth anniversary
of resolution 1612 (2005), which established a Working
Group focused on children and armed conflict, as well
as the tenth anniversary of the Paris Commitments and
the Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated
With Armed Forces or Armed Groups, which were
adopted in 2007.

During the almost three decades'-long conflict that
Sri Lanka experienced, one of the most complex and
painful issues to address was the horror of terrorist
groups recruiting both girls and boys as combatants
and suicide cadres. With the conclusion of conflict, in
May 2009, a total of 594 child combatants aged between
12 and18 years of age surrendered. The Government of
Sri Lanka did not criminally prosecute those children,
but considered them as victims of the conflict. The
Government took a series of measures to rehabilitate
and reintegrate those former child combatants by
providing education, recreational facilities and
vocational training, as well as psychological support to
help them deal with their past.

Those positive developments led the United Nation
to de-list Sri Lanka from annex II to the report of
the Secretary-General on child combatants in 2012.
Today Sri Lanka is proud to state that all former child
combatants have been rehabilitated and re-integrated
into society. They have become productive and
responsible citizens of Sri Lanka. Some have even sat
for competitive exams and entered university.

Sri Lanka believes that the use of children in armed
conflict in any capacity, as combatants or otherwise,
is a clear violation of international humanitarian and
human rights law. Sri Lanka also believes that there
are three effective methods to reduce the recruitment
of child combatants by non-State actors. The first is to
put political and economic pressure on the offending
parties while strengthening law and order; the second
is to mobilize resources for rehabilitation programmes;
and the third is to address the socioeconomic, political
and ideological dynamics that non-State actors can use
to lure children by to their so-called causes.

The Government of Sri Lanka is appreciative of
United Nations agencies, such as UNICEF, and our
bilateral partners for helping us in our endeavors to
combat the menace of children being recruited into
armed conflict, and thereafter in the task of ensuring
their rehabilitation and reintegration into society. In
conclusion, Sri Lanka is happy to share our experience
of rehabilitation and reintegration of child combatants
with parties that wish to learn from our story.

