Mr. Berger (Germany): I join my colleagues in
warmly welcoming Mr. Eamon Gilmore, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade of
Ireland, to the Council today. I also thank him for his
comprehensive briefing setting out Ireland's priorities
as it assumes the chairmanship-in-office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for 2012. Germany looks forward to working
with the Irish chairmanship on the key issues the
OSCE is facing, including the chairmanship's
priorities.

12-2284]
Let me briefly comment on four aspects.

First, we consider progress in the resolution of
the remaining protracted conflicts in the OSCE area to
be of particular relevance. We welcome the recent
decision of the Ministerial Council of the OSCE to
strengthen the OSCE's capability in conflict
management. That area, together with its newly
strengthened capacities to deal with transnational
threats, will be one of the key parameters of the
OSCE's work in the months to come.

Germany commends the OSCE's active
participation in the political process aimed at settling
the Transdniestrian conflict. We welcome the
resumption of the formal 5+2 talks under last year's
Lithuanian chairmanship of the OSCE. Germany fully
and actively supports the Irish chairmanship in its
efforts to encourage and facilitate steady progress on
that issue. We express our hope that the conflict parties
will extend their full cooperation with those efforts.

Germany also welcomes the role of the OSCE in
pursuing a settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh
conflict within the framework of the Minsk Group. We
commend the Russian, United States and French co-
Chairs of the Minsk Group for their efforts, and would
welcome the continuation of the additional Russian
initiative of meetings with the conflict parties on the
highest political level. We believe that a strengthening
of OSCE monitoring activities and the inclusion of
humanitarian measures could prove beneficial.

On Georgia, we remain committed to the
principle of re-establishing an OSCE presence
throughout Georgia. It remains important that all
parties fully implement the 2008 ceasefire agreements.
We continue to support the active engagement of the
OSCE in the ongoing Geneva talks to reduce tensions
and build trust among affected communities. We also
stress the importance of the functioning of the two
incident prevention mechanisms, and welcome the
recent exchange of detainees as a result of the meetings
under that instrument.

Secondly, as regards the implementation of
commitments made with respect to the human rights
dimension in the OSCE area, Germany remains
particularly concerned about existing restrictions on
fundamental freedoms - in particular the freedom of
the media and the freedoms of expression and of
assembly - in many OSCE participating States. We

12-2284]
welcome the Irish initiative to prioritize the issue of
Internet freedom.

In the context of the democratic process, we
consider OSCE election observation missions to be a
vital instrument. We commend the Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights for
providing the relevant methodology, and we would like
to thank Minister Gilmore for his clear commitment to
the OSCE's role in election observation activities.

Thirdly, concerning the economic and
environmental dimension, we welcome the Irish
chairmanship's promotion of security and stability
through good governance. Good environmental
governance will be a key topic at the forthcoming
United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development. In that context, the environment and
security initiative is an important example of inter-
agency cooperation and partnership between the
OSCE, the United Nations Environment Programme,
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
and others. Germany will complement efforts in that
field by hosting a conference on water issues with
OSCE participating States from Central Asia on 7 and
8 March in Berlin.

Good governance also comprises the fight against
corruption, money-laundering and the financing of
terrorism. In that field, we will support the Irish
chairmanship in view of pursuing the objectives of the
United Nations Conventions on Transnational
Organized Crime and against Corruption in the OSCE
area.

Fourthly, referring to the politico-military
dimension, let me underline that Germany attaches
great importance to further developing synergies
between the OSCE and the United Nations. In that
regard, we welcome the first ever memorandum of
understanding and annual plan of action agreed last
year between the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the OSCE secretariat, which provides an
excellent framework for intensifying programmatic
coordination, joint programming and even joint
fundraising. We look forward to similar initiatives -
for example, with UNDP - in the traditional area of
cooperation on small arms and light weapons and
ammunition stockpile projects in the OSCE region.

Let me also point to the exemplary cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE in Kosovo,
where, as an integral pillar of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, the OSCE
contributes to the security and well-being of all
communities. Moreover, the OSCE continues to be an
attractive model for regional cooperation, in particular
for our neighbouring OSCE Partners for Cooperation in
the Mediterranean region and, as our Indian colleague
mentioned, in Asia. In that context, the application of
Mongolia to become a participating State of the OSCE
is noteworthy and deserves our support. Regarding the
OSCE partner Afghanistan, Germany welcomes the
Vilnius Council's decision to further strengthen the
OSCE's support of stabilizing that country.

As Foreign Minister Westerwelle pointed out at
the OSCE Ministerial Council in Vilnius last
December, the OSCE can and should pursue efforts
aimed at creating a Euro-Atlantic security community
reaching from Vancouver to Vladivostok. That is one
of the main tasks the OSCE assigned itself at the
Astana summit. As an important step in that direction,
Minister Westerwelle spoke of a "track two" initiative
being undertaken by German, French, Polish and
Russian think tanks to organize a series of joint
academic conferences on that subject in the course of
2012, starting on 20 March in Berlin.

Finally, let me thank the Chairperson-in-Office
once again for his briefing, and reiterate Germany's
full support for the Irish OSCE chairmanship.

