Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Sir, for having organized this debate and thank
you also for having honoured us by your presence.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union -
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia - and the associated countries, Cyprus and
Malta, align themselves with this statement.

The European Union congratulates the Jamaican
presidency on organizing this debate on conflict
prevention, which is an aspect of the maintenance of
international peace and security that is too often
overlooked. However, in accordance with Article 1,
paragraph 1, of the Charter, one of the purposes of the
United Nations is:

"to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace".

Thus, the Secretary-General has rightly called for the
development of a "culture of prevention".

First, I would like to underscore the importance
of prevention, and also the difficulties it raises. There
are several reasons why the prevention of armed
conflict arouses less interest than dealing with the
effects of armed conflicts themselves. This is
particularly regrettable since prevention is always less
costly than dealing with conflicts - be this from a
human, political, economic or financial perspective.
Prevention very often involves discretion more than
publicity, perseverance more than action. It seems,
therefore, to offer less opportunities to enhance one's
political status or media image.

Prevention is not without risk. There is a risk of
overreacting or of not reacting enough, of acting too
soon or too late. Nevertheless, we must accept this risk,
since if we do not take it, we leave ourselves open to
even greater difficulties.

The results of prevention are also difficult to
assess. How do we know whether a particular action
has achieved its aim? How do we learn from a policy
of prevention?

Another difficulty with prevention lies in its
degree of compatibility with the sovereignty of States.
Most of the current conflicts are not direct conflicts
between States, but internal conflicts, resulting from
economic or political problems - seizure of power and
wealth by a political or ethnic group, failure to comply
with the rights of minority groups, secessionism and so
forth.

It should, of course, be pointed out that local
actors have the principal responsibility for prevention.
Does this mean, however, that these internal crises and
tensions, which may degenerate into conflict, do not
involve the international community? In fact, for
several years the Security Council has been involved in
dealing with internal conflicts that in almost every case
have international repercussions.

Preventive action presupposes that at a stage prior
to the eruption of the conflict, the Security Council
may become involved in a potentially dangerous
situation and, if necessary, consider actions. Such a
situation has already occurred in the past. The Council
has acknowledged its responsibility. This shows that it
can and knows how to adapt to developments in the
very nature of conflicts, including from the point of
view of prevention. Such adaptation should be
welcomed and encouraged.

This development, however, should not be
confined to the Security Council, but be fully taken up
by States themselves and by regional organizations,
which have a central role to play in the matter.

Secondly, the European Union considers that the
best means of preventing conflicts is to address their
fundamental causes. This goes beyond the sphere of
competence of the Security Council, yet it is a
fundamental aspect of conflict prevention.
Responsibility in these areas lies primarily with the
States themselves, but international institutions and
donors of funds have a not inconsiderable role to play
in providing impetus.

The first and not the least aspect of this is of
course economic and social development. Poverty
leads to frustration and revolts, which may degenerate
into conflicts. Economic development is, therefore, an
essential factor in the prevention of conflicts. We
cannot emphasize this point enough.

However, such development must be sustainable
and harmonious. It must be sustainable so that natural
resources are not wasted and economic growth is not
achieved to the detriment of future generations. It must
be harmonious so that everyone benefits from it. It
must, therefore, include a social dimension - public
education, sanitation, health-care and equal access by
all - men and women - to a decent standard of
living.

The most industrialized countries can and must
help the developing countries by placing at their
disposal technological, financial and human resources
and by maintaining an appropriate level of aid,
including governmental aid, for development. That is
what the European Union has done in adopting an
important policy based on cooperation and the
openness of its markets.

Furthermore, the rule of law, respect for human
rights and the democratic foundations and functioning
of political systems must be ensured. A State that
respects the fundamental rights of its citizens and has a
participatory political system allows not only freedom
of expression, but also the possibility of everyone's
interests being taken into account, thus reducing the
risk that all or part of society will rebel against the
State or seek to secede from it. Political life should not
boil down to an all-or-nothing approach. Room must be
made for political, ethnic and religious minorities, as
well as for different regions, so that they need not
choose between absence from political life and
recourse to armed violence.

Finally, the importance of good governance
cannot be overemphasized. Good governance covers
several aspects: the exploitation of resources to the
benefit of all and not for the enrichment of a small
group; the sound management of public finances so as
to provide basic services to the entire population; anti-
corruption measures; administration in the general
interest and not solely in the interest of those in
government; and the accountability of leaders. As
many examples to the contrary have shown, good
governance makes it possible to reduce the risks of
conflict arising from shortages, the seizure of power or
the effects of a culture of predation.

In addition to addressing causes, it is also
necessary to remove the sources of the funding,
fuelling and unleashing of conflicts. The international
community has become increasingly aware of the need
to combat the illegal exploitation of and traffic in
natural resources, as well as the production of and
traffic in drugs. Armed conflicts are triggered and
perpetuated all the more easily if they can be financed
by the illegal exploitation of and trade in natural
resources, in particular diamonds, which are easy to
dispose of and whose origins are difficult to identify, as
well as drugs.

The market needs to be regulated so as to abolish
illicit trafficking and to increase the transparency of
transactions. This involves enhancing cooperation
between States, marketing centres, industrialists and
regional organizations. It also requires support for the
efforts of producer States to enhance their regulations
and their means to stop illicit trafficking. Lastly, it
involves consideration of how to certify rough
diamonds, define codes of conduct for industrialists
and establish an international agency responsible for
promoting transparency and responsibility.

I will not dwell on the problem of drug
trafficking, the extent and complexity of which are well
known. I would simply point out that certain conflicts,
in particular that in Afghanistan, persist as a result of
this sole but very lucrative resource. This explains the
great importance of preventive action in that area.

We must also take action against the destabilizing
stockpiling of and illicit trafficking in light and small-
calibre weapons. Crises degenerate all the more easily
into armed conflicts when weapons, in particular light
and small-calibre weapons, are readily accessible.
Coordinated action in this sphere is an essential aspect
of preventing armed conflict.

I am pleased to note that the international
community has increasingly mobilized itself in this
respect. The sale of light and small-calibre weapons
must be regulated so that their transfer at the national,
regional and international levels is conducted legally
and responsibly. In practice, this requires an entire
range of measures: the strengthening of national laws;
the development of regional initiatives, such as, for
instance, the moratorium imposed by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
Nairobi Declaration, the action programme conducted
jointly by the European Union and the Southern
African Development Community, and the Inter-
American Convention of the Organization of American
States (OAS); the exchange of information on
trafficking; the marking of weapons; anti-trafficking
measures; international cooperation to increase the
monitoring capacity of States directly affected by the
illicit traffic in small arms; the drafting of a protocol on
the manufacture of and illicit traffic in firearms; and a
reduction in the destabilizing stockpiling of small
arms, in particular through the adoption of confidence-
building measures and through the collection and
destruction of all weapons not legally owned or not
necessary to national or community defence or to
internal security.

For its part, the European Union is highly
sensitive to this problem and has adopted a Code of
Conduct on arms exports and a Joint Action on small
arms. In this context, the European Union is obviously
lending its full support to the convening in 2001 of a
United Nations conference on the illicit arms trade in
all its aspects.

Beyond the responsibility of States, regional
organizations have an important role in the prevention
of conflicts. Regional organizations may and should,
first, have political and diplomatic machinery for
preventing conflicts. Such is the role played by such
continental organizations as the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the OAS and the
Organization of African Unity, as well as by such
subregional organizations as, for instance, ECOWAS in
West Africa. They represent the first level for
addressing tensions that are mostly of a regional nature
and for finding solutions among all the forces directly
involved, while ensuring that internal crises and
tensions do not draw the countries of a given region
into the problem alongside the local protagonists.

We should draw conclusions from the conflict-
prevention actions already undertaken by regional
organizations so that their role can be enhanced and
strengthened. Moreover, the emergence of such
organizations where they do not already exist should be
encouraged. These regional cooperation agencies are
also crucibles in which links of solidarity are formed
and economic integration is developed, enabling them
to play a preventive role.

The European Union is itself a successful model
of conflict prevention. After two world wars unleashed
in Europe, the Union arose in the belief that it was
necessary to create common economic interests to
prevent the resurgence of conflicts and that every
country should have sufficient interest in and with its
neighbours to make war impossible. Indeed, after
centuries of tearing one another apart, the States
members of the European Union have lived in peace
for over half a century. The lesson to be drawn from
this European success story is that it is better to share
and jointly exploit resources than to pillage one's
neighbours. The lesson holds good in particular for
problems of access to and distribution of water
resources, which have become increasingly vital.

We can only rejoice that this path has been
chosen by regional organizations, such as the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Association of South-East Asian Nations.

Finally, what is the role of the United Nations and
what are the means at its disposal for the prevention of
armed conflict? Bearing in mind the diversity of the
questions dealt with in the context of conflict
prevention, many United Nations bodies, specialized
agencies, funds and programmes have a role to play. In
this Security Council debate, I will concentrate on the
role of the Council.

The main responsibility of the Security Council
for peacekeeping and security also extends to the
prevention of armed conflict. It falls to it to investigate
any dispute or situation to determine whether that
dispute or situation could degenerate into armed
conflict and to take appropriate measures. The Council
must assume that responsibility in full, taking into
account the change in the nature of conflicts, 90 per
cent of which now take place within States. Its
effectiveness will be also be improved if greater
account is taken of that dimension.

In this context, we should remind ourselves of the
role of the Secretary-General in alerting the Security
Council in accordance with Article 99 of the Charter.
The Secretary-General must not hesitate to draw the
Security Council's attention to certain situations. The
Secretariat's early-warning, reaction and analysis
capabilities should therefore be bolstered so that the
Secretary-General is better able to perform that task.

I should like to emphasize that particular aspect
of our message. The Security Council has at its
disposal a range of resources, of which it must avail
itself as necessary. I should like to mention a few of
them. They include Security Council missions, of
which there has been a welcome revival recently, and
which we must be able to send not only when conflict
breaks out, but further down the line; preventive
disarmament measures and arms embargoes for
preventive purposes; measures to combat illegal
trafficking in mineral raw materials and embargoes on
diamonds; the establishment of demilitarized zones;
and measures for preventive deployment, including
civilian police. The Security Council must
progressively develop all of these measures.

In conclusion, we are gratified to see the Security
Council becoming increasingly aware of the
importance of preventive action. This new interest
must now be translated into action and decision-
making. Beyond the Council, the entire international
community, United Nations specialized bodies and
agencies, regional organizations and Member States
must develop that dimension more effectively and
acquire a culture of prevention. Furthermore, an
integrated approach is also essential, extending from
the prevention of conflict to the consolidation of peace
after conflict, so as to break the vicious cycle of
unavoidable conflict and unachievable peace.

It is for the Security Council to implement the
recommendations made here today in specific cases.
This topic warrants greater, sustained attention. It
would therefore be useful for the Secretary-General to
give us his views and recommendations on the matter,
as requested in the draft presidential statement to be
adopted later, and for the Security Council to examine
them in due course, if possible at ministerial level.

