Mr. Corr (Ireland): I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his briefing
this morning and the Secretary-General for the detailed
report on the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) since last
October. Ireland agrees fully with the statement that
will be delivered on behalf of the European Union by
the Permanent Representative of Spain later in this
meeting.

My delegation would like to express warm
appreciation to Mr. Hans Haekkerup for his excellent
work during the past year as Special Representative
and head of UNMIK. The achievements realized by
UNMIK in implementing resolution 1244 (1999),
completing the Constitutional Framework and the
UNMIK-Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Common
Document and holding Kosovo-wide elections bear
testament to Mr. Haekkerup's dedication and
determination and that of his full team. We are also
grateful to Mr. Charles Brayshaw for his interim
leadership and wish the new Special Representative,
Mr. Steiner, well in his task.
Ambassador Mahbubani rightly made the point
earlier in our discussion that Kosovo has been held in
trust by the United Nations. With trust comes special
responsibility. This trust and responsibility has been
fully met in the work of UNMIK and KFOR.

While the November elections and the
inauguration of the Assembly were landmark events,
my delegation, like others here this morning, is
concerned at the continuing difficulties in electing a
President of Kosovo and of forming a government.
This delay in establishing self-government and in
transferring authority from UNMIK threatens, if it
continues too long, to undermine the credibility of the
provisional institutions. The democratically elected
representatives of Kosovo must work together to
ensure that self-government becomes a reality. We
encourage UNMIK to continue facilitating meetings
between the relevant parties in this regard.

The progress achieved at the municipal level is
positive, including the participation of Kosovo Serbs
and the other minority groups in local government.
Once formed, it is important that the provisional self-
governing institutions exercise their new authority in
strict compliance with resolutions 1244 (1999) and
with the Constitutional Framework, cooperate fully
with UNMIK and engage constructively with the
Belgrade authorities, in accordance with the Common
Document. The institutions should be seem by all
communities as a legitimate and fair way of
representing their interests. For this to happen, as the
Secretary-General points out, those elected must use
their mandates wisely and reach out to one another in
the spirit of mutual respect, tolerance and constructive
compromise.

My delegation welcomes as a key provision of the
Common Document the establishment of the High-
ranking Working Group as a forum for cooperation and
dialogue. We agree with Ambassador Eldon that it is
important that the elected representatives of Kosovo
participate as soon as possible in its work.

Ireland encourages UNMIK to continue its efforts
to implement resolution 1244 (1999) and to further
progress in its work in relation to security, justice,
refugee returns and missing persons, as well as to
further develop its cooperation with the authorities in
Belgrade. We welcome the establishment of five new
specialized units within pillar I, which should help to
intensify the fight against organized crime and
terrorism, as well as the gradual increase in the number
of trained officers in the Kosovo Police Service.
We also welcome the establishment of the Office
of Returns and Communities within the Special
Representative's Office, which should assist in the
return and reintegration of displaced persons. As
pointed out by the Secretary-General in his report,
there has been a particular slowdown of Kosovo Serb
returns during the past year. We encourage rapid work
on a framework for 2002-2003 that will combine
economic incentives and other measures in order to
offer longer-term prospects to returnees and other
internally displaced persons. The process of displaced
persons returning home is central to advancing peace
and reconciliation in Kosovo.

The issue of the remaining ethnic Albanian
political detainees is particularly important. We hope
that, as agreed under the Common Document, their
cases can be reviewed according to international
standards and that they can be released to UNMIK as
soon as possible. Such transfers would do much to
improve relations between the two main communities
in Kosovo. Ireland is pleased, therefore, to note that
this issue is being raised at the High-ranking Working
Group meeting in Belgrade today.

Finally, Ireland believes that the successful
development of Kosovo will help to ensure peace and
stability in South-East Europe. Along with our partners
in the European Union, we will continue to support
greater integration and regional cooperation through
the Stability Pact and the Stabilization and Association
Process.

