Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Having been actively
involved in United Nations peacekeeping activities
since 1960, Nigeria is grateful to the French presidency
of the Security Council for convening this meeting to
re-evaluate the enormous challenges facing United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We are delighted by
the invitation extended to our delegation and by the
concise concept paper circulated to facilitate the
discussions. We also thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support; and Mr. Hedi Annabi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, for
their informative briefings.

Today, peacekeeping has become complex and
multidimensional in scope and nature, with a broad
range of challenges, including resource constraints,
gaps between mandates, inadequate preparation and
planning of operations, as well as ill-defined exit
strategies. Several missions are not only not self-
sustaining, but lack even basic equipment, transport,
food and medical supplies. Yet, my delegation is of the
view that these constraints do not diminish the
importance of United Nations peacekeeping as a
fundamental tool for conflict resolution around the
world, particularly in Africa. As weighty as the
challenges are, we believe that they can be addressed if
the political will exists and if the following measures
are put in place.

There is a need to strengthen the triangular
cooperation between the Security Council, which
exercises strategic oversight on peacekeeping issues,
the troop-contributing countries and the Secretariat. It
is imperative that the troop-contributing countries,
which implement the mandates at the operational and
tactical levels, be involved from the conception to the
deployment of peacekeeping missions. They should
also be involved in the determination and review of
mandates. That will ensure that operations are well
conceived and administered right from the outset.

There is also an urgent need for synergy in the
performance of the duties of the special representative
of the Secretary-General and that of the force
commander in peacekeeping missions. The special
representative must be able to relate to what is
happening on the ground without impinging on the role
of the force commander. Experience has shown that,
too often, the ability of force commanders to
implement mandates is limited by the actions of special
representatives.
Resource constraints remain the single most
important challenge to effective peacekeeping. They
dampen the morale and enthusiasm of peacekeepers
and the political will of troop-contributing countries.
Our delegation believes that neither the outsourcing of
peacekeeping activities to third parties nor the
deployment of civilian capacity in theatres of conflict
is a viable option in tackling the problems of resource
constraints. Outsourcing will create consent and
confidence issues. It will also impinge on national
ownership of the process, while civilian capacity
deployment will create security problems. What is
required is commitment and the adequate provision of
resources to strengthen existing missions, such as the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and the
African Union Mission in Somalia, and to support the
establishment of potential hybrid missions in such
places as Somalia.

The downsizing or closing of existing missions is
necessary, but it should be a function of the successful
attainment of mandate benchmarks and a well-
conceived exit strategy, including a peacebuilding
mechanism. Peacekeeping and peacebuilding must go
together from the beginning of an operation.

A key lesson that emerges from 60 years of
United Nations peacekeeping is that the mandate and
the welfare of peacekeepers and the enhancement of
the capacity of the United Nations to render them
unflinching support should constantly engage our
attention. United Nations peacekeeping must
continuously be rooted in impartiality, national and
local ownership and respect for established principles,
including the territorial integrity of States and the
consent of parties before the deployment of
peacekeeping forces. For maximum effectiveness,
peacekeeping mandates must be clearly defined and
robust.

In addition, resources to accomplish the
mandated tasks must be adequate and predictable.
Moreover, there should be constant and reliable
communications between the Secretariat, the field
missions and the troop-contributing countries.
Similarly, adequate predeployment training should be a
prerequisite to the successful implementation of any
mandate.

Over time, it has become apparent that those who
provide the material resources and logistics support for
peacekeeping have captured the peacekeeping process
and relegated the welfare of peacekeepers to the
background. Nigeria calls for a change of attitude.
Attention and respect must revert to the peacekeepers,
who risk their lives in dangerous circumstances, often
without adequate logistics support, in the cause of
global peace. It is only respect and support for
peacekeepers that will encourage troop-contributing
countries to continue to commit their troops and attract
potential troop contributors.

There is a need for the Security Council to
continue to support regional and subregional
peacekeeping efforts. In particular, we call for support
for the development of a standby force capacity at the
regional and subregional levels in Africa.

Finally, Nigeria supports the call for intensified
dialogue and consultations among the Fifth Committee,
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations and the Security Council
Working Group on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations to overcome some of the identified
challenges to United Nations peacekeeping operations.

