The Secretary-General: I have had the chance
this morning to meet with President Kagame, and we
have had a very good discussion. For the second time
in less than one week, we are meeting again here in the
Council to reaffirm our commitment to bringing peace
and stability to the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

I believe the welcome presence of the President
of Rwanda here today should strengthen our resolve to
make the most of this opportunity for change and
ensure that it gives us new impetus towards a final
resolution of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. What is clear to this Council, and should be
clear to all sides in the conflict, is that no country in
the area can hope to enjoy stability while the conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues and
that all will benefit from its resolution. I therefore wish
to commend President Kagame and President Kabila
for the statesmanship they showed in meeting last week
in Washington to discuss the challenges facing both
countries and the entire area.

There are difficult issues of governance, national
dialogue, democracy, accountability and reconciliation
that need to be addressed in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in the region as a whole if there is to
be a lasting solution in the Great Lakes. There is also
the issue of the continued existence of predatory armed
groups. Although there is no easy military solution to
this dangerous phenomenon, those guilty of the worst
atrocities of human rights abuses - and especially
those guilty of genocide - must not be allowed to
escape unpunished. We must understand that all the
countries in the region, in particular Rwanda, have
legitimate security concerns.

Let me also commend the Government and the
people of Rwanda for their efforts to build and renew
their nation. Much remains to be done, however. The
United Nations will continue to give whatever help it
can to Rwanda in carrying out these tasks.

In welcoming President Joseph Kabila during his
brief visit last week, many members of the Security
Council spoke of the need to seize this opportunity for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In addition,
leaders throughout the region have responded to the
latest developments in a way that suggests that they
sincerely wish to implement the Lusaka Agreement in
all its aspects. I hope we can build on this momentum
and on the fact that no major ceasefire violations have
been reported over the past two weeks.

I would like to mention one step that will serve as
an important confidence-building measure as the
United Nations moves to help the parties carry out the
disengagement plan signed in Harare in December. The
Force Commander of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), Major-General Diallo, is currently
discussing with the authorities in Kigali and in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo the withdrawal of
Rwandan forces and their allies from the town of
Pweto, on Lake Mweru in Katanga. We understand that
substantial, if not complete, agreement has been
reached. MONUC is ready to deploy a team of
observers to the town once all the arrangements are in
place. A withdrawal from Pweto by Rwanda and its
allies in accordance with the Harare disengagement
plan would help set the tone for the remainder of the
disengagement plan. It would also represent an
important step towards compliance with Security
Council resolution 1304 (2000) of 16 June 2000, which
calls for the withdrawal of all foreign forces from the
territory ofthe Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In the report I intend to submit to the Council
next week, I will propose a revised concept of
operations for the deployment by MONUC. I will
propose the deployment of additional personnel to
monitor and verify the implementation by the parties of
the Harare disengagement plan. Meanwhile, MONUC
has already begun to take some initial steps which fall
within the mandate approved by the Security Council
in February 2000. Should the Council approve the
revised concept, MONUC will be able to help the
parties further in drawing back their forces from the
confrontation line. This will reduce the risk of clashes
and serve as a vital first step towards an eventual
complete withdrawal of all foreign forces from the
country.

We may also be on the verge of a new and more
constructive stage in the process of bringing an end to
the conflict and instability in the region. We should,
however, not lose sight of the scale of challenges that
remain. Indeed, it is my profound hope that the
resolution ofthe conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo will bring peace to the entire Great Lakes
region and, in particular, to Rwanda. We are also taking
urgent steps to re-energize the intra-Congolese
dialogue and I hope the summit that is being planned in
the region will focus on this aspect of the problem. I
think a new opportunity has presented itself and I urge
this Council and every country in the region to do
everything possible to seize it.

