Mr. Al-Otaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): It is a
pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
are confident that with your expertise and skill you will
be able to lead the Council's work successfully at this
critical juncture. I would also like to thank your
predecessor, Permanent Representative of France,
Mr. Jean-Marc de La Sabliere, for the valuable efforts
he and his delegation made while presiding over the
Council last month.

In October of last year, the Security Council held
an open meeting to discuss developments in the crisis
between Iraq and the United Nations in response to a
request by the Chairman of the Non-Aligned
Movement. Many members participated, and the views
of those members crystallized international opinion,
helping the Council to reach agreement, which
culminated in the unanimous adoption of Security
Council resolution 1441 (2002). The resolution was a
major achievement, through which the Security
Council showed its determination to shoulder the
responsibility entrusted to it under Article 24 of the
Charter: the maintenance of international peace and
security. Today's meeting comes in response to a
similar request. However, it is being held in more
difficult circumstances, due to the Iraqi Government's
reluctance to fulfil its commitments under Security
Council resolutions 687 (1991), 1284 (1999) and 1441
(2002).

It is regrettable that Iraq has continued to defy the
will of the international community for so long, not
realizing the gravity of its policies and their
repercussions for the peace and stability of the entire
Gulf region. For more than 20 years, the region has
suffered the negative effects of the Iraqi Government's
actions and its failure to respond to the resolutions of
international legality. After the adoption of resolution
1441 (2002) in November, everyone was optimistic that
the beating of the drums of war would be stopped and
that the Iraqi Government would come to its senses,
realize the gravity of the situation, seize the final
opportunity offered by that resolution and cooperate
fully with the United Nations Monitoring, Verification
and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) by
declaring its activities in the manufacture of weapons
of mass destruction and by giving an account of all its
proscribed weapons. However, that optimism soon
evaporated and was supplanted by concern when Iraq
submitted its full, final and complete declaration on
7 December last year. UNMOVIC and the IAEA stated
that the declaration was incomplete and contained no
important new information. The periodic reports
submitted to the Security Council by the Executive
Chairman of UNMOVIC and the Director General of
IAEA, the last of which was delivered last Friday, have
concluded that Iraq has not fully cooperated in
responding to the requirements of resolution 1441
(2002). That is truly regrettable, especially since such
an attitude undermines the chances of peace and
increases the possibility of war, which we are all trying
to avoid because it would have negative repercussions
on the region and its peoples. Kuwait, because of its
geographic location, could be more heavily impacted
than other countries by developments in Iraq's relations
with the United Nations. As part of our contingency
planning, Kuwait has recently taken precautionary
measures to ensure peace and security for its people.

On many occasions, Kuwait has expressed its
views, which are as follows. First, Iraq must fully
commit to the complete and faithful implementation of
all relevant Security Council resolutions.

Secondly, Kuwait supports all efforts made to
reach a peaceful solution to the question of Iraq's
weapons of mass destruction, in accordance with
resolutions of international legality. We urge the Iraqi
Government to respond fully to regional and
international appeals and resolutions calling on Iraq to
comply with their provisions in order to avoid war.

Thirdly, Kuwait pays tribute to the UNMOVIC
and IAEA inspectors for their impartiality,
professionalism and objectivity. It appreciates the great
efforts that all are making to fulfil UNMOVIC's
mandate.

Fourthly, Kuwait hopes that the use of military
force will be a last resort and will take place under
international legality. We believe that the Iraqi
Government alone can spare the brotherly Iraqi people
and the other peoples of the region the negative
repercussions and dangers of military action by
modifying its conduct as soon as possible and by
cooperating with the inspectors on substance rather
than merely on process.

Fifthly, we reaffirm the need to maintain the unity
of the Security Council because that is an important
element in ensuring commitment to the resolutions
adopted by the Council. Previous Council experience in
the handling of the question of Iraq has proven that a
common stance and unified will are more effective in
realizing our desired objectives.

The Security Council has been intensively and
repeatedly seized of the question of the elimination of
Iraq's weapons of mass destruction. The issue is very
important because it affects international peace and
security. However, it is not the only commitment
included in relevant Security Council resolutions. The
resolutions contain other important commitments
directly affecting Kuwait that have not yet been settled.
The most important of these issues are missing persons
and prisoners of Kuwaiti and other nationalities, and
that of Kuwaiti property seized during Iraq's
occupation of Kuwait. It is regrettable that the methods
employed by the Iraqi Government with respect to the
inspection teams tasked with the destruction of Iraq's
weapons of mass destruction since 1991 are the same
methods Iraq uses in addressing the situation of
prisoners, missing persons and Kuwaiti property,
despite that issue's humanitarian aspect. This proves
that Iraq's procrastination and evasion of commitments
are an entrenched approach for the Iraqi authorities.

With respect to the Kuwaiti and other prisoners
and missing persons, no progress has been made in
resolving this humanitarian question. Those people
have been missing for more than 12 years. Iraq
sometimes boycotts the work of the Tripartite
Commission and the Technical Subcommittee chaired
by the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
sometimes it resumes its participation with one or the
other body for purely political reasons. For more than
three years, Iraq refused to cooperate with the High-
Level Coordinator, Ambassador Yuli Vorontsov,
appointed by the Secretary-General pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1284 (1999). Iraq recently
agreed to invite the High-Level Coordinator to Iraq.
That visit took place in January. However, no tangible
progress was made.

Cooperation on procedure is the main
characteristic of how Iraq has handled the humanitarian
situation for all these years in total violation of
Security Council resolutions 686 (1991), 687 (1991)
and 1284 (1999). Therefore, we hope that the Security
Council will continue to pressure the Iraqi Government
to meet the demands of the resolutions of international
legality. We are not content with presidential
statements intended purely for the press.

As concerns the issue of the property usurped by
Iraq during its occupation of Kuwait, the way that Iraq
has addressed this question is not different from the
way in which it has dealt with other issues. Procedural
and nominal cooperation is the main characteristic of
Iraqi conduct. Iraq claimed that it did not have any
Kuwaiti property, and documented those claims in a
letter it addressed to the Secretary-General in 1994.
Later, however, it admitted that it still had some
Kuwaiti governmental and institutional documents and
property. Iraq even claimed that these documents
represented the notional archives of Kuwait. Then,
when those documents were returned, under the
auspices of the United Nations and in the presence of
the League of Arab States, and when we studied them
to determine which properties had been returned, we
found that these were simply correspondence between
different organs of the State apparatus and that they
could not be the official archives of Kuwait.

We therefore sent a letter to the Secretary-General
in order to place on record our position. That document
was issued under the symbol S/2002/1412 on 24
December 2002. Iraq's failure to cooperate in returning
the national archives of Kuwait and other property is a
cause for concern. The letter from the Iraqi President
addressed to the Kuwaiti people on 7 December of last
year confirmed our doubts and the fact that Iraq does
not intend to respect its Arab and international
commitments or the sovereignty and independence of
Kuwait.

Kuwait submitted a letter to the Council with
information on the subject, contained in document
S/2002/ 1350, dated 11 December 2002.

In conclusion, the Security Council, as the
principal organ entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security, is facing a grave
challenge: to bring about the implementation of its
many resolutions with regard to the situation between
Iraq and Kuwait. The Council has the responsibility of
preserving its authority, credibility and legitimacy
before the international community. We hope that the
Council will present a unified will and take the same
position that it has in the context of previous
international crises, in a manner that enhances the role
of the United Nations and promotes the realization of
the purposes and principles of the Charter.

