The President (spoke in Spanish): I would now like
to make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.

We would first like to thank Ambassador Sacha
Llorentty Soliz for his briefing on the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We would like to commend his work and that
of his team, and to express our strong support for the
full implementation by all States of resolutions 1540
(2004) and 2325 (2016), especially speaking as the new
Coordinator of the Working Group on monitoring and
national implementation.

Peru is committed to all efforts aimed at
achieving general and complete disarmament and the
non-proliferation of nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons and their delivery systems, which constitute a
threat to international peace and security. We reiterate
our deep concern about the threat of terrorism and the
risk of non-State actors acquiring, developing, using or
trafficking such weapons and their delivery systems. We
believe it is essential for the international community
to remain united in order to respond effectively to the
serious challenges facing non-proliferation regimes,
which are the most serious threats to international
peace and security in the world today. It is urgent
that the challenge posed by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's nuclear and ballistic programme
be addressed.

We also believe that it is crucial to preserve the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action on the Iranian nuclear
programme and to strictly monitor its implementation.
We would also like to stress the importance of
reaching compromise in the Council concerning the
unacceptable use of chemical weapons in Syria with a
view to ensuring that the facts are fully investigated
and that responsibility for it can be determined through
an attributive mechanism.

We are also concerned about the possibility that the
misuse of new scientific innovations may lead to illicit
proliferation activities, particularly through illegal
technology transfers and illicit financial transactions.
In that regard, we want to underline the importance of
ensuring that all States implement measures aimed at
fulfilling all their obligations, especially those relating
to internal control and export. We must all adopt effective
national controls in line with resolution 2325 (2016).

Finally, we believe in the importance of the work
of the 1540 Committee, particularly in responding to
the risk that non-State actors, especially terrorists, may
acquire chemical, biological or radiological weapons
or fissile materials. Lastly, we commend the Chair's
successful efforts to ensure the Committee's adoption
of a programme of work, which will promote the full
implementation of resolution 2325 (2016) and serve as
the basis for its next comprehensive review.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I invite Council members to informal consultations
to continue our discussion on the subject.

The meeting rose at 11.40 am.
