Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank the Ukrainian
presidency for its wisdom in organizing this debate.
We should also like to express our appreciation to
the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Antonio
Guterres, the Secretary General of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
observer of the European Union for their briefings.

Although the Security Council has been seized
with a number of European issues under this agenda
item, this is perhaps the first time that the Council
is broadly discussing conflicts in Europe as threats
to international peace and security. That we are now
living in a turbulent world has become very clear. One
gets the sense that we are undergoing a transition at
the global level. But it is impossible to say where we
are heading, because it is difficult to talk even about
the general contours of what we are transitioning into.
One can understand, therefore, why Secretary-General
Guterres has defined the current global situation as
chaotic. At no time has multilateral diplomacy been as
vitally needed as it is now. It is also for that reason that
the Ukrainian presidency should be commended for
organizing this debate.

Europe is not merely vital for the success of
multilateral diplomacy * it is indispensable. A peaceful
and harmonious Europe can serve as an important pillar

for global peace at a time when, at the global level,
there is more confusion than clarity. That is making
the global situation potentially more dangerous than
perhaps at any time since the advent of the post-Cold-
War period. Some might go so far as to say since the
end of the Second World War.
When experts begin to draw parallels between the
current period and the times prior to the First World
War, people with common sense should put their ears to
the ground. As far as we are concerned, we do not claim
to be experts on European issues, but we do recognize
from history that the peace and security of Europe has
always had a major impact on the peace and security
of our world. Conflicts in Europe have, in the past,
resulted in two devastating world wars and, during
the post-Second World War period, in an international
order that has ensured durable peace and unprecedented
prosperity on the continent. Europe also means a lot to
us in Africa for our development and for our peace and
security. Europe is perhaps one of the most generous
and effective partners of the African Union (AU), and
the AU is critical for the future of Africa. It is against
that backdrop that we look with a great deal of concern
at some of the unresolved conflicts in Europe that are
still on the agenda of the Council, as well as those that
have emerged recently. Dialogue and negotiation remain
the only way to find a durable political and diplomatic
solution to some of the difficult and extremely delicate
issues of peace and security in Europe.

In that regard, as is true with all other conflict
situations, the political will and commitment of the
parties to the protracted and new conflicts in Europe is
crucial, not only in order to reach a peaceful settlement
but also to ensure that agreements are fully respected
and implemented. No doubt, building the necessary
trust and confidence between and among parties is the
key to making progress. The United Nations should
continue to work closely with the European Union and
the OSCE in the pursuit of those objectives.

We realize that Europe is indeed passing through
a very difficult period. Like the rest of the world, it is
confronting serious challenges involving an economic
slowdown; the migration and refugee crisis; heightened
threats of terrorism; and the resurgence of populist
tendencies, all of which threaten to undermine its
stability and prosperity, as well as the refined cultural
values that have made Europe an example to the rest
of the world. We understand there are no quick fixes
to some of those challenges and, in a much more
interconnected and interdependent world, Europe
cannot alone find a solution to the difficult and complex
challenge it is facing.

There is no substitute in this regard in Europe or
elsewhere for ensuring peace, security and stability
through scrupulous observance of principles of
international law governing inter-State relations. That
is why reaffirming the multilateral approach and
investing in a stronger United Nations and enhancing
cooperation and partnership with other regional
organizations, such as the African Union, is a sensible
and logical thing to do, as the European Union High
Representative Federica Mogherini stated during the
just concluded Munich Security Conference.

Let us not forget that we have a Secretary-General
who takes himself as a bridge-builder seriously. He
needs to be empowered. This is a time when we need a
moral arbiter, but one who is not too ostentatious about
his or her role.

For us in Africa, let me reiterate that Europe is not
only a neighbouring continent, but also an important
partner in addressing the many peace and security, as
well as development, challenges we face. Therefore,
we hope Europe will remain true to the spirit of the
strategic partnership that has been forged with Africa
in tackling issues of mutual concern, as well as in
ensuring collective peace, security and prosperity.

