Mr. Skoog (Sweden): On 12 May, a small group
of ordinary Afghan citizens began an extraordinary
journey. They left their homes in Helmand province to
begin a 600-kilometre march to Afghanistan's capital,
Kabul. As they marched, their numbers increased and
they were greeted by large crowds when they arrived
in Kabul on 18 June. They brought with them a simple
message. After 40 years of violence and conflict,
the time for peace in Afghanistan has come. In the
presence of Ambassador Saikal, I want to pay tribute
to the incredible resolve and resilience of the Afghan
people. The widespread support for the march was a
demonstration of the strong desire for peace in Afghan,
all the more after the brief but historic ceasefires that
inspired it. However, while the past weeks have offered
a much-needed glimpse of hope, we remain concerned
about the security situation in Afghanistan.
The continued high number of civilian
casualties, not least among children, and the attacks
against humanitarian and development workers are
unacceptable. International humanitarian law applies
to all parties. There is no military solution to the
conflict. The only viable option is an inclusive and
Afghan-owned and Afghan-led peace process, leading
to a politically negotiated settlement. We strongly
welcome the unprecedented steps taken by the Afghan
Government in the pursuit of peace. The Government's
peace offer at the second Kabul process conference and
its temporary unilateral ceasefire are commendable.
We deeply regret that the Taliban has not extended its
partial ceasefire. We call on the Taliban to respond to
the plea for peace from the Afghan people and to engage
in a dialogue with the Government to achieve that end.

A peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan is key to
achieving development and prosperity in the broader
region. That should be in everyone's interest. We urge
all those with stakes and influence, especially the
countries of the region, to act with full and unreserved
commitment to engaging constructively in support of
a political solution. Indeed, many challenges faced by
Afghanistan are common to the countries of the region:
security threats, radicalization, the production of, and
trade in, narcotics 4 with all its negative effects, as
highlighted by Executive Director Fedotov earlier this
morning - climate change and conflicts over water
and energy resources. Through regional cooperation,
such challenges can be addressed and transformed into
mutually beneficial opportunities.

Women's full and effective participation in peace
processes and political, social and economic life is
essential to creating legitimate systems that cater to the
needs of the whole population. In addition, it is difficult
to think of any other structural change that would more
effectively reject what the Taliban stands for. I want to
welcome the efforts that the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan has made to that end, which we
support. We encourage efforts to ensure women's full
participation in the preparations and in the ministerial
meeting in Geneva in November.

For our part, to that end and through our most
recent contribution to the Afghan National Army trust
fund, we support the establishment of the first Women's
Police Town, which is aimed at enabling and furthering

women's participation in the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces.

It is imperative for Afghanistan's future and stability
that the planned elections take place in 2018 and 2019
according to schedule and that they be conducted in an
inclusive, credible and transparent manner. We urge
all stakeholders to do their utmost to ensure increased
women's participation in the elections. Recent targeted
assaults on the electoral preparations are not only
horrific attacks on civilians but also direct attacks on
the efforts to build democracy. We support the proposal
put forward by the representative of the Netherlands
this morning that the Security Council stay engaged
and make public statements in support of the electoral
process moving forward.

At the NATO Summit in Brussels on 11 and 12 July,
we will reaffirm our commitment to doing our part
to strengthen and to enable a self-sufficient Afghan
security sector that is able to provide the conditions
necessary to increased security in Afghanistan.
Combating terrorism, creating stability and building
national capacity and strong institutions will require
action to address the political and economic root
causes of conflict and instability. Our commitment
to Afghanistan remains firm. It includes $1 billion
in bilateral development assistance from 2015 to
2024, humanitarian assistance, capacity-building and
dialogue and mediation training, including for local
female actors, as well as our military contribution to
the NATO Resolute Support Mission.

With regard to the effect of the conflict on children,
as stated by the representative of France, we welcome
the Government's commitment to including concrete
actions in the criminal code to protect children and
prevent their recruitment, including the establishment
of child protection units by the Ministry of the Interior
in all provinces. However, because the recruitment and
use of children remain prevalent, we strongly emphasize
the importance of implementing the penal code, with a
focus on accountability, including prosecutions.

Lastly, demonstrators in the march from Helmand
to Kabul were between the ages of 17 and 70. Many
Afghans' entire lives have been blighted by conflict.
All parties must now respond to their call for peace and
ensure that future generations of Afghan children can
grow up without the shadow of war.

