Mr. Somavia (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
Let me congratulate you, Sir, on pursuing during your
presidency this good idea of convening open Security
Council debates. In the light of our experience in the
Council's work, we can now say that we find it most
enriching to hear the views of non-member delegations on
the various items before us. We feel that this is a practice
that the Council should be broadening and deepening in
an appropriate way.

As this is the first time that Chile has spoken in the
Security Council on the situation in Somalia, I shall be
taking some time to make my statement.

By reading the latest reports of the Secretary-
General, we can appreciate the lack of progress in the
Somali situation, which remains confused and frustrating.
Nevertheless, the worst - an all-out civil war - has
been averted.

I wish to focus in the first part of my statement on
an aspect that is critical to a country with a political
framework like that of Somalia: the humanitarian
situation. Humanitarian problems vary from region to
region. In some sectors, the work of humanitarian
missions can be carried out with less difficulty than in
others.

But generally speaking, extraordinarily complex
problems exist. We have been informed that malnutrition
is once again emerging in places that had previously
shown some promise. The main factor in this situation is
the lack of purchasing power and the lack of access to
food markets. At the same time, the resurgence of cholera
has been a major concern. More than 1,800 cases
recorded in February alone may be related to cholera, and
it is confirmed to have caused 23 deaths.

It is worth noting that one of the major obstacles
preventing due attention to the problems of malnutrition
and cholera is not lack of medicine but, rather, the
difficulty of transporting food and medicine. As we know,
the port of Mogadishu remains closed. The general lack
of security in the country does not make overland
transport advisable; therefore, air transport, which
considerably increases the cost and difficulty of any
operation, must be used.

 

But we have learned that the various United Nations
agencies and agencies of other intergovernmental and non-
governmental organizations continue to cooperate as
energetically as they can to mitigate the effects of the
problems besetting the Somali population. The difficulties
they are facing in this respect are enormous: added to the
lack of security in certain parts of the country and
transportation costs and difficulties is the shrinkage of
funds provided by donors to various humanitarian
programmes.
My delegation would like to echo the request
addressed to us by the various agencies regarding the
urgent need to reopen the port of Mogadishu for
humanitarian shipments. If this request were heard by the
factions that control the port of Mogadishu, and if they
were prepared to reopen it so that the agencies could
provide humanitarian assistance to the factions' own
children, women and elderly, this would be a sign of hope
for the future of Somalia.

It is fitting to pay tribute to all the agencies and
assistance programmes in Somalia: those of the United
Nations and those of the vast number of non-governmental
organizations, which, motivated by their conviction, their
passion and their belief in humanitarian causes, are today
present in Somalia under extraordinarily difficult conditions.

In the last statement of the President of the Council on
this matter, we emphasized the courage and the valour of
those who are today working in Somalia under such
difficult conditions. However, we also noted something that
I wish to recall in this debate. On this occasion, in the
statement of 24 January 1996, we said:

"The Security Council considers the
uninterrupted delivery of humanitarian assistance to be
a crucial factor in the overall security and stability of
Somalia." (S/PRST/1996/4, seventh para.)

I wish to emphasize this because what we said then
means that the humanitarian task is not simply a worthy
cause, not just a matter of saving people. In a situation like
that of Somalia, it is also an important political task,
inasmuch as it makes it possible to maintain a degree of
security and stability, that the political conditions of the
country itself do not permit. I think it extraordinarily
important that the Security Council has recognized that
humanitarian duty.

In that same statement, the Council expressed its deep
concern at the fact that no tangible progress had been made
in national reconciliation in Somalia. The statement urges
all political leaders and sectors of Somalia to return to an
inclusive process of consultations and negotiation aimed
at national reconciliation leading to the establishment of
a broad-based national government.

A month and a half may be too short a time to
achieve results, but the truth is that we must recall the
statement of the President of the Security Council made
almost a year ago, on 6 April 1995, when the Council
referred to the completion of the withdrawal of the United
Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM. II). That
statement also appealed to the Somali parties to seek
national reconciliation, rehabilitation and reconstruction in
the interests of peace, security and development. The
same had been said in earlier resolutions.

The fact is that these appeals by the international
community, expressed through the principal political
organ of the United Nations, have elicited no response
from the leaders of the various Somali factions. There is
no doubt as to who is responsible for what is occurring
today in Somalia: the leaders of the factions, the political
leaders who are incapable of seeing beyond their personal
interests and their desire for power and of making them
secondary to the interests of the Somali people.

Why can they not understand the international
community's exhortation that they find a peaceful way
out that will enable Somalia to be reborn?

Why do they not understand the damage they
continue to inflict on the population of their own country
by impeding the movement of persons, food and medicine
between their various spheres of influence?

How can they fail to realize that by continuing with
their dogmatic stances, and their eagerness to achieve
greater territorial control, they are acting only in their
personal and group interests and against the needs of the
Somali people?

The basic problem of Somalia is not that is has had
a system of clans and sub-clans imposed upon the
divisions of the former centralized administration of the
country. That system, if properly administered and led,
could give a country order and stability. The problem is
not that Somalia does not fit the classical political outline
that most nations of the world are accustomed to. It is not
that there is no central government, a fact to which we
are accustomed, although it is sometimes hard for us to
understand that a country like Somalia does not have the

 

same characteristics as others. That is not the problem.
With its own pre-colonial historical structures, Somalia
could achieve stability. The problem is that the political
leaders want neither to return to past forms of stability nor
to accept modern formulas, modern ways of working. They
seek only power. I believe that we must be exceptionally
clear in that respect, because in Somalia, more than in any
other country, the international community has been
prepared to cooperate and to help the country's leaders
themselves take the decisions that fall to them. That is why
they are leaders; that is why they have assumed the role of
leading their own factions.
Thus, before concluding my statement, I should like to
place on record the appreciation of the Government of
Chile for all the steps taken by the Secretary-General in
connection with the Somali situation. We hope that the
Political Office can be transferred from Nairobi to
Mogadishu as soon as possible.

These meetings that we are now holding, these open
orientation debates, are very useful for enhancing the work
of the Council in the future. It would also be in our interest
if, at the appropriate time, the Security Council could put
what has been expressed in today's debate in the form of
a statement, a resolution or some other initiative so that we
could keep abreast of events in Somalia and be prepared to
help that country return to normalcy and help its people -
especially the leaders who are today standing in the way of
agreement - regain their peace of mind.

