Mr. Cevik (Turkey): I would like to thank the
United States presidency for holding today's meeting.
We also welcome the adoption of resolution 2177 (2014),
which Turkey is pleased to have co-sponsored.

The Ebola outbreak has become an international
emergency with wider implications for the economic,
social and political lives of the affected States and with
serious security and stability risks for the region.

We welcome the commitment and ever-increasing
response to the emergency of national Governments,
regional organizations and the international community.
We commend the strategic leadership demonstrated
by the Secretary-General and the World Health
Organization. We also commend the efforts of the
African Union (AU) and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) to develop a collective
response to the outbreak and contain the disease. The
initiatives taken by the AU and the ECOWAS once
again show that regional organizations can play a
significant role in responding to humanitarian and
health emergencies that often do not recognize borders.

We pay tribute to the humanitarian and health
workers in the front lines who put their lives at risk
and work with devotion. Turkey extends its heartfelt
condolences to the relatives of the victims of the
outbreak and to the people of the affected States.

The international emergency before us is one that
no country can deal with alone. The international
community should continue to provide and even
increase technical, logistical and financial support
to the affected countries as should the international
organizations responding the crisis. The challenge is
one that we can overcome by international cooperation
and solidarity, instead of staying on the defensive side.
We believe that isolating and restricting the travel to
and from the affected countries is causing the situation
to deteriorate and is undermining the will and ability of
the people concerned to fight the menace.

Turkey immediately mobilized financial resources
and provided medical assistance to the affected
countries. Plans to scale up Turkey's support to the
affected States through bilateral and multilateral
channels are under consideration. More importantly,
Turkish Airlines is continuing its flights to the region.
Our support in the fight against the epidemic will
continue with a long-term perspective focusing on
capacity- and resilience-building in infrastructure and
the health sector.

The Ebola outbreak requires a comprehensive,
coordinated and long-term response. We must keep the
focus and continue our support even when the outbreak
is in decline. A long-term and sustainable solution
to emergencies of this kind is needed to support the
societies and economies of the affected countries, to
help them build resilience and capacity and ensure that
the peace and stability ofthe region will not be set back.

