Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation would like
to thank the United States for having requested this
important meeting. We also express our appreciation to
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing.

Equatorial Guinea has been monitoring with great
concern the escalation of Violence and rhetoric in the
region. We condemn all violence by any actors. We
condemn and deem any attack against civilians - in
any form - unacceptable and reprehensible.

In that connection, Equatorial Guinea welcomes
the efforts of the Arab Republic of Egypt to mediate the
tension that has arisen between the Israeli forces and
the Palestinian factions in the Gaza Strip. We regret
that, despite the repeated appeal of the members of
the Security Council, the Secretary-General and his
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
as well as other actors of the international community,
we must meet again today for the same acts of violence.

Today, as we have done for the past two weeks,
we are discussing Violence in Gaza. Last week,
Mr. Mladenov alerted us of the possibility of Gaza
collapsing. Regrettably, we are now confronting
exchanges of attacks between the parties, rather than
brokering a solution to the situation.

My delegation yet again calls on all parties to exercise
restraint and to refrain from acts that could aggravate
the already complex situation. The Government of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea always advocates for a
negotiated solution to any conflict or problem that may
arise, however difficult and complicated it may be. The
position of our Government in this case is no different.
Therefore, we invite the parties to do their best to
normalize the situation and to alleviate the suffering of
the civilian population.
It is critical to ease the humanitarian situation in
Gaza. We also believe it is important and call upon
Palestinians to honour the reconciliation pact. If that
had occurred, the Palestinian Authority would already
control the Gaza Strip. We also call upon the Israeli
authorities to use proportionate force in their legitimate
self-defence.

In conclusion, I reaffirm our position, based on the
standards and principles of international law, Security
Council resolutions, the declarations of the African
Union and the Arab Peace Initiative, which refer to the
solution of two independent States - one Israeli and
the other Palestinian - living in peace and security,
with Jerusalem as the capital of both States. We believe
that Israelis, Palestinians and any just mediator must
respect such results. We therefore urge the international
community to continue its efforts to restart dialogue
between the parties and to avoid actions that could
undermine the peaceful coexistence of Israelis
and Palestinians.

