Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): The
Permanent Representative of Sweden will shortly be
expressing the views of the European Union on the
situation in Kosovo. France subscribes to the statement
that he will make. I should like simply to offer a few
additional comments.

Last Saturday, after a remarkable stint of 18
months at the head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr.
Bernard Kouchner passed the baton to Mr. Hans
Haekkerup. Those 18 months involved an enormous
amount of particularly difficult work - 18 months of
rebuilding Kosovo, laying the foundations of a
pluralistic democracy, re-establishing security,
promoting coexistence among communities and
organizing municipal elections under excellent
conditions. Thanks to his resolve and courage, Mr.
Kouchner was able to implement the basic elements of
resolution 1244 (1999) and to restore confidence and
dignity to Kosovo society.

I should like to assure his successor, Mr.
Haekkerup, that we have full confidence in him and
will provide full support to him as he continues to
implement resolution 1244 (1999).

Improving security remains the top priority of the
international community's action in Kosovo. In this
regard, I should like to recall the last statement made
by Mr. Kouchner before he left Pristina, in which he
said that the spirit of revenge must be eradicated. All
the inhabitants of Kosovo have the same right to
security, access to public services and respect for their
dignity. Each also has the right to have his or her voice
heard by peaceful and democratic means in public
debate. As was noted in the most recent report of the
Secretary-General, extremists are seeking to put
obstacles in the path to coexistence among
communities and progress in establishing a democratic
and pluralistic society. This cannot be tolerated.

I should like to say a few words about violence in
the Presevo Valley. In its presidential statement of
19 December, the Security Council strongly
condemned intolerable actions by terrorist groups in
that zone. We must support the Kosovo Force (KFOR)
and UNMIK in their resolve to do everything possible
to put an end to such actions.

We welcome the cooperation between KFOR and
the Belgrade authorities aimed at remedying the
situation, and we also welcome the restraint shown by
the Yugoslav authorities. We encourage them to
continue to take political and economic steps for the
Albanian minority in south-east Serbia. France will
play its part in the European Union effort to promote
economic development in southern Serbia.
I should also like to raise the issue of the general
elections. The elections must be organized when, and
only when, conditions have been met. It is essential for
preparations for the vote to be impeccable and, in
particular, that everything be done to ensure that all the
communities can participate, which means that
minorities must be registered in advance, particularly
the Serb community. Moreover, the nature and the
functions of the bodies to be elected must be clearly
defined in advance. In this regard, the discussions on
the content of the substantial autonomy provided for in
resolution 1244 (1999) must take place among
Kosovars under the authority of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General; I should like
to thank Mr. Guehenno for his comments in this
connection. It is also desirable that the views of other
parties involved be taken into consideration at the
appropriate time. In this regard, we welcome UNMIK's
proposal to open an office in Belgrade.

