Mr. Long Zhou (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's open
debate.

(spoke in English)

A strong earthquake struck the Yushu region in
Qinghai province in China today. The earthquake
caused heavy losses in terms of the lives and property
of the local people. The central and local Governments
have responded rapidly and are making every effort to
organize rescue and relief work. I would like to take
this opportunity to thank previous speakers for the
support and sympathy they expressed for the Chinese
people and Government.

(spoke in Chinese)

The current situation in the Middle East remains
serious. The peace process in the Middle East remains
at an impasse. We are seriously concerned and worried
about this situation. An early solution to the Middle
East question is a shared expectation of the
international community. It is also in the common
interests of the various parties and critical to regional
and international peace and security. The international
community should make concerted efforts for the early
settlement of the issue. We hope that this meeting will
provide new impetus to the Middle East peace process.

It is the consistent View of China that political
negotiation remains the only way to solve the problem.
We hope that the parties will maintain their faith in
peace talks and demonstrate the political will to create
favourable conditions for an early resumption of the
talks. Israel's declaration that it would build
settlements in East Jerusalem and other practices run
counter to international efforts and create new
obstacles to the resumption of talks. We strongly reject
such practices. We urge Israel to respond to
international appeals by ceasing construction of its
settlements and separation wall in the occupied
Palestinian territory.
We are opposed to any act that undermines the
basis for such talks and mutual confidence and
prejudges the outcome of those talks. We are deeply
concerned by the decision of Israel to implement its
military order in the West Bank and its possible
negative consequences. We call upon Israel to give
careful consideration to its own interests and to overall
peace and stability in the region before taking action
and to create positive conditions for the resumption of
talks. We urge all parties to implement Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009) in earnest and to
facilitate the lifting of the blockade of the Gaza Strip
so that construction can start as soon as possible and
people can return to their normal lives and live in
dignity.

The realization of intra-Palestinian reconciliation
is very important to restarting the Middle East peace
process. We hope that all parties will focus on their
long-term national interests, consolidate unity and join
hands in achieving independent, self-reliant and viable
statehood for the Palestinians.

With the return of spring all life awakes anew. We
await the early return of spring in the Middle East
peace process. We welcomed the declaration of the
Quartet last month in Moscow. We hope that all parties,
including the Quartet, will take practical measures to
facilitate the early resumption of talks. We also hope
that the Security Council will play a greater and more
effective role in this process.

The Chinese Government supports the legitimate
rights and interests of the Palestinian people and their
just cause. We support the two-State solution based on
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the principle of land for peace. Together
with the international community, China will maintain
its support for the efforts of the Palestinian people to
achieve statehood and for the realization of just, lasting
and comprehensive peace in the region.

