Mr. Griffiths: I thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security Council. I would like to start with an unusual comment in saying that we have some good news in Yemen today. As you probably know, since this morning, the skies of Yemen have seen what I like to refer to as an airlift of hope. The parties have started releasing prisoners and detainees following the agreement that they reached in Switzerland on 27 September. That process will lead to the release of more than 1,000 individuals, all returning to their families. That will bring immense relief and comfort to all those families who have waited so long to be reunited, as well as to other families, close relations, friends and members of their communities. That is an extraordinary number to be released during the conduct of hostilities. Indeed, I understand that it is the largest such operation of its kind in the history of the conflict in Yemen. As the Council may imagine, I am personally very grateful to the International Committee of the Red Cross and its President, Peter Maurer, for working with us to reach that agreement and, in addition, for so diligently and expeditiously working on the implementation of the agreement - itself a densely complicated task. I want to thank the Swiss Government for hosting the meeting to which I have referred in a supportive environment, especially at a time when face-to-face meetings are so difficult to organize. I would also like to take this opportunity, unusually, to congratulate my deputy, Mr. Muin Shreim, for his persistence and his mediation in reaching that agreement. I am very grateful to him, as are all of us in our mission. More importantly perhaps, I commend the parties. We know that their respective leaderships stepped up to the plate and made the commitments necessary to send their delegations to Switzerland for the talks and, during the period of the negotiation, to negotiate constructively and successfully at length, day and night, to reach the agreement concerning those more than 1,000 individuals. Of course, this prisoners' agreement does not include many thousands more Yemenis detained during the course of this conflict and it is therefore our obligation and the obligation of the parties to convene very soon to discuss further releases, in line with the commitment that they made in Stockholm in December 2018 to release all conflict-related prisoners and detainees. Indeed, the first time I met President Hadi, this was the first topic that he raised with me - the need for all prisoners to be released. I would also like to reiterate my call on the parties to unconditionally and immediately release all arbitrarily detained civilians, including journalists and political prisoners. Here, I pay tribute to the Yemeni activists, actors and civil society organizations that have determinately, continuously and, many times, successfully, in situations of peril, advocated for the release of civilians and for uncovering the fates of the forcibly disappeared. We hope, of course, that the implementation of disagreement will build confidence and, indeed, momentum by demonstrating a simple truth - that peaceful dialogue and negotiation between the parties can deliver the road back to peace. I should also like to take note today of the return yesterday of injured Yemenis to Sana'a, who had gone to Oman for medical treatment around the time of the Stockholm talks in 2018. This is very good news for those who are finally returning home. My Office continues to negotiate the agreement between the parties on a joint declaration. Both parties remain engaged in those negotiations, but they have yet to agree a final text. I would like to say that I am neither surprised nor, frankly, discouraged by this. We are, in fact, asking a lot from the parties. I have just returned from a visit to Riyadh myself, where I had very useful and extensive meetings with the Government of Yemen, of course, and President Hadi, as well as the leadership of the Arab coalition. Now, I am not surprised. I am not discouraged. We are asking a lot. The joint declaration is an ambitious set of agreements, as President Hadi pointed out to me, which covers, as members know, a nationwide ceasefire, economic and humanitarian measures and the resumption of the political process - perhaps the most important of the three. So, I do understand the reasons why the parties take their time to cross that crucial line. Negotiations have been conducted, after all, in the midst of a global pandemic. We started in March, as Council members will remember, as a result of the Secretary-General's call for global ceasefire and subsequent call for ceasefire in Yemen. In the midst of a global pandemic and lockdown, and while the war raged, perhaps even more ferociously, across the battlefields of Yemen, the negotiations have been conducted solely through shuttle diplomacy. The mediator, myself, has become the negotiator. The meetings have been mostly virtual due to coronavirus disease restrictions, and the parties have not yet met face to face to discuss the joint declaration. We know now that virtual means may take us a long way, but they still do not replace the necessity of parties negotiating with each other to understand the commitments they will make to each other. This is what made the prisoner meeting so important and, I hope, such a precedent. The primary goal of the joint declaration is to end what I call the shooting war and to open the gateway to peace. Resuming this process, as I have just said, is an imperative and, frankly, an obligation for the people of Yemen. In Riyadh yesterday I met a group of Yemeni women, mostly from the south, who confirmed again - as we always hear, every time, in meetings with civil society and women's groups - that enough is enough. This war has gone on years longer than it needed to. I cannot stress enough through you, Sir, and through the Council, the need for the parties to act with a sense of urgency to conclude the negotiation on this joint declaration. What we have learned from the Yemen conflict - and perhaps it is a general proposition - is that, as time goes on in such internal conflicts, resolution becomes more difficult. Actors fragment and multiply. State institutions, of course, erode. The conflict becomes more entrenched and more the new normal. The war economy threatens the national economy, creating financial incentives for those who want to continue fighting. Interference from outside the country grows as opportunities present themselves. And in Yemen, as elsewhere, the longer the conflict goes on, not only does the suffering of the people continue, but it also makes it harder to reverse the circumstances in which they live. On the military front, the intensity of the fighting in Ma'rib -we have often discussed the campaign in Ma'rib - has decreased in recent days. This is important, but the situation remains volatile, and I reiterate my call for the attacks on Ma'rib to cease completely and immediately. Allow me also to express my concern about the situation in Al-Hudaydah. While my colleagues in the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement, continue their efforts to reactivate the Redeployment Coordination Committee and the joint mechanisms contained in the resolution to implement the Hodeidah Agreement, the military situation in the city and the governorate has recently deteriorated significantly since my last briefing (see S/PV.8757). During the first week of October, clashes in the south of Al-Hudaydah, particularly in Durayhimi and Hays districts, developed into some of the most intense fighting since the signing of the Stockholm agreement in December 2018. We understand that this caused many, many civilian casualties, as well as those among combatants. The Mission and I, in their support, have engaged extensively with both sides and issued public calls to stop the fighting, following which the situation now seems tense but calm. I hope that the parties will sustain this calm and avoid putting the local population at further risk, as well as threatening the validity and continuation of the Hodeidah Agreement. I want to comment today on the situation in Taiz, an historic place in Yemen, as members know, that has experienced far too much suffering. It has been a battlefield these many years, and the people living there have lived in that war zone all this time. A solution is desperately needed for Yemen, but a solution is also needed to unlock the impasse among the various forces - and there are a number of them - in Taiz. Such a solution should bring together all stakeholders - including, particularly but not only, civil society and women's groups, famously active in Taiz - to contribute to reconciliation, to cross-line efforts, to protecting schools, to allowing workers to go to work and trade to resume at least a small part of the life of those communities and thus to alleviating the suffering. That is of great importance. I want to turn to two other issues that require urgent action to prevent even more widespread suffering in Yemen. I know, and as we will hear from Mark, that the fuel shortages in Ansar-Allah-controlled areas are having evidently detrimental impacts on the civilian population. Prices are rising, and vital services are being affected. The Government of Yemen has in the past day or so cleared a number of fuel ships to enter Al-Hudaydah this week, which is a positive step. But a mutually agreed solution is needed. We have been working with the parties for months, frankly, to agree a set of arrangements that will ensure the uninterrupted flow of fuel into and around Ansar-Allah-controlled areas to allow essentially for the flow of humanitarian assistance to reach the people who need it. I urge the parties to please engage with me on the current proposals in front of them to make this happen. Secondly, with respect to the SAFER oil tanker, I acknowledge the positive public message from Sana'a on this matter in recent days, and I express my gratitude therefor. I will not repeat what Mark and I have said on numerous occasions to the Council about the vital importance of the United Nations, through the United Nations Office for Project Services, being granted permission to assess and undertake urgent initial repairs of the tanker. We all know what is at stake. The people in Yemen know what is at stake, and it is more urgent by the day. Twenty years ago, the Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000), the landmark resolution on women and peace and security recognizing women's contributions to peace as well as the disproportionate effects of armed conflict on women and girls. In Yemen, as in all such situations, women have worked tirelessly, mostly behind the scenes and always below the radar, to stop the war, reduce violence, release detainees and build back peace. They do this against all odds, with a courage we can only imagine, and often under circumstances that threaten their lives, their livelihoods and their families. On this anniversary, I would remind all parties to the conflict in Yemen to take special measures to protect women and girls and human rights defenders from all kinds of violence and threats. I hope that they will, as we will, heed the consistent calls of Yemeni women, as I said, heard just yesterday once again in Riyadh for a just and equitable peace - not just a peace, but a just and equitable peace. I call on them to strengthen the meaningful participation of women, including by ensuring at least 30 per cent representation in their negotiating delegations. I remind us all of the extraordinary record in the national dialogue in Yemen of such participation, when Yemen was an icon of female participation in national dialogues. Finally, I want to refer, perhaps a bit eccentrically, to the issue of education. I refer to it not, perhaps, purely as humanitarian but as an illustration of the costs of war. I was prompted to say this to you, Sir, and to the Council through reading about one particular school in Taiz where the children risk their lives to go to school and yet go there; where they go to school where there are few, if any, materials; where the teachers, I am sure, have rarely been paid and yet go there. This struggle to continue an education for the next generation is remarkable; we see it in every conflict, and we are seeing it in Yemen. It is a testament to the courage of Yemeni families and the plight of Yemeni children.
