Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): I should like
to thank the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela for
convening this debate and acknowledge the very useful
concept note (S/2016/103, annex). We appreciate the
briefing given by the Secretary-General.

My delegation endorses the statement delivered by
the representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and Kuwait on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

Azerbaijan subscribes to the centrality of the
United Nations, which has enabled the development of
norms governing contemporary international relations
and provided for a stable international order. In the
face of diverse and complex challenges, the Charter
of the United Nations should continue to be a guiding
framework. The principles enshrined in the Charter
reflect fundamental values. The principles of sovereign
equality, the non-use of force, non-interference in the
internal affairs of States, and respect for territorial
integrity are prerequisites for peaceful coexistence
among nations, sustainable development and the
promotion and protection of all human rights. The
maintenance of international peace and security
requires Member States to work collectively in order to
achieve those objectives with great efficiency.

On its part, the Security Council, as the custodian
of international peace and security, should enforce
measures of collective security more effectively. In
its conduct, the Security Council should take the lead
in safeguarding respect for and application of the
principles and purposes of the Charter. We fully agree
with the view that there is a need to eliminate double
standards in addressing violations of the Charter, as
well as the selective application of rules and concepts.
The Council's inaction against persistent threats is a
serious deviation from its responsibilities under the
Charter.

The growing complexity and cost of crises reinforce
our conviction that the role and responsibility of the
Security Council is not limited to the formal adoption
of resolutions. It is far more important that the Council
operate more consistently than it has heretofore in
enforcing its own resolutions, thereby adhering to and
upholding the rule of law.

One of the main challenges threatening
international peace and security remains international
conflicts. The ongoing armed conflict between
Armenia and Azerbaijan continues to pose a serious
threat to international and regional peace and security.
For more than 20 years, Armenia has been using force
to undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Azerbaijan in blatant disregard of international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
It has occupied around one-fifth of the territory of
Azerbaijan and has carried out ethnic cleansing against
almost 1 million Azerbaijanis. As a result, there is not
a single Azerbaijani remaining in Armenia nor in the
occupied territories of Azerbaijan. At present, the front
line extends far beyond the Nagorno Karabakh region
of Azerbaijan, reaching the Fizuli and Agdam districts.

Continued occupation of a large portion of the
territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan by the armed
forces of the Republic of Armenia is the main obstacle
to the settlement of the conflict between Azerbaijan
and Armenia, and the only source of the escalation and
recurrence of hostilities and casualties.

It is therefore ironic that the representative
of Armenia, the country that bears the primary
responsibility for unleashing the war against
Azerbaijan, for committing other serious crimes during
the conflict and for failing to comply with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, goes so far as to
lecture Member States about such notions as peace,
security and human rights. In practice, the successive
Governments of Armenia have established a notorious
pattern of complete disrespect for the generally accepted
norms and principles of international law. Committing
war crimes and crimes against humanity, sponsoring
terrorism, adhering to dubious ethnoreligious ideologies
and raising territorial claims against its neighbours
have become a sort of norm of conduct for Armenia.

Armenia policies have nothing in common with
the realization of the right of self-determination. The
entity that Armenia tries to present as independent, the
so-called Nagorno Karabakh Republic, is nothing more
than a puppet regime under the occupation and direct
control of the Government of Armenia. All key figures
of the puppet regime illegally established by Armenia
in the occupied Nagorno Karabakh region of Azerbaij an
are in fact actors in the political system of Armenia,
including the incumbent President of Armenia, Serzh
Sargsyan.

The conflict can be resolved only on the basis of
full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Azerbaijan within its internationally recognized
borders. Armenia must withdraw its armed forces from
the Nagorno Karabakh and other occupied territories
of Azerbaijan, constructively engage in the conflict
settlement process and comply with its international
obligations.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Azerbaijan's
support for the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the collective work undertaken
to advance international peace and security.

