Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Sandra Honore for introducing the
latest report of the Secretary-General on the activities
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(S/2015/667) and for her assessment of the situation in
that country.

Major progress has been achieved in Haiti oflate in
terms of strengthening stability. Long-awaited elections
have taken place with reasonably good organization
and in acceptable security conditions. We hope that
the presidential elections will also go smoothly. The
successful organization of the electoral campaign
is evidence of the scrupulous work of the national
authorities, including the law-enforcement bodies. The
Haitian National Police showed its overall ability to
keep the situation under control, although there were
a few outbreaks of violence. Moreover, the local police
was compelled to seek assistance from MINUSTAH
only a few times.

We are grateful to the United Nations Mission,
which provided valuable assistance to Port-au-
Prince and proved its worth, even in times of gradual
drawdown. We also recognize the Chilean peacekeeper
who died in the line of duty on 13 April. We offer our
condolences to the family and loved ones of the former
Force Commander, Lieutenant General Jaborandy, and
express our support for the new Force Commander,
Lieutenant General Pinheiro.

The Haitian people have suffered a great deal in
recent years. However, the leading political actors
in the country, with the support of the international
community and MINUSTAH, were eventually able
to overcome their differences. The most pressing
issues have been resolved, including the building of
the national law-enforcement and judiciary systems,
reducing the numbers of temporary internally displaced
persons and holding free, fair and transparent elections.
We trust that early next year the new President and
legislative and local authorities will take office in
Haiti. That should be a new milestone in the country's
development and help resolve the urgent tasks it faces.

If Haiti is to successfully move forward and achieve
full socioeconomic normalization, Port-au-Prince will
continue to require the assistance of the United Nations
Mission and the international community. However,
the events of the past six months suggest that the main
political stakeholders of the country are able to resolve
their differences and set aside their own ambitions
to ensure a successful future for all Haitians. The
professional training of the Haitian National Police has
been stepped up, as has the number of law-enforcement
agents. We trust that in the course ofthe United Nations
drawdown, the Mission will draw fully on its existing
resources to fulfil its mandate to assist stabilization in
Haiti. That work will be all the more effective the closer
it is coordinated with the newly elected authorities.

As progress is achieved, functions needs to be
gradually transferred from the Mission to the national
authorities. We remain troubled by the difficult
humanitarian situation, including with respect to
food security and the rising number of cases of
cholera registered in the spring. In that regard, the
United Nations specialized agencies, international
organizations and Haiti's donors have a key role to play.

For our part, we are ready to consider in-depth the
Secretary-General's strategic assessment of the future
of the United Nations presence in the country once it
is prepared. We believe that if the process of restoring
statehood is to be effective and successful, the country's
national Government needs to play the central role,
and that further measures taken by the United Nations
should be fully aligned with the priorities of the
authorities and people of Haiti. Following the elections,
the new Government will enjoy a sufficient margin of
confidence on the part of the voters that will allow it to
act as effectively as possible and be a reliable partner to
the international community.

