Mr. Skinner-Klee (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me begin by thanking you, Sir, and the delegation
of the Arab Republic of Egypt for convening this
open debate on the potential contribution of United
Nations peacekeeping operations to the overarching
goal of sustaining peace, and for our concept paper
(S/2017/692, annex).
My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina
Mohammed; Mr. Yousef Mahmoud, as a member
of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations; and in particular my friend and compatriot
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal.

Peacekeeping is one of the pre-eminent
responsibilities ofthe United Nations. The Blue Helmets
are the hope of civilian populations that face and suffer
the serious consequences of conflicts. Peace missions
have mandates of a unique character, the essential
purpose of which is to protect civilians and to ensure
peace according to the specific context of each country.
We therefore welcome any initiative that encourages

and strengthens the relationship of the Council with the
Human Rights Council and its mechanisms.

Taking into account the fact that peacekeeping
operations do not always address the root causes
of conflict, we believe that their design must
comprehensively and coherently address conditions
on the ground and the specific characteristics of
the population in order to better plan and efficiently
coordinate all efforts to use political, social and
development tools based on successful experiences
and lessons learned. Every effort to that end requires
a deep and authentic knowledge of the situation
on the ground - as well noted this morning by
Mr. Mahmoud - particularly national ownership and
respect for national sovereignty, as reflected in the
preambular paragraphs of resolution 2282 (2016).

My delegation is convinced that peacekeeping
operations focused on fostering sustainable peace and
conflict prevention will allow us to move systematically
towards a comprehensive reconstruction of both the
social fabric and the elements that are conducive to the
integral development of the population in question in
order to achieve true and lasting peace, which is not
only the absence of conflict but also the opportunity
to build the conditions of an inclusive national agenda,
focused on development and respect for human rights.

It is appropriate to recall the important role the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture can and
should play in providing sufficient assistance and
knowledge to allow the Security Council to determine
the conditions required by the country hosting a
peacekeeping operation in order to avoid unnecessary
prolongation of the mission's mandate or the stagnation
of the peace process. Experience has shown that
without a well-planned integration, implementation and
finalization strategy, the risks ofrelapse or prolongation
in a conflict situation can be high as well as costly. It is
therefore important that, in planning for the transition
of a mission, it be carried out in consultation with
and with the support of the host country, including
taking into consideration ways of minimizing potential
collateral effects of the mission.

We advocate and recognize the importance of the
allocation of sufficient resources for peacebuilding
components within peacekeeping operations,
including during the transition and downsizing
phases, so as to support the stability and continuity of
peacebuilding activities.

Lastly, the Security Council has the responsibility
to determine the existence of any threat to peace,
breach of the peace or act of aggression and to make
recommendations for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Guatemala hopes that the new
budget cuts that some members of the Council are
promoting will not affect the implementation of
sustainable peace in the host countries of missions
where a transition is under way. In view of its powers,
or rather its responsibilities, we urge the Security
Council to include the concept of sustainable peace and
to focus on implementing its recommendations for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

