Mr. Larrain (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
We are at a crucial moment in the struggle for peace in
Guatemala. Even at the risk of being repetitive, we cannot
fail to say that we are witnessing the end of a civil war that
has gone on for more than 35 years and has taken a toll of
more than 100,000 victims.

The United Nations has played an important role in
restoring normality for the citizens of that beloved brotherly
country, and that should be a source of legitimate pride for
this Organization.

The two parties to the Guatemalan conflict have
requested one final step by the United Nations to
consolidate this long and successful effort for peace, and
we are confident that the Security Council will once again
be responsive to this appeal and will authorize the sending
of observers to verify the disarmament process and the
demobilization of the forces in conflict.

This is one final effort by this Organization, and we
are all aware that within the scope of peacekeeping
operations that have been authorized by the Council, the
operation now being requested is truly one of minimal
dimensions. What has been requested is a group of 155
observers at an unusually low cost for this type of
operation. Not only is the operation necessary, but this
would also be a demonstration of political will by the
Council and an expression of its interest in the Central
American peace process.

We believe that the Security Council and all its
members are aware of their responsibilities for preserving
international peace and security and the importance of
successfully completing the United Nations actions to
bring peace to Guatemala and to the Central American
isthmus as a whole. This has been and continues to be a
matter of high priority for the entire hemisphere. Once
peace is consolidated in this region, a region that once
was a focus of concerns in this Council and is today
becoming an area of great hope, there will remain a long
difficult road to restore democratic coexistence and
economic well-being. Our country, so far as its means
permit, has been promoting programmes of cooperation in
the Central American region and is prepared to continue
doing so.

Millions of fellow human beings with a long history
of suffering and deprivation are looking to this Council
for support in their struggle for peace. We therefore make
another sincere appeal to the members of the Council to
assume their responsibilities towards these suffering
people and support a draft resolution which constitutes the
final stepping stone in the long process to consolidate in
Central America an area of peace, freedom, democracy
and development.

