Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
should like first of all to thank Ambassador Alfonso
Valdivieso, our colleague and the Chairman of the
Security Council sanctions Committee on Afghanistan,
and, through him, Ambassador Haile Menkerios, the
Chairman of the Committee of Experts, as well as all of
his colleagues, for the report that has just been
introduced. It is a comprehensive and exhaustive
document. The detailed supplementary information that
it contains, compiled from different sources, shows the
firm commitment of the experts to provide us with a
complete picture of the situation on the ground so that
we can draw appropriate conclusions and take the
necessary decisions.

I should like to make several comments and share
some thoughts about the conclusions and
recommendations contained in the report.

First of all, My delegation welcomes the
commitment of the countries in the region to abide by
the provisions of resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1333
(2000) and to seek a political resolution of the conflict
in Afghanistan. Secondly, we share the opinion of the
experts that sanctions, the search for a political
solution and humanitarian and economic initiatives
must be seen as a package of elements in an integrated
strategy aimed at the achievement of a representative
Government in Afghanistan. Assistance may be
necessary for those among Afghanistan's neighbours
that need concrete support in order to strengthen and
develop their monitoring mechanisms.

Thirdly, it is important to stress the fact that the
countries visited by the Committee of Experts showed
their commitment to cooperating and to accepting the
assistance of the international community. They made
it very clear that they would implement the provisions
of Security Council resolutions using their own border
control services.

That leads me to my fourth point, regarding the
recommendations of the Committee on the
establishment of a United Nations Office for Sanctions
Monitoring and Coordination-Afghanistan. The
Office- which, according to the Committee's
recommendations, would have headquarters in
Vienna - would benefit from the support of Sanctions
Enforcement Support Teams working alongside the
border control services in the States neighbouring
Afghanistan. That is an interesting recommendation,
but there are practical difficulties involved. We believe
that setting up such a mechanism will depend to a
considerable extent on the cooperation of
Afghanistan's neighbours, who will have to
demonstrate their support for the Office.

In this regard, we believe that it will therefore be
necessary to discuss with the countries concerned all
the modalities involved and to gather their opinions on
establishing the mechanism so as to ensure its success
at the practical level. We truly need their cooperation
and support.

Fifthly, with regard to the conclusions of the
Committee on the implementation of the arms
embargo, as well as annex I of the report, which
contains a list of arms control measures to be
considered by the Office for Sanctions Monitoring and
Coordination, my delegation would like to recall that
certain issues relating to small arms raised by the
members of the Committee are still being considered
by States Members of the General Assembly. It would
therefore be useful to pay close attention to the United
Nations conference on the illicit trade in small arms
due to take place in July. In the view of my delegation,
we would be well advised to await the conclusions of
that conference.

Sixthly, with regard to the recommendations on
the imposition of a possible embargo on the chemical
substance used in the manufacture of narcotics, we
believe that it is important to impose strict controls so
as to prevent the production and sale of illicit drugs
coming from Afghanistan.

Finally, we believe that sufficient time must be
taken to carefully examine the report and assess the
impact of the recommendations made by the
Committee of Experts so that the most appropriate
decision can be taken regarding the establishment of a
mechanism to ensure that Security Council sanctions
are implemented.

