Mr. Zannier: I would like to brief the Council on
recent developments in Kosovo, and in particular on
the incident that took place recently in northern
Mitrovica that tragically led to the death of one person.

The Kosovo authorities decided to inaugurate, on
2 July, a civil services centre in an ethnically mixed
area of northern Mitrovica known as the Bosniak
Mahalla. We understand that the centre would provide
local communities with birth, death and marriage
certificates, identification cards and travel documents
issued by the Kosovo authorities, all of which are
currently provided by offices located in the southern
part of Mitrovica.

At around 8.30 a.m., a large number of Kosovo
Serbs started gathering near the East Bridge in northern
Mitrovica to protest the opening of the centre, which
they claimed not to have been done in consultation
with the local Kosovo Serb community and which, we
understand, is part of the Kosovo authorities' efforts to
establish their institutions throughout the territory.
Those efforts are opposed by Kosovo Serbs in the
north. Elsewhere, Kosovo Serbs have been making
5
increasing use of the services of Kosovo civil registry
offices.

After a siren sounded at 9 a.m., the number of
protesters increased significantly, to about 1,500 to
2,000. The Kosovo police and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) created a
buffer between the protesters and the centre. The
Kosovo Force (KFOR) was also present and ready to
assist if necessary. At 9.50 a.m., several shots were
heard and an explosive device went off close to the
crowd heading towards the centre. Some 600 to 700
people broke through the security cordons and, at about
10 a.m., once they reached the front of the centre,
demanded that the sign bearing the inscription
"Republic of Kosovo, Ministry of Internal Affairs" be
removed from the front of the building. Once the sign
was removed, the protesters began to disperse and, an
hour later, all roads were cleared.

However, as a result of the explosion, 12 people
were injured - seven Kosovo Serb females, four
Kosovo Serb males and one Kosovo Bosniak,
Dr. Mesud Dzekovie, who was not participating in the
protest and later died at the hospital while being treated
for his injuries.

At around 2 p.m., the emergency siren sounded
again, calling on residents of northern Mitrovica to
gather to mourn the loss of Dr. Dzekovie. The
Belgrade-appointed head of the Kosovska Mitrovica
region, addressing a crowd of up to 3,000 people,
stated that the Kosovo Serbs would continue to protest
the integration of northern Kosovo into Pristina-based
institutions, branded the explosion a terrorist attack
and criticized EULEX's approach as not being status-
neutral.

The evening of 2 July was calm and no incidents
were reported. The victim's funeral took place on
3 July in northern Mitrovica, with a large gathering and
the participation of the Serbian Minister for Kosovo.
The event passed peacefully. The Kosovo police and
EULEX, which, together with KFOR, are deployed in
the area, continue to investigate the incident in order to
arrest the perpetrators. However, since the incident, the
security situation in northern Kosovo is more tense
than usual. Yesterday morning, a Kosovo Serb member
of the Assembly of Kosovo, Mr. Petar Miletic', was shot
in both legs by unknown assailants outside his house in
northern Mitrovica. His wounds are not life-threatening
and his condition is reported as stable.
Following the 2 July incident, I expressed my
deep concern over the violence that occurred and
offered my condolences to the family of the victim. I
called on all sides to refrain from provocative
statements and to remain calm, and on all competent
law enforcement authorities to take urgent measures to
bring the perpetrators to justice. I would like to ask the
Council today to support those messages to the family
of Dr. Dzekovie and to the communities in Kosovo, as
well as to Pristina and Belgrade, and to help ensure
that there is no further escalation in the situation in
northern Kosovo.

While both Pristina and Belgrade strongly
condemned the incident and called for the arrest of the
perpetrators, each side has claimed that the other is
responsible for provoking the incident. On the one
hand, the Kosovo authorities called on Belgrade to
distance itself from "such violent acts that are a
product of Belgrade policies" and emphasized that they
would keep the civil services centre open and would
not halt the extension of their institutions into northern
Kosovo. On the other hand, the Serbian Council for
National Security and other Belgrade representatives
blamed Pristina for the incident and branded the
inauguration of the centre as a provocation and a
violation of the principles of the Security Council and
the European Union, "which have not endorsed the so-
called strategy for northern Kosovo".

In that regard, I would like to recall the concern
expressed by the Secretary-General in his latest report
(S/2010/169) over the risk of tensions should the
implementation of policies and strategies for northern
Kosovo not take place in conditions of transparency
and dialogue with local communities and all relevant
stakeholders. I would therefore like to reiterate the
Secretary-General's call to all sides to commit to
dialogue as a necessary process to address the
challenges faced in northern Kosovo. Events over the
past few days point to the need to initiate that dialogue
as a matter of urgency.

For our part, we will remain engaged with all
sides in order to encourage such dialogue, help defuse
tensions and maintain peace and stability on the
ground, in close coordination with EULEX and KFOR.

