Mr. Atieh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Thank you, Mr. President, for having given
me this opportunity to address the Council regarding
the situation in the Middle East. I would like to
welcome the Secretary-General, who is present at this
meeting. I would also like to welcome the Prime
Minister of Lebanon, Mr. Fouad Siniora, who has just
made a statement about the situation in Lebanon.

My delegation asked to participate in and speak
at this meeting so that it could explain the position of
Syria on some of the points just raised by the Prime
Minister of Lebanon. In this context, we would like to
reaffirm the special relationship between our two
countries and our two peoples - the Syrian and the
Lebanese peoples - as dictated by history and
geography. No external factor can separate them. In
this respect, we regret the attempt by certain parties in
the Lebanese arena to undermine that relationship in
one way or another by spreading rumours that there is
tension between our two fraternal countries. Syria has
helped to promote stability and to put an end to the
devastating civil war in Lebanon.

Syria has also sacrificed many of its sons to
ensure Lebanon's freedom and independence and to put
an end to Israel's occupation of southern Lebanon.
During his statement, the Prime Minister of Lebanon
spoke about Syria's constructive and important role in
putting an end to attempts to divide Lebanon and to
build national unity.

I now refer to the question of the demarcation of
the border between Syria and Lebanon. We believe
that, contrary to what some have implied, there is no
problem in this regard. However, Syria has stated that
it is willing to demarcate the border. Syria's Prime
Minister has sent a letter in that regard to his Lebanese
counterpart.

Concerning the demarcation of the border in the
Sheba'a farms area, that region is under Israeli
occupation. Israel must withdraw from the occupied
lands before our two countries can demarcate their
border, because demarcating the border there can only
take place once the Sheba'a area is free of foreign
occupation.

As to the issue of diplomatic representation
between our two countries, since 1990 the agreements
and existing institutions linking the two countries have
gone far beyond the issue of exchanging ambassadors.
Syria reaffirms its respect for the sovereignty and
independence of Lebanon. The question of the
exchange of ambassadors is a sovereign one. However,
if there is a mutual desire to renew diplomatic
relations, that matter can be considered.

Syria affirms its support for the national dialogue
in Lebanon between our Lebanese brothers. We hope
that dialogue will be successful, for that would be to
the benefit of the Lebanese people. We believe that all
the questions to be discussed by the Lebanese people
should be left to the political parties in Lebanon, so
that they may reach agreement without external
interference.

Syria implemented the provisions of resolution
1559 (2004) pertaining to it when it withdrew all its
troops and personnel from Lebanon on 26 April 2005.
Some parties have said that the issues of the
demarcation of the borders and the exchange of
ambassadors are part of resolution 1559 (2004).
However, we reject that idea. We believe that the
matters of exchanging ambassadors and demarcating
the border are sovereign matters for Lebanon and
Syria. The Security Council should not interfere in
those matters, in accordance with Article 2, paragraph
7, of the Charter, which states that "Nothing contained
in the present Charter shall authorize the United
Nations to intervene in matters which are essentially
within the domestic jurisdiction of any state".

The Arab region aspires to comprehensive and
lasting peace, as well as to the implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. Peace in
the Middle East will come about through Israel's
complete withdrawal from occupied Arab territories in
the Syrian Golan and the Sheba'a farms in Lebanon
and from occupied Palestinian territories to the 4 June
1967 line.

Some States have taken advantage of their
membership in the Security Council to achieve certain
objectives. That is contrary to the goal of peace and
security in the region and will contribute to instability
and tension. We hope that the Council members will
demonstrate the same enthusiasm when it comes to
implementing resolutions pertaining to the Arab-Israeli
conflict, in particular resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), as it does with regard to other resolutions.

