Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): My delegation would like
to congratulate you warmly, Sir, on your assumption of
the office of President of the Security Council for the
month of April. We are convinced that under your
leadership the Council is in excellent hands. We would
also like to thank Ambassador Li Zhaoxing of China and
members of his delegation for their skilful guidance of the
work of the Council during the month of March.

The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), which came into force in 1970,
represents a responsible mix of rights and obligations on
the part of Member States parties to the Treaty. To a
large extent, it is an unequal Treaty, which, however, has
continuing implications for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

As a product of the cold war, the Non-Proliferation
Treaty seeks to prevent both the horizontal and vertical
spread of nuclear weapons. It seeks to pursue nuclear
disarmament and the ultimate elimination of nuclear
weapons. In doing so, it embodies the hope that the
benefits of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes will
be made accessible and available to States parties,
particularly the developing countries among them, as a
positive contribution to their socio-economic development.
The cold war is now over, and no time is more propitious
than the present to pursue the non-proliferation objectives
of the NPT, particularly as provided for in Article VI of
the Treaty. The continuation of the Treaty must reside in
the full and effective implementation of both the spirit
and the letter of that Article.

With the creation of a differentiated form of
membership, the NPT was bound to be discriminatory.
However, it has continued to attract increased
membership - and with good reason, in our opinion -
with the result that the goal of universal adherence to the
Treaty is now a viable and feasible proposition. This is
just as well.

We cannot but reiterate, however, that the
Non-Proliferation Treaty has served the international
community well. We must therefore seek to strengthen it.

In return for a renunciation of the development and
acquisition of nuclear weapons, the non-nuclear weapon
States expected, inter alia, credible assurances from the
nuclear-weapon States that they would not use, or threaten
to use, nuclear weapons against them. To all intents and
purposes, this is legitimate.

 

It was this concern of the non-nuclear weapon States
and their insistence on the need to be provided with such
security guarantees that induced the adoption of resolution
255 (1968). That resolution recognized, inter alia, that
aggression with nuclear weapons, or the threat of such
aggression, against a non-nuclear-weapon State would
create a situation in which the Security Council and, above
all, its nuclear-weapon-States members, would have to act
immediately in accordance with their obligations under the
United Nations Charter.

Resolution 255 (1968) was considered ab initio
unsatisfactory. Only three of the nuclear-weapon States
gave some form of positive security assurances. It did not
commit the nuclear-weapon States parties to the Treaty to
any specific form of action in defence of a non-nuclear-
weapon State which is a victim of nuclear attack or
aggression involving the use of nuclear weapons.

The present draft resolution, which builds on
resolution 255 (1968), enjoys the support of the five
nuclear-weapon States. We commend in particular the
unconditional security assurance given by China in its own
national declaration contained in document S/1995/265 of
6 April 1995. This is a positive development. Be that as it
may, it is the firm and principled view of my delegation
that what is desirable, in the circumstance of the inequities
in the NPT and the disparities in the implementation of the
various provisions of the Treaty by the two sides to the
bargain, is that negative security assurances should be
provided to non-nuclear-weapon States in a legally binding
instrument. Such an instrument, which should be negotiated
multilaterally, must have as its starting point the obligation
of "no use, no first use" of nuclear weapons by the nuclear-
weapon States against a non-nuclear-weapon State party to
the Treaty - the kind of obligation contained in the
Chinese national statement to which I referred earlier.

In other words, there must be a clear commitment by
all the nuclear-weapon States - not some of them - not
to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-
nuclear-weapon States parties to the Treaty. Since the non-
nuclear-weapon States accepted the Treaty provisions not to
develop or to acquire nuclear weapons, they should in
return be assured in Treaty form that they will not be
victims of use or threat of use of nuclear weapons. The
insistence on such a quid pro quo is both legitimate and
fair, and therefore cannot be side-stepped much longer.

Although we have in the spirit of consensus agreed to
go along with the adoption of the present draft resolution,
which had been put forward in anticipation of the NPT
Review and Extension Conference, we do so without
enthusiasm. Therefore, we must place on record our
disappointment that the present draft resolution fails to
prescribe clearly defined and specific action to be taken
in the case of aggression with nuclear weapons, the
specific obligations of nuclear-weapon States, the specific
form of assistance to be provided by the Council as a
duty, rather than as a request from a victim State, and the
action to be taken by the Council should the aggressor be
a nuclear-weapon State which is also a permanent
member of the Security Council. The draft resolution also
fails to commit all members of the Council to the
necessity of adopting in the immediate future negative
security assurances in a legally binding instrument.

The assurances in the present draft resolution, as
drafted, need to be further clarified if they are to inspire
the necessary confidence which non-nuclear-weapon
States can live with, and if they are not to be a mere set
of measures whose efficacy could be undermined by
varying interpretations of Member States. There must also
be a set of assurances which Member States would be
unable to withdraw from fulfilling, especially during
hostilities, on account of what may be claimed as national
interests. My delegation looks forward to a set of
guarantees that would not be vulnerable to the use of the
veto by the permanent members of the Security Council.
Nigeria has always believed, and continues to believe,
that the best assurances against nuclear annihilation is the
complete elimination of these weapons.

