Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Zarif
for his briefing to the Council on the activities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) during the reporting period. I would
also like to welcome to the Council the President of
Serbia, Mr. Tomislav Nikolic', and the President of
Kosovo, Mrs. Atifete Jahjaga, and to thank them very
much for their statements. I would also like to convey
Australia's condolence to President Nikolie and to the
communities in Serbia which have suffered the loss of
family members in the unprecedented flooding. These
losses are being deeply felt within affected communities
in Australia.

Serbia and Kosovo have achieved remarkable
progress over the past two years in their high-level
political dialogue to normalize their relations and in the
implementation of the 19 April 2013 agreement. As the
Secretary-General says in his report (S/2014/305), the
parties have been steadily narrowing their differences.
We welcome the efforts of political leaders in both
Belgrade and Pristina, and commend them for the
progress they have made. The progress on the police
integration chapter of the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations of 19 April
2013has been particularly important. The 284 former
Serbian police officers now serving with the Kosovo
police force enhance the trust that Kosovo Serbs
have in Kosovar institutions and therefore represent
an important confidence-building measure for the
community. As the Secretary-General observes in his
report, some challenges remain, including with regard
to the establishment of the association of Serbian
municipalities in Kosovo. Yet that, too, remains
important. We encourage both sides to work towards
finding an appropriate role for the association.

Australia commends the Kosovo Assembly's
decision on 23 April to establish a special court within
the Kosovo court system with seats within and outside
Kosovo, designed to adjudicate allegations arising from
the work of the Special Investigative Task Force. We
acknowledge that this was a difficult and sensitive
decision. In establishing a credible judicial process
that we hope can finally resolve the grave allegations
of organ trafficking during the 1990s conflict, Kosovo
has reaffirmed its commitment to the rule of law, and
we commend this decision.

The proposal to reform Kosovo's security forces has
also proved to be a sensitive issue, both domestically
and regionally. Australia recognizes Kosovo's right
as an independent nation to develop its security
forces, particularly in the framework of its continued
cooperation with NATO. We recommend that every
effort be made to ensure that Kosovo's armed forces
are developed in full transparency and dialogue with
key regional neighbours.

We would like to acknowledge the importance of
the continued deployment of the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). We acknowledge
the report of the European Union High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on EULEX
activities. EULEX's refocused mandate, voted on
by the Kosovo Assembly and supported by President
Jahjaga in her April letter, will ensure that EULEX can
continue to investigate and prosecute serious organized
crime and war crimes, and help build the capacity of
Kosovo's multi-ethnic justice and police institutions
until 15 June 2016. We condemn the attack on EULEX
vehicles on 25 April and call for a swift and thorough
investigation. We remain encouraged, however, that the
overall security situation remains calm and that Kosovo
remains on a positive trajectory. This lends credence,
in our view, to the argument that the Security Council
could decrease the frequency of its debates on the
situation in Kosovo.

The return of the significant numbers of people
displaced during the Kosovo conflict is an essential
component of the long-term reconciliation process
in Kosovo, but this cannot happen without a holistic
approach to returns policy, addressing housing,
security, freedom of movement, access to public
services and employment opportunities. Australia
welcomes Kosovo's new strategy for communities and
returns for the period 2014-2018, and encourages all
relevant Kosovar authorities to implement it fully.

To conclude, the opening by Serbia in January
of accession talks with the European Union, and the
conclusion of negotiations on a future stabilization
and association agreement for Kosovo, are historic
steps on the respective paths of both countries towards
European integration. Following the understandable
short pause during the general elections in Serbia, and
the forthcoming parliamentary elections in Kosovo
scheduled for 8 June, it is now important that the newly
elected leaderships in Belgrade and Pristina re-engage
with renewed purpose and vision in the political
dialogue supported by the European Union. This will
ensure that positive momentum is maintained and full
normalization of relations achieved, to the mutual
benefit and prosperity of the people of Serbia and
Kosovo.

