El Salvador thanks the presidency of the Security Council for its interest in continuing to address the challenges posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, particularly those related to global peace and security, as well as all the efforts to hold this open debate. At the outset, my country commends the outstanding work of peacekeepers around the world and pays tribute to the men and women who have given their lives for peace and whose work and commitment will endure over the years in the history of the Organization and of the countries that they so honourably represent. El Salvador reaffirms its commitment to peacekeeping operations by contributing its highly trained police and military personnel. Given the great challenges posed by the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, the importance of that mechanism, which has given hope to thousands of people around the world, has been highlighted now more than ever. The Salvadoran military and police forces will continue to support the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General and the Governments of the countries that have a peace operation on their territories. As mentioned above, El Salvador believes that the pandemic represents a serious threat to peace and security and could mean a setback in the achievement of economic and social development. Furthermore, it highlights the fragilities of many peace processes, threatening the population's access to basic services, unfortunately opening the door to stigmatization and hate speech, and increasing economic differences among the population. The pandemic also jeopardizes the population's levels of trust in public institutions, which may be further eroded in places where authorities are perceived to have not addressed the pandemic effectively or to have not been transparent about its impact. As institutions lose trust, they become more vulnerable and fuel social unrest, which could lead to even greater conflict because of the limited scope for action by States and the eroded political capital of Governments to address this challenge. The pandemic requires considerable attention to mitigate its consequences and care for the population so that irreparable loss of life and a health system crisis in affected countries can be avoided. At the same time, it could create a major distraction from addressing all the threats to peace and security, which could be used by terrorist, extremist and organized crime groups to advance their illegal operations, exploiting the uncertainty created by COVID-19 as a tactical advantage. El Salvador has taken note of the humanitarian difficulties in different countries and regions of the world and is paying close attention to how these have increased over the past few months as a result of the pandemic. My country calls for respect for international humanitarian law, improving systems for the protection of civilians in conflict regions and ensuring access to humanitarian assistance, through the principles established by the Organization. The pandemic cannot be a pretext for putting democracy and the rule of law at risk, which is why it calls on all political forces to take the necessary measures to guarantee the scheduled elections and reproaches all those attempts to ignore these important agreements, which will only fuel political tensions. The threats posed by the pandemic require an urgent and unique response, based on understanding among all parts of this Organization, cooperation and international solidarity. El Salvador welcomes the fact that some 180 States have joined the international community in supporting the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and in unanimously adopting resolution 2532 (2020). We hope that this understanding of the Security Council will be translated into genuine action by all parties to put an end to the conflicts and provide a true humanitarian response to the consequences of the COVID-19 outbreak. The challenge for the Members of the Organization, together with other relevant actors, will always be the protection of millions of people affected by conflict and who are in situations of serious vulnerability. For this work, the Security Council, as the guarantor and protector of international peace and security, has a fundamental duty to make its voice heard and to make its influence felt at this juncture, through clear guidelines and by coordinating the support that should be given to operations on the ground, as well as the resources necessary to meet this challenge on a global scale. El Salvador calls on the Security Council to continue to address this public health emergency. Political interests should not take precedence while the pandemic is spreading on the ground and endangering the situation of millions of people in areas of conflict and affected areas. Furthermore, the door should be opened for subsequently taking economic measures, which should be effectively promoted by the United Nations system and the General Assembly. El Salvador appreciates all the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General and the United Nations system in support of mitigating the spread of COVID-19 among peace operations personnel, and further welcomes the support that these missions provide to the Governments of countries that have a peace operation on the ground. My country stresses the importance of protecting the health and well- being of all peace operations personnel, and calls for further efforts to provide all personnel with the necessary protective equipment to effectively and safely carry out their work. Finally, El Salvador calls for all assistance plans to be developed ensuring support for the most vulnerable groups and sectors of the population, including migrants, displaced persons, civilians residing in areas controlled by non-State armed groups, detained persons and those working in the informal sector of the economy. It is also essential to ensure such assistance for older persons, a group highly affected by the pandemic, racial minorities, children and youth, and women, among others. The protection of civilians and actions that enable the building of community trust must be protected and maintained.
