Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation is
pleased to see you, Mr. President, preside over this
emergency meeting of the Security Council. We joined
in calling for this meeting today in response to the full-
scale military operations that are under way in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem. We
would like to express our appreciation to the Council
for scheduling the open debate during the day, when all
Member States have an opportunity to express their
views before the Council.

We also note with appreciation that the Security
Council has taken a step in taking action on our
suggestion that it consider meeting with Prime Minister
Sharon and President Arafat by instead meeting with
their representatives here in New York.

However, we believe that more may need to be
done. We would like to remind the Council of the
suggestion by some of the members of the Non-
Aligned Movement that the Security Council visit the
region to obtain a first-hand impression of events on
the ground. A visit to Israel and Palestine by the
Council at this time would be another signal that the
international community is very concerned about the
deteriorating situation.

The Non-Aligned Movement is concerned that
Israel has for many years refused to comply with
Security Council resolutions. This cannot be allowed to
continue if the Council is to fulfil its role of
maintaining peace and security. At some point this
Council will have to stand up to all countries that do
not obey its resolutions. We believe that this time is
right now.

The Non-Aligned Movement has consistently
maintained that there can be no military solution to the
Middle East conflict and that occupation, settlement
activities and collective punishment of the Palestinian
people are the root causes of violence and insecurity in
the region. In other words, the enemy in the Middle
East is not President Arafat or the Palestinian
Authority. The enemy in the Middle East is the lack of
peace between Israel and Palestine.

We are therefore deeply distressed by the fact that
the Israeli Government has chosen to respond to the
symptoms of its own military occupation by using
disproportionate lethal force, with a resulting
escalation in conflict and tragic consequences for the
civilian populations of both Palestine and Israel.
Clearly, Israel's decision to destroy Palestinian
infrastructure, to humiliate and humble Palestinian
civilians and to threaten the life of the legitimate,
elected and internationally recognized leader of the
Palestinian people cannot be justified as acts of
counter-terrorism or even self-defence.

Israel's militaristic approach is all the more
inexplicable and inexcusable since it is taking place
against a backdrop of renewed efforts by the
international community to mediate a peaceful solution
to the conflict. The Government of South Africa found
it inexplicable that Israel saw fit to prevent President
Arafat from travelling to Beirut to endorse and support
the Saudi initiative. This action was short-sighted and
provocative. It played directly into the hands of the
extremists, whose sole goal was to prevent creation of
the conditions that would allow the achievement of a
ceasefire and promote movement towards a substantial
dialogue on peace in line with the requirements of the
Mitchell report.

It is also deeply troubling to the South African
Government that at precisely the time when both the
Israeli and Palestinian leadership were engaged in
discussions with General Zinni about establishing the
conditions for the implementation of a ceasefire,
extremists once again targeted Israeli civilians in
attacks that left scores of dead and injured.

Israel's response to these killings was once again
the same massive, predictable military escalation
witnessed in the past, which sought to target President
Arafat as an enemy, to destroy the Palestinian
infrastructure and to try to humiliate and bludgeon the
Palestinian people into submission.

Despite these setbacks, the United Nations
Secretary-General, the Arab League, the Non-Aligned
Movement, the European Union, the Russian
Federation, the United States of America and others
continue to intensify their efforts to encourage dialogue
between the Palestinians and the Israelis. We therefore
remain convinced that it is possible to achieve a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the crisis.
However, the trauma, intense mistrust and fear
generated by the current spasm of terrorist acts and
military attacks will not be easily overcome, and a
credible, multinational monitoring mechanism will be
required on the ground to monitor the implementation
of agreements between the two parties.

Through the adoption of resolution 1397 (2002),
the Security Council has recognized the right of the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples to exist side by side, in
peace and security with their neighbours, in States of
their own. The Council has also adopted resolution
1402 (2002), demanding the immediate cessation of
violence and calling for the implementation of a
meaningful ceasefire and the withdrawal of Israeli
troops from Palestinian cities. The least we expect is
for Israel to obey Security Council resolutions and to
implement particularly resolution 1402 (2002).

In conclusion, please allow me to restate a
fundamental truth: Israel's security cannot be achieved
through the barrel of a gun. The current cycle of
growing violence and the ever increasing death toll of
innocent Israelis and Palestinians cannot be ended
without a political solution.

