Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation wishes to associate itself with the comments
to be made on behalf of the European Union by the
Ambassador of Luxembourg.

My delegation thanks you, Sir, for your initiative
of organizing today's debate on African issues. We
welcome that initiative for three reasons.

First, the Council's activity has largely been
focused on African issues. That was demonstrated this
month as we discussed Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea-Bissau,
Ethiopia and Eritrea, Burundi, Somalia and the Sudan,
concerning which we have taken important decisions
and expect to take yet another tomorrow. What was
true in March also applies to the rest of the year. I must
say, somewhat sadly, that we would of course prefer
that the Council did not have so frequently to address
the crises that continue to afflict that large and friendly
continent.

Secondly, cooperation between the Security
Council and African regional organizations is growing.
Africans today are taking control of their fate. The
African Union is now a necessary partner in the
settlement of crises on the continent, and we are very
gratified by that development. That also holds true for
such regional organizations as the Economic
Community of West African States and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD).
It is therefore quite appropriate and desirable for
our Council and those organizations to work closely
together. France is convinced that such cooperation is a
guarantee of effectiveness. That was demonstrated two
days ago when the Council took cognizance of the
South African mediation in the Cote d'Ivoire crisis. It
was also demonstrated with respect to Somalia when
the Council brought all its support to bear on IGAD's
outstanding efforts. Naturally, all such cooperation
must be undertaken with respect for everyone's
competencies.

Thirdly, the Council has established many
peacekeeping operations in Africa. Today, the majority
of the 65,000 Blue Helmets deployed throughout the
world are in Africa. It is therefore up to the Council to
bring all its weight to bear on the settlement of crises
to which the United Nations is committed.

The international community's resources are not
unlimited. The number of peacekeepers deployed in the
field cannot grow indefinitely. That is why the Council,
in close cooperation with the Africans, must in each
case define a genuine exit strategy. In some cases,
however - in Cote d'Ivoire in particular - an
additional but temporary investment is sometimes
indispensable if it will help to solve the crisis any
sooner. In all cases, the Council must have a
comprehensive and long-term perspective of its
commitments in a given crisis.

I am compelled to raise a question that affects all
of us: the campaign against sexual abuse in
peacekeeping operations. Attention has been focused
on the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but our collective
efforts must go far beyond that. Prince Zeid's report is
a very useful contribution in that regard. It should help
us to combat that scourge.

In conclusion, I recall that several United Nations
soldiers have been killed or seriously injured this
month in Africa in the exercise of their duties. That
sacrifice reflects the ongoing commitment of those
peacekeeping soldiers in Africa and elsewhere. I pay
tribute to them and commend the courage and
dedication of all those who are serving peace under the
Council's mandate.

