Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU).

The ongoing crisis in Syria, including the connected
spread of Da'esh, poses an existential threat to the
Syrian people. The consequences are also particularly
felt by its neighbours and the wider region, and in
Europe itself as well. If we want to tackle this threat,
we must first intensify our joint efforts to put an end
to the war in Syria by arriving at a political solution
within the framework of the 2012 Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015).
Secondly, we must all join forces against Da'esh in an
even more effective way.

The European Union is an active member of the
International Syria Support Group and its two task
forces, on humanitarian access and a cessation of
hostilities, and fully supports the efforts of Staffan
de Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General.
There is no alternative to the intra-Syrian talks being
conducted under the aegis of the United Nations if we
are to reach the goal ofa political settlement. We expect
all Syrian parties and their backers to engage in the
process. In particular, we encourage the Syrian regime
to engage in good faith and to address the substantive
aspects ofa political transition.

In that context, the EU emphasizes the importance
of four key elements agreed on by the International
Syria Support Group and endorsed by Security Council
resolutions. First is the consolidation and expansion
of the cessation of hostilities. It is incumbent upon
all parties to respect the agreement of 27 February.
Secondly, there is the consolidation and expansion
of humanitarian access, especially to besieged and
still hard-to-reach areas. The Al-Assad regime has a
particular responsibility in that regard, since a clear
majority of the besieged areas are under its control.
Thirdly, there is the release of arbitrarily detained
persons, particularly women and children. Fourthly
and, I would say, extremely important, is embarking
upon a political transition, without delay and with the
intention of reaching a lasting solution.

As we have stressed in the past, the Middle East
peace process remains vital not only for those directly
affected by the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, but also for
the stability of the wider region and thereby also for
the European Union. Despite current challenges on the
ground, the EU remains united in its commitment to
achieving a two-State solution based on the parameters
set out in the Council's conclusions of July 2014. We
reiterate that there is no alternative to a negotiated two-
State solution, which remains the only realistic way of

ending the conflict to the main benefit of both Israelis
and Palestinians. Regrettably, those populations are
now adversely affected by the recent violence, which
is taking a terrible human toll and further undermining
trust on both sides.

The EU has taken a clear stance and condemned acts
of terror and violence against innocent civilians from
all sides. In January, our Foreign Affairs Council also
urged all sides to refrain from actions that could fuel
further tension by way of incitement and provocation,
while adhering to the principles of necessity and
proportionality in the use of force. We also recognize
the special significance of holy sites and urge all to
uphold the status quo for the Temple Mount, Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. However, we remain convinced that security
and short-term measures alone are no substitute for
sustainable political solutions. Only significant policy
shifts on the ground and the re-establishment of a
political horizon can end the violence, rebuild trust
and pave the way for meaningful negotiations on the
outstanding issues. In that context, it is vital to ensure
that all international initiatives are directed towards
that goal.

The EU will play a leading part, not least through
the its Special Representative for the Middle East peace
process and the Quartet, which is currently drafting
a report on the dangers of the current trajectory
with significant recommendations on the best way
to advance a two-State solution. In that context, the
European Union also welcomes other initiatives in the
international arena, such as the international peace
conference proposed by France, as one part of a broader
and coordinated effort to preserve and strengthen the
two-State solution.

The role of regional partners remains essential.
The Arab Peace Initiative could serve as an important
pillar of any future comprehensive peace agreement,
while it also provides an opportunity for building a
regional security framework. The Security Council
has an obvious and crucial role in that context. We
take this opportunity to offer our full support to the
Secretary-General's Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Process, Mr. Mladenov. The EU believes that an
integrated approach among international stakeholders
can help revive the Middle East peace process. We
look forward to working closely with partners in the
months ahead towards that common goal. The power
to change the situation is obviously primarily in the
hands of local leaders and societies. The support
and active participation of both sides of the conflict
remain a crucial prerequisite for the success of any
peace initiative.

Both sides will need to demonstrate through
policies and actions that they are genuinely committed
to the two-State solution. They must end all actions
that undermine the viability of the two-State solution.
The EU is highly concerned by the ongoing erosion of
the viability of a two State-solution. In that context, we
reiterate that settlements are illegal under international
law, constitute an obstacle to peace and threaten to make
a two-State solution impossible. As it has consistently
reaffirmed in its Council conclusions, and most
recently in January 2016, the EU is strongly opposed
to Israel's settlement policy and to actions taken in that
context, such as the recent increase in demolitions,
including those of EU and EU-member States' funded
projects in Area C, the declaration of private land as
State land, the legalization of unauthorized outposts
and confiscations, as well as the forced transfers of
people. Settlement activity in East Jerusalem seriously
jeopardizes the possibility of Jerusalem serving as the
future capital of both States.

By the same token, jointly addressing the needs
of the Palestinian population should be a top priority
for Palestinian political leaders. We therefore urge
Palestinian factions to bring ongoing reconciliation
efforts to a rapid and successful conclusion, on the
basis of democracy and the principles of the Palestinian
Liberation Organization. Palestinian unity and
accountable and democratic Palestinian institutions will
be crucial in establishing a viable Palestinian State. We
welcome the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians, the main mechanism for aid management
and donor coordination, being held in Brussels today
and tomorrow in the presence of the two parties. Its role
is to underpin political efforts to achieve a two-State
solution by supporting the development of institutions
in preparation for Palestinian statehood.

There must also be accelerated efforts to address
the dire situation in Gaza. While the EU has delivered
on all its pledges made at the Cairo Conference in 2014,
we urge all others to follow suit. Increased access to
Gaza through legal crossings would also contribute to
an improved situation in accordance with resolution
1860 (2009).

Let me end by noting that, in our view, the
forthcoming Quartet report should be the basis to set
out in more detail the concrete steps that both sides
must take to recreate the political horizon for a two-
State solution with the full support of the international
community.

Together, we need to find ways to prevent further
disasters in the Middle East mainly for humanitarian
reasons, but also because despair can breed
radicalization and further violence. Together with
international partners, and hopefully with crucial input
by the core parties to the conflict, the European Union
will continue its concerted efforts to prevent the further
escalation of violence and defend the viability of the
two-State solution.

