I align myself with the statement submitted by the observer of the European Union (annex 29). I would like to thank the Indonesian presidency of the Security Council for organizing this open debate to continue assessing the threats the coronavirus disease pandemic poses to multilateralism. In that regard, I thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, and Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director of the Center on International Cooperation of New York University, for their statements. Spain is committed to inclusive multilateralism, especially now that the pandemic is a threat to multilateralism. The current crisis must be resolved through universal agreements and common efforts. In that regard, resolution 2532 (2020) was a great achievement, and Spain will continue to firmly support the Secretary- General's call for a global ceasefire. The Secretary-General's call continues to be important because the pandemic response must be based on the peace-humanitarian assistance-development-human rights nexus. The current crisis consists of three major challenges. First, movement restrictions can contribute to the curtailment of human rights and hamper humanitarian access and development cooperation. Secondly, social distancing forces us to reimagine new ways to effectively mediate peace processes. Thirdly, the global ceasefire must be accompanied by adequate humanitarian tools and relevant development mechanisms in order to build resilient societies. Our actions must continue to be guided by the United Nations. The Peacebuilding Commission is a key player in the management of the crisis. Our actions must be based on an integrated approach that recognizes and makes possible the effective participation of women in the pandemic response and in peace processes. Similarly, we must broaden our approach to include mechanisms for the prevention, promotion and respect of human rights and protection of civilians, with special consideration for people in vulnerable situations. I conclude by recalling that, in the greatest crisis of the twenty-first century, the international community must reinforce multilateralism, the centrality of the United Nations and the role of the World Health Organization. Only then will we be able to overcome these challenges.
