The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Haiti in which he requests to be invited
to participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Me'rores
(Haiti) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (Spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council congratulates Rene
Garcia Preval on his inauguration as President of
Haiti. The Council also congratulates all newly-
elected parliamentarians and calls upon them to
recognize the importance of the mandate given to
them by the Haitian people to work constructively
to build a better future for their country. To this
end, the Council urges the executive and
legislative powers to establish a fruitful and
collaborative relationship. The Council stresses
that the timely holding of municipal, local and
remaining parliamentary elections is fundamental
to democratic governance.

"The Security Council underlines that many
challenges remain to be tackled, including the
need to ensure a secure and stable environment in
Haiti, strengthen its democratic institutions,
foster national reconciliation, inclusiveness and
political dialogue, promote and protect human
rights and the rule of law and build governmental
capacity, and welcomes Mr. Preval's commitment
in this regard. The Council also emphasizes the
need to reform and strengthen Haiti's police,
judiciary and correctional systems, and, in this
regard, looks forward to the results of the
discussions between MINUSTAH and the new
authorities on how to address these and other
security-related issues. Recognizing that
development remains essential to Haiti's stability,
the Council calls on donors and relevant
stakeholders to continue to assess and coordinate
assistance priorities, in close cooperation with the
new Government, taking into account existing
mechanisms such as the Interim Cooperation
Framework. The Council reiterates the need for
the quick implementation of highly visible and
labour-intensive projects that help to create jobs
and deliver basic social services. In this regard,
the Council looks forward to the upcoming
meeting to be held in Brasilia on 23 May.

"The Security Council welcomes
CARICOM's intention to reintegrate Haiti fully
into the activities of the Community. The Council
also expresses its appreciation for the
contribution of the Organization of American
States to the electoral process. In this regard, the
Council supports the commitment of the new
Haitian authorities to enhance cooperation with
regional partners in order to address issues
related to regional stability.

"The Security Council expresses its full
support for the continued efforts by MINUSTAH
and the international community to assist Haiti in
its ongoing transition, and requests that
MINUSTAH work closely with the new
authorities in the implementation of its mandate.
The Council looks forward to the report of the
Secretary-General requested in resolution 1658
(2006) on whether to restructure MINUSTAH's
mandate and reiterates its willingness to
cooperate with the newly-elected authorities to
address the long-term challenges facing Haiti.
The Council would like also to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his
tireless efforts and dedication to the success of
the United Nations presence in Haiti."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2006/22.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

