The Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa is an important subsidiary body of the United Nations Security Council. As Chair, I am briefing the Council on the work of the Ad Hoc Working Group, in particular the activities it undertook in 2019 and 2020. The latter period was shortened owing to the negative impacts of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. With regard to the activities of the Ad Hoc Working Group in 2019, its first substantive meeting took place on 29 May 2019 and focused on the issue of root causes of conflict in Africa, in particular the illicit exploitation and trade of natural resources as a key driver of conflict, what options exist for conflict prevention, as well as conflict management and resolution. The rationale for focusing on this theme was that many of the conflicts in Africa are fuelled by the proliferation of illicit trade of natural resources, with enormous implications for regional stability and arguably for international peace and security. The direct connection between the illicit exploitation of Africa's natural resources and the trade therein has been covered in many studies, including studies by the United Nations. It is also recognized as one of the major root causes and drivers of most of the intractable conflicts on the African continent. Both briefers and participants, including representatives from the Member States, academia, the United Nations system and civil society, provided important policy recommendations and relevant proposals. The second meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group took place on 21 June 2019 and focused on the topic of security sector reform (SSR), in particular the role of local participation in and ownership of reform efforts. The rationale for focusing on this topic was predicated on the understanding that the United Nations and the African Union (AU) can draw on their comparative advantages to ensure they play a key role in supporting more effective conflict analysis in relation to security sector reform. The concept of inclusivity in SSR is essential; so too is overcoming the trust deficit between security forces and local communities. It is therefore important to develop dialogue mechanisms for rapprochement between the population and security institutions, making sure the former have input into the design and implementation of the SSR process. Local ownership has also emerged as part of the key contemporary reality for successful and effective SSR. The Ad Hoc Working Group convened a third meeting on 9 August 2019 to consider preparations for the thirteenth annual joint consultative meeting between the Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council. The importance of this meeting was underlined by the imperative of members of the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security Council to exchange ideas on common issues affecting the African continent, including developing joint recommendations and a shared approach to conflict prevention and resolution in order to address in particular the long-standing conflicts on the African continent. In accordance with the usual practice, the two Councils decided to hold two meetings in Addis Ababa, with the first day, 23 October 2019, set aside for the fourth informal seminar, wherein two topics were discussed: first, silencing the guns in Africa and, secondly, modalities for conducting missions on the continent. The second day, 24 October 2019, was set aside for the thirteenth annual joint consultative meeting, which focused on the situation in Libya, the situation in South Sudan, and the implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. Finally, the Ad Hoc Working Group also held important joint working sessions between the AU Peace and Security Council Committee of Experts and the Security Council's own experts on 2 and 4 October 2019. This joint meeting was held in the context of the third workshop, which focused on the issues of silencing the guns in Africa by 2020, conflict prevention and mediation, peacebuilding and sustaining peace, counter-terrorism, climate change and support for AU peace operations. These exchanges between the AU Peace and Security Council Committee of Experts and the experts from the Security Council ensure that we share and familiarize the AU experts with the working methods of the Security Council, which is critical to enhancing cooperation and partnership between the two Councils in the area of peace and security. With regard to the activities of the Ad Hoc Working Group in 2020, a number of the meetings were planned to consider important themes in line with its mandate. However, the Ad Hoc Working Group's activities were not spared the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which forced the cancellation of a number of these plans. Nevertheless, the Ad Hoc Working Group did convene one important meeting, albeit virtually, to prepare for the fourteenth annual joint consultative meeting between the Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council. Subsequently, members of the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security Council held their fourteenth annual joint consultative meeting on 29 and 30 September 2020 on a virtual platform. In accordance with previous practice, the members of the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security Council discussed matters of peace and security in Africa. At the fifth joint informal seminar, held on 29 September 2020, members of the two Councils exchanged views on strengthening cooperation between the United Nations as it marks its seventy-fifth anniversary and the African Union marks its own fifty-seventh anniversary. Members of the two Councils also reflected on the salient topic of silencing the guns, in particular the ways to create conditions conducive to Africa's development. On the occasion of the fourteenth joint consultative meeting, which was held on 30 September 2020, members of the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security Council reflected on two topics, namely, the situation in Somalia and the situation in Mali and the Sahel region. At the conclusion of this meeting, the two Councils adopted a communique to mark the occasion. In conclusion, the mandate of the Ad Hoc Working Group is very specific, namely, to play a critical role in assisting and advising the Security Council on approaches to preventing and resolving conflict in Africa. Additionally, the Ad Hoc Working Group provides a platform for engaging and discussing difficult issues. Further, it provides an opportunity for the Council to engage in open, transparent and non-confrontational consideration of important peace and security matters. During its tenure as the Chair of the Ad Hoc Working Group, South Africa has sought to ensure that when the elected and permanent members of the Security Council engage in their collective task, they propose unique and innovative approaches towards preventing and resolving conflicts in Africa. I would like to thank all delegations for their support and active engagement in the work and activities of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa during my tenure as Chair. It is my hope that our successor will build on this solid work and on the good cooperation between the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security Council. I would like to take this opportunity to thank Ambassador Fatima Mohammed and her team at the Permanent Observer Mission of the African Union to the United Nations, Ms. Bintou Keita, the Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, and her team, Ms. Bience Gawanas, and her successor, Ms Cristina Duarte, at the Office of the Special Advisor for Africa. I also thank the United Nations Secretariat for its support. I would also like to thank the Governments of Ethiopia and the Sudan for facilitating the Security Council's visits to Addis Ababa and Juba, South Sudan, in 2019. Talso thank the three African States members of the Security Council for 2019, namely, South Africa, Cete d'Ivoire and Equatorial Guinea, and the configuration for 2020 comprising the three African States members of the Council namely, South Africa, the Niger and Tunisia, as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, which supported and provided unwavering solidarity on African issues. I would like to also thank the South Africa team led by Ambassador Xolisa Mfundiso Mabhongo, the Deputy Permanent Representative, Mr. Marthinus Van Schalkwyk, the Political Coordinator, and Ms. Kgaugelo Thermina Mogashoa, Deputy Political Coordinator.
