I would like to thank the Estonian presidency for having convened this Security Council open high-level video-teleconference on the theme of the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The participation of the President of the Republic of Estonia, Kersti Kaljulaid; Secretary-General Antonio Guterres; the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), Peter Maurer; and Nobel Peace Laureate and member of The Elders Ellen Johnson Sirleaf in this video- teleconference demonstrates the persistent relevance of the topic, in particular in the light of the recent new challenges. We thank the Secretary-General for his report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366) and for the recommendations contained therein. The crisis caused by the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has had a severe impact on the protection of civilians in conflict situations. Armenia has extended its unequivocal support to the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire, which is a key prerequisite for facilitating efforts to address the pandemic in conflict contexts. The Secretary-General's appeal was also supported by the authorities of Nagorno Karabakh. The report points out the devastating impact of conflicts on civilians, with tens of thousands of casualties, gender-based violence targeting women and girls, violations of the human rights of children and indiscriminate attacks on civilian infrastructure. We share the Secretary-General's view as to the urgent need to facilitate rapid, unimpeded and safe humanitarian access to the conflict-affected population in order to prevent the suffering of civilians. Attempts to deny humanitarian access aimed at meeting the protection needs of people living in conflict areas should be identified and effectively addressed. International humanitarian law and international human rights law remain crucial frameworks for the effective protection of civilian populations. Armenia attaches the utmost importance to the full compliance by all parties to conflict with the Geneva Conventions and their Protocols Additional, without any political preconditions. The promotion of the norms of international humanitarian law is an important element of Armenia's security-sector governance and reform. International humanitarian law is incorporated into the curriculums of Armenia's military educational institutions. The Government of Armenia prioritizes the safety of children and the protection of their right to education, in line with its commitments under the Safe Schools Declaration. The protection of women and girls affected by conflict is another important priority of the Government of Armenia, reflected also in the national action plan on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. Armenia appreciates the close involvement of the International Committee of the Red Cross in protecting schools through the construction of safe rooms and protection walls and the implementation of other programmes. Full and unimpeded access by the ICRC to conflict areas, including to places of detention, is vital to ensuring the protection of civilians. The civilian population of Armenia's border regions and Artsakh (Nagorno Karabakh) continue to face serious humanitarian risks, which may be further exacerbated owing to the spread of the pandemic and the suspension of the activities of conflict-related field operations. Strict adherence to the 1994 trilateral ceasefire agreement concluded by Nagorno Karabakh, Azerbaijan and Armenia and the 1995 agreement on consolidation of the ceasefire regime is essential to ensuring the protection of civilians and preventing violations of international humanitarian law. We strongly condemn Azerbaijan's continual attempts to escalate the situation along the line of contact between Artsakh and Azerbaijan and the Armenian- Azerbaijani border, including the targeting of civilians, border settlements and infrastructure, infiltration attempts and large-scale, unnotified military exercises of an offensive nature. At a time when the international community is consolidating its efforts in responding to the COVID-19 pandemic, such actions display total disregard for the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire and the calls made by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Minsk Group co-Chairs to refrain from any provocative action that could further raise tensions during this period. For along time, Armenia has been raising the need to address the manifestations of racial and ethnic profiling, the glorification of hate crimes and the denial and justification of past crimes, especially those led and incited by State leaders. On 26 May, the European Court of Human Rights made its ruling on the case Makuchyan and Minasyan v. Azerbaijan and Hungary in relation to Azerbaijan's release and glorification of its officer, Ramil Safarov, who murdered Armenian officer Gurgen Margaryan when he was asleep by axing him to death while participating in a training course within the framework of the 2004 Partnership for Peace programme in Budapest. Here is an excerpt of that ruling: "The court is particularly struck by the fact that, in addition to immediate release, upon his return to Azerbaijan R.S. was granted a number of benefits, such as salary arrears for the period spent in prison, a flat in Baku and a promotion in military rank awarded at a public ceremony." The release of the convicted murderer by decree of the President of Azerbaijan and the glorification of Mr. Safarov is an affront to the standards of civilization and human dignity. Today resolute action by the United Nations and regional organizations to advance prevention, including the prevention of hate speech and identity-based crimes, 1s more critical than ever to ensure the effective protection of civilians in armed conflict.
