Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank today's
briefers and commend the presidency of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela for convening this open debate
on the review of the peacebuilding architecture at a time
when we are at a crossroads, confronted by protracted
conflicts, violent extremism, cyberinsecurity and
destabilized societies - problems that are in turn
aggravated by climate change, cross-border economic
shocks, transnational crime and massive population
flows. We therefore need to assess the performance
and impact of the peacebuilding architecture thus far
in preventing conflicts and providing human security.

My delegation supports the recommendations
contained in the report (see S/2015/490) of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture aimed at the full realization of the
peacebuilding architecture's functions, resources and
modes of engagement, as well as its links with the
United Nations system.

First, peacebuilding needs to be associated
primarily with the post-conflict phase, but it must also
be integrated from the very start in all United Nations
efforts involving conflict-prevention and -resolution
mechanisms.

Secondly, the original design and interventions
should be more comprehensive and long-term so as to
suit contemporary and future environments, as well as
be able to adapt to the changing nature of conflicts.
Therefore, the Security Council must work closely with
the Peacebuilding Commission to ensure the proper
financing and use ofthe resources of the Peacebuilding
Fund and field support offices.

Thirdly, it is critical that the United Nations system
achieve greater internal coherence among its agencies
and country teams on the ground, as well as with host
countries and regional structures and organizations.
National ownership, the mobilization of civil society
and close cooperation with Special Representatives,
special missions and peacekeeping operations are also
crucial to a successful peacebuilding architecture.

The peacebuilding architecture should fully
incorporate the goals and principles of the Human
Rights Council and the responsibility to protect, inter
alia, by adopting tailor-made strategies. No two conflict
situations are the same, as each one is tied to multiple
different domestic and international actors with varied
agendas. Hence, the peacebuilding architecture requires
multisectoral and interdisciplinary strategies aimed
at national and local ownership, capacity-building,
inclusive institution-building, mutual accountability
and risk management, as well as at building resilience.
That involves the intersection of security and
development, with distinct pillars, including reforms in
public safety, the rule oflaw, good governance, justice,
human rights, reconciliation and ending impunity. In
addition, other key priorities include socioeconomic
reconstruction and psychosocial rehabilitation.

In order to ensure peace and security, my country,
Kazakhstan, is undertaking multidimensional
measures at the national, regional and international
levels in the fields of preventive diplomacy, economic
and social development and inter-ethnic and
interreligious dialogue. We have adopted our National
Strategy 2050, which provides the conditions needed
for the ongoing equitable and inclusive political and
economic development of the country in order to lay
the groundwork for social stability.

We are strengthening inter-ethnic and interreligious
unity by fostering dialogue and cooperation among the
130 nationalities residing in the country through the
Assembly of People of Kazakhstan and the triennial
Congress of the Leaders of World and Traditional

Religions. We strongly believe that religion, morality,
ethics and tolerance foster peace and stability, and we
have therefore initiated a high-level forum on religions
for peace, to be held in May in New York, under the
patronage of the President of the General Assembly.

Last year President Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan
proposed the elaboration of a global development
strategy to eliminate conflicts for all time, and the
allocation of 1 per cent ofnational military expenditures
to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals
Fund.
In addition, Kazakhstan provides humanitarian
and development assistance to the most vulnerable
countries. I hope that the ongoing joint initiatives
between my Government and the United Nations
Development Programme in Africa and the Economic
and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific in the
Pacific region on behalf of the small island developing
States and our work with the Caribbean Community
demonstrate our continuing commitment to peace,
security, stability and prosperity.

We are determined to share in the efforts of the
global community to build a more environmentally
friendly world, with a particular focus on water,
energy and nuclear security, which are the pillars of
my country's campaign for election to a non-permanent
seat in the Security Council for the term 2017-2018. We
are strongly committed to contributing to the extent
possible to the Council's peacebuilding mandate.

