The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ghana.

It is an honour for us to preside over this meeting,
which has been convened this evening to adopt the
resolution on Lebanon for which the world has been
waiting. The anxiety that has gripped the world since
the outbreak of the conflict and that has led some to
accuse the Security Council of inaction can now be laid
to rest. And our deepest wish is that today will mark a
truly new beginning not only for the people of Israel
and Lebanon, but for the entire region.

We wish to join others in expressing our profound
gratitude to Ambassador Jean-Marc de La Sabliere,
Permanent Representative of France, and Ambassador
John Bolton, Permanent Representative of the United
States of America, their Governments and their respective
teams for working tirelessly to achieve the consensus
that the resolution before us represents. Their dogged
determination to achieve results has enabled the
Council to do its duty to the peoples of the world.

The presence in our midst of United States
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and her colleagues
from France, the United Kingdom, Greece, Denmark
and the State of Qatar underscores the fact no other
body can surpass the Security Council in the force of
its moral authority and its sheer diplomatic clout when
it acts in unity and remains faithful to its
responsibilities. We expect nothing less when we come
to grapple with the fundamental question of a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the long-
standing Middle East question. Clearly, the solution is
within the grasp of the Security Council, and we must
resolve to work together in a spirit of compromise to
bring to a speedy end the pain and suffering of the
peoples of that troubled region.

Therefore, I fully share the views of other
speakers who have stressed that the adoption of this
resolution should lead to the immediate cessation of
hostilities between Israel and Lebanon in order to bring
prompt relief to the 1 million displaced people who are
in dire need of humanitarian assistance and those who
suffer the rockets and the bombing.

Beyond that, I wish to reiterate that the adoption
of this resolution should also be seen, as others have
also noted, as an important step in the search for a
comprehensive solution to the Middle East question,
the core of which is the Palestinian question. In that
regard, the President of the Republic of Ghana, His
Excellency Mr. John Agyekum Kufuor, and the
Ghanaian Government intend to work closely with the
other members of the Council in implementing the
two-State solution, which entails an independent
Palestinian State living side by side with Israel within
internationally recognized borders. The international
community, especially the Security Council, should
leave no stone unturned in tackling this problem and
seeing to its successful realization.

It is for those reasons that Ghana, which has
consistently supported the international consensus on
this question, decided to co-sponsor the present
resolution, and we are happy that it has been adopted
unanimously. Ghana, as a troop contributor to the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, is also
happy that the resolution seeks to enhance the Force's
capacity and believes that that enhancement will make
a significant and positive contribution to the search for
peace in the Middle East.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call now on His Excellency Mr. Tarek Mitri,
Minister of Culture and Special Envoy of the Council
of Ministers of Lebanon.

