Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for his biannual report in
implementation of resolution 1593 (2005). Like previous
reports, this report confirms the lack of cooperation on the
part of the Government of the Sudan with the
International Criminal Court (ICC): arrest warrants have
not been executed, the Court's jurisdiction is not
acknowledged, the authority of the Security Council and
its resolution 1593 (2005) are being questioned, and no
national judicial procedure has been undertaken.

In 2005, when we adopted resolution 1593
(2005), despite differences among us regarding the
Court, the Council showed its will to not tolerate that
the terrible crimes committed in Darfur go unpunished.
The resolution was triggered by the recommendations
of the Commission of Inquiry, which we had requested
to investigate the situation in Darfur and which had
confirmed the commission of mass violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law and the
existence of crimes against humanity and war crimes.

France supported the adoption of the resolution,
because it considered that transferring the case to the
ICC was the best way to ensure that the perpetrators of
the crimes would be judged impartially and in an
efficient manner, and to send a strong message, beyond
Darfur even, about the Security Council's
determination to combat impunity for the most serious
crimes against the human conscience.

In the days prior to the adoption of resolution
1593 (2005), the Security Council had successively
adopted resolution 1590 (2005) in order to help the
African Union with its surveillance and protection
mechanism and resolution 1591 (2005) in order to
bring the conflict to an end. Resolution 1593 (2005)

09-6333]
was aimed at ending impunity and was therefore part
of a wider-ranging and coherent policy aimed at
re-establishing peace and security in Darfur. The action
of the Court and the Security Council have been
complementary, therefore, although independent.
France is convinced that there is no contradiction
between justice and peace, and that combating
impunity is one of the conditions of lasting peace.

It is true that political timing and judicial timing
do not always coincide. The needs presented by a
peace process can at times differ from the requirements
of judicial process. That explains the presence in the
Rome Statute of a mechanism that allows the Security
Council to suspend investigations or proceedings
undertaken by the ICC for a year. This mechanism,
whose effects are temporary by definition, can only be
used when the interests of peace and security
absolutely requires such use. Its purpose can never be
to permit impunity for crimes before the Court. It is
clear that requirements for invoking this mechanism
have not been met in the case of Darfur.

Whatever the case, it is not up to the Security
Council to intervene in the independent judicial
decision-making by the ICC and its Prosecutor.
However, it should demand that everyone respect a
resolution adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter
that imposes on the Government of the Sudan and all
other parties to the Darfur conflict full cooperation
with the ICC and its Prosecutor and to provide all
necessary assistance, and which firmly demands that
all States and regional and international organizations
concerned cooperate fully.

I note the positive indications provided by
Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo on cooperation with the
Arab League, the African Union and the Government
of Qatar. I also note the recognition that he has
expressed here for the assistance provided by some
countries in the investigation on the attack against
Haskanita, which led to a first hearing in October.

I would like to reiterate that France believes
firmly both in the authority of the Security Council, as
the main United Nations body for maintaining peace
and security, and in that of the International Criminal
Court, as the judicial body responsible for punishing
the most serious crimes in violation of international
humanitarian law and human rights, to which the
Council has entrusted the mission of prosecuting the
atrocities committed in Darfur.
Everything should be done to bring about an
urgent settlement to the conflict in Darfur and facilitate
mediation efforts. Fighting impunity is a prerequisite
that will contribute to restoring lasting peace and
stability in the region.

