Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset, on behalf of my authorities, to warmly
thank you, Sir, for having organized this debate and for
your presence among us. I also offer you our best wishes
for your success in Equatorial Guinea's presidency of
the Security Council this month.

I thank the Secretary-General, the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation
of Rwanda for their very enlightening briefings. I
also welcome the presence among us of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Cote d'Ivoire and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation and
Regional Integration of Gabon.

I further wish a happy new year to our
Chinese colleagues.

The phenomenon of the use of mercenaries
constitutes a real threat to the peace and security of
the African continent and of all the other regions of
the world where it is developing. Mercenary activity
is a multiplier of instability, upon which it feeds and
which it then increases. As foreign nationals and
non-members of regular armed forces who are recruited
in return for financial or material remuneration to
participate directly in armed conflicts, mercenaries are
not constrained by borders and thrive on the instability
and fragility of States. We have seen that phenomenon
in the past, particularly in Sierra Leone, Liberia and
Cote d'Ivoire in the early 20005. We continue to see
it today in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
the Central African Republic and in the Sudan. The
impact of mercenaries' activities is well known. What
first comes to mind is their destabilization of States
and undermining of constitutional order. We must also
consider their involvement in the illicit trafficking of
arms and natural resources. Finally, and above all, we
must address their multiple violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law, in such forms
as sexual and gender-based violence, torture, forced
displacement and the recruitment of child soldiers.
Those violations were documented in the latest report
of the Working Group on the use of mercenaries as
a means of violating human rights and impeding the
exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination
(see A/73/303).

I would also like to raise the issue of private
security and military companies. The latter must
of course be distinguished from the phenomenon
of mercenarism, since their activities are subject to
international regulation, as embodied, for example, in
the International Code of Conduct for Private Security
Service Providers and the Montreux Document. We
must, however, remain vigilant to ensure that those
private companies do not carry out destabilizing
activities in the countries in which they are deployed.

Given that observation, the question arises as to
how to curb the phenomenon of mercenarism. The first
line of response is prevention. While mercenaries fuel
conflicts, they are also a symptom ofthe root causes ofthe
instability and fragility of certain States. In that regard,
strengthening the rule of law - in particular improving
governance and combating corruption - investing in
educating young people, combating climate change
and developing cross-border cooperation are all factors
that, by their very nature, can address those root causes
of conflict. Accordingly, we welcome the efforts of the
African Union (AU), African subregional organizations
and the States members of the AU through the
implementation of the Silencing the Guns by 2020
initiative, which we fully support. We also commend
all the work undertaken to implement the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the African Union's
Agenda 2063, the launch of the African Continental
Free Trade Area and the measures taken to combat the
proliferation of, and illicit trade in, small arms and light
weapons, such as the 2010 adoption of the Kinshasa
Convention at the level of the Economic Community of
Central African States.

The second part of the solution lies in dealing
with the phenomenon of mercenarism in and of
itself. The first step involves providing a security
response, such as through the robust action of certain
peacekeeping operations, including the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic and the Intervention
Brigade ofthe United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Such a security response is also predicated upon the
action of African peace support operations - whose
development and predictable and sustainable financing
we fully support - and the activation or reactivation of
joint bilateral commissions of a number of States.

The security response is clearly only a first step
to addressing the phenomenon of mercenarism. The
response must also be political. In countries in which
mercenary groups are active, political processes must
consider foreign combatants as an integral part of any
strategy to dismantle armed groups. In that regard,
the implementation of demobilization, disarmament,
reintegration and repatriation programmes for former
members of armed groups who are engaged in a peace
process is often a necessary condition for the return
to peace and national reconciliation. Moreover, with
regard to demobilization, disarmament, reintegration
and repatriation programmes, the issue of the fate of
child soldiers is key to ensuring their demobilization
and possible repatriation to their countries of origin,
as well as to preventing their re-recruitment. Lastly,
the issue of submitting foreign combatants to the
judicial system should also be a part of the equation,
whether through ordinary or special tribunals or the
International Criminal Court.

Given the threat posed by mercenary activities, only
close international cooperation among States, regional
organizations and the United Nations will enable us to
act effectively. Rest assured of France's commitment to
this struggle.

