Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany, Mr. Guido Westerwelle, for convening this
important debate, and to congratulate his delegation on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council during
the month of July and the chairmanship of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. Mexico had
the honour of chairing the Working Group during its
term as non-permanent member of the Security Council
in the biennium 2009-2010. We are well aware of the
responsibilities involved.

Resolution 1998 (2011), adopted this morning,
represents a positive step, as it gives both the Security
Council and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General better tools with which to respond to
the serious violations that, regrettably, are committed
against thousands of children in armed conflicts in
various parts of the world.

Over recent years the Security Council has
contributed to improving the United Nations capacities
in the comprehensive protection of children in armed
conflicts. Resolution 1882 (2009) broadened the
criteria whereby parties to a conflict can be listed in
the annexes to the Secretary-General's reports to
include sexual violence and the killing and maiming of
children. Resolution 1998 (2011) includes an additional
criterion: cases of attacks against schools and hospitals
and attacks or threats of attack against protected
persons in relation to schools and hospitals.

This new criterion is particularly important,
considering that attacks against schools and hospitals
not only threaten thousands of children, teachers,
doctors and support staff but also represent an attack
on the future of societies, depriving boys and girls of
the inalienable right to education and health and
therefore undermining the development of the country.

The Security Council has reaffirmed today its
unequivocal commitment to protect children in
situations of armed conflicts and is sending a clear
message that the commitments imposed on parties by
international law regarding the security and well-being
of children must be respected and all abuses of or
violence against children avoided.

Nevertheless, such violations will continue to be
committed as long as we do not sanction those
responsible for those crimes and do not fight impunity
at all levels. It is important that national authorities and
the parties concerned take the relevant legal measures
to bring those responsible to justice.

Combating impunity must go hand-in-hand with
the process of reintegrating and caring for children
affected by armed conflict. In this context, the Security
Council must ensure that the sanctions committees
view the protection of children as a core element of
their mandates, and the Council must analyze in detail
the cases where specific committees do not exist so as
to adopt the necessary measures against those who are
responsible for systematic violations against children.

Mexico recognizes the importance of bolstering
the mechanisms that are available to the Working
Group in order to improve its effectiveness and to
contribute to the effective implementation of its
recommendations. We consider that the Working Group
should use all the tools available to it in an efficient
way, including regular field visits and emergency or
informal meetings in the case of serious violations at
the request of the Chairman or any member of the
Working Group. Also, the Security Council must
continue to strengthen the mandates of peace missions
for the protection of children by deploying advisers
and establishing reintegration and support programmes
for victims of sexual violence.

Finally, I would like to recognize especially the
extraordinary work of Special Representative Radhika
Coomaraswamy and her team, as well as Mr. Anthony
Lake and the officials of UNICEF, who together with
civil society are implementing this mechanism and are
working tirelessly on this priority issue on the
international agenda.

