Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Council this month. I also wish to
thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
situation in Afghanistan (S/2011/772*) and extend my
warm greetings to our good colleague, Mr. De Mistura,
whose mission in Afghanistan will come to an end in
the near future. Mr. De Mistura's dedication to
strengthening peace and stability in Afghanistan is
praiseworthy. I would also like to congratulate His
Excellency Mr. Jan Kubis on his appointment as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and wish him all success in his
new assignment.

The briefings by Mr. De Mistura and by
Mr. Jawed Ludin, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs

of Afghanistan and other statements presented today
touched on key points regarding the situation in
Afghanistan, UNAMA's mandate and the prospects of
international engagement following the International
Conference on Afghanistan that was held recently in
Bonn. I therefore wish to take a few minutes to
succinctly touch upon some important developments in
Afghanistan, from the Iranian perspective.

We have always warned about the negative
consequences of the presence of foreign forces in
Afghanistan and the concerns of Afghanistan's
neighbouring countries about the real intentions behind
such presence. I want to refer, here, to the case of the
drone which took off from a United States base in
Kandahar, Afghanistan, and violated Iran's airspace.
That American unmanned spy plane, dubbed the "Beast
of Kandahar", flew 250 kilometres deep into Iranian
territory, up to a region near the city of Tabas, and was
then brought down by the Armed Forces of the Islamic
Republic of Iran.

This act of blatant military air aggression was
unprovoked and in contravention of all universally
accepted, existing international norms relating to
sovereignty and the inviolability of the airspace of
sovereign countries. I wonder why this type of
airplane, which appears to be only in the possession of
United States military intelligence and used mainly to
collect intelligence for spying purposes, should have
crossed into Iranian airspace in violation of established
international law?
It goes without saying, that violating Iranian
territorial air space contravenes the basic purpose of
the United Nations, that is, to maintain international
peace and security and develop friendly relations
among nations. Of course, it is not the first time that
such a malicious incident has occurred, but I hope it
will be the last time. I have already expressed our
strong objection by sending a letter to Their
Excellencies the Secretary-General, the President of
the General Assembly and the President and members
of the Security Council (S/2011/764). The various
aspects of that issue remain under consideration by the
Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran.

In relation to another drone-like operation,
organized and led by United States military bases in
Afghanistan, I would like to refer to a recent case
where a well-trained and equipped American national
spy agent and a member of the United States military
intelligence forces was identified while leaving the
United States base in Bagram, Afghanistan, and
entering Iran. This person was on a covert operation.
His malicious mission was, fortunately, disrupted by
our intelligence. Those are clear examples that the
United States uses its bases in Afghanistan for spying
purposes as well.

In analysing the situation on the ground and the
discussion on longer-term international engagement in
Afghanistan, the concerns of the neighbouring
countries should be seriously taken into account. That
same concern has been expressed by an official of
neighbouring Pakistan in relation to the high number of
civilian casualties owing to drone operations in
Pakistan's northern areas.

It is because of those concerns that we maintain
the strong belief that long-term international
engagement should not lead to long-term presence and
the establishment of permanent military bases or
military presence in Afghanistan. We all know that
foreign forces entered Afghanistan in the name of
countering terrorism and establishing peace and
security. A decade has passed. According to many
official reports, there has been an increase in the
degree of insecurity as compared to the situation last
year. The prolonged presence of foreign military forces
in whatever form and under whatever justifications
therefore will not bring about peace and stability in
Afghanistan, but rather it will provide a breeding
ground for terrorists and extremist groups to continue
their operations.

The other issue is the continuation and increase in
the cultivation of narcotic drugs, which is still the most
serious challenge not only for Afghanistan but also for
those along the drug trafficking routes and the
countries of destination. That menace has hindered the
country's advance towards development and has put at
risk the social cohesion of Afghanistan, along with that
of its neighbours. Moreover, narcotic drugs, as the
financial source of terrorism in Afghanistan, have
served as another breeding ground for terrorists,
extremists and illegal groups who attempt to
destabilize the Afghan Government.

On 28 November, Iran's Minister of the Interior
took part in the ministerial meeting of the counter-
narcotic Triangular Initiative held in Kabul. Since its
launch in 2007, that Initiative has promoted
information exchange and intelligence-led operations
targeting the major transnational networks, while
building confidence. The drug control operations
coordinated by the joint planning within that
framework have resulted in the seizure of several tons
of illicit drugs and the arrest of many drug traffickers.

Yet another issue is the long-standing problem of
Afghan refugees. We look forward to the international
conference planned for the spring of 2012, which is to
be held with the participation of Iran and Afghanistan
and aimed at exploring a comprehensive long-term
strategy for resolving the issue of refuges. We hope
that that conference will lead to concrete and
substantive outcomes that can offer real solutions. We
have hosted an average of about 3 million Afghan
nationals over the past three decades. At present, more
than 1 million Afghan refugees are registered in Iran,
while a greater number of unregistered Afghans are
also living in our country. For all these years, Afghan
nationals have continued to enjoy Iran's educational
and welfare facilities, among other things, as well as to
benefit from the same subsidies that Iranian nationals
receive. We again urge the international community to
continue to strengthen and expedite its efforts to create
the conditions conducive to the sustainable repatriation
of refugees and their full rehabilitation and
reintegration in their homeland.

On regional cooperation, we have continued our
talks with Afghan authorities on a bilateral, trilateral
and regional basis to further strengthen our
cooperation, particularly in relation to increasing our
coordination on security matters, counter-narcotic
efforts, illegal immigration and the completion of
developmental projects, including the construction of
roads and railways. Fortunately, we have been able to
establish a good record. For example, with respect to
railroads, we will soon witness the completion of a
railway network in the region that will connect the
landlocked Central Asian countries and Afghanistan to
the Persian Gulf. By integrating Afghanistan to the
railway system in Central Asia, Afghan economic
integration in the region will be eased to a great
degree.

In the trilateral summit meeting held in Tehran in
June, the Presidents of Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan
agreed to join forces in combating militancy. All sides
stressed their commitment to efforts aimed at
eliminating extremism, militancy and terrorism. In that
respect, a number of projects have already been
finished and some new agreements reached. We look
forward to more agreements on bilateral, trilateral and
multilateral bases.

We are now in the preparatory phase for an
upcoming trilateral summit in Islamabad between the
heads of State of Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan. The
Deputy Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the three
countries met in Tehran on 16 October. We hope that
the improved political atmosphere will permit the
continuation of that initiative.

Earlier this month we held the Bonn Conference.
The Conference was an opportunity for neighbouring
countries and international partners to exchange views
on how to move ahead in creating a stable and
prosperous Afghan-led process. We hope that the
outcome of the Bonn Conference will help to develop
measures aimed at addressing common challenges on
political and security issues, lead to concrete steps to
eliminate extremism, militancy and terrorism, and pave
the way for increased economic prosperity for
Afghanistan with the active participation of all the
neighbouring and regional countries in the
infrastructural and developmental projects in line with
the wishes of Afghan people and Government. Any
initiatives elaborated in the Bonn Conference should
strengthen the trust between Afghanistan and its
neighbours through active engagement, interaction and
partnerships.

The neighbouring countries of Afghanistan share
critical interests in Afghanistan's security and long-
term stability and have a role to play in promoting
Afghanistan's socio-economic development.
Obviously, the prospect of a stable and flourishing
Afghanistan would be an ideal situation for its
neighbours and the wider region, and in particular for
the Islamic Republic of Iran. The continuing
engagement between Afghanistan and its neighbours
and regional partners in the areas of trade, economic
development and infrastructure development must
therefore be supported. In that connection, we should
also emphasize the central role of the United Nations in
coordinating international efforts in Afghanistan,
which is of paramount importance and enjoys our full
support.

