Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): My delegation
congratulates you, Madam President, on your country's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of March. Our delegation will always
cooperate with you and with the Security Council
under your presidency. We thank the Secretary-General
(S/2019/191) for his most recent report on South Sudan.
I would also like to welcome Mr. David Shearer and to
thank him for his courageous presentation. And I thank
our sister Ms. Jial for her briefing.
I would like to take this opportunity to wish the
women of South Sudan, Africa and all around the globe
a happy and peaceful International Women's Day. With
regard to the remarks by my friend the Ambassador of
Germany, one day we will reach 50 per cent, but 35 per
cent is better and far more progressive than much of
what is happening in many countries, including a
number of member States represented in this Chamber.
We will get there.

Since the signing ofthe Revitalized Agreement, the
overall situation in South Sudan on the security, peace
and economy fronts has improved noticeably. We are
seeing the effect of the confidence-building measures
between the signatories, which are a prerequisite for
implementing peace, in the return and presence of
many of the opposition leaders in Juba. Again with
regard to Mr. Heusgen's comments, Rick Machar's
absence from Juba still falls within the provisions of
the Peace Agreement. We have an eight-month period
that ends at the end of May. I think Mr. Shearer was the
last person to meet with Mr. Machar in Khartoum and
Mr. Machar assured him that he will be in Juba before
the end of May.

The peace implementation is progressing slowly
but surely. President Salva Kiir Mayardit, accompanied
by some of the opposition leaders who recently returned
to Juba, is currently touring greater Bahr El-Ghazal by
land, which is a sign that there is security. The national
dialogue regional conferences have started, and the first
concluded successfully in Wau just last week. The next
will be in Upper Nile in the next few days, and the final
national conference will be convened in the greater
Equatoria region before the end of May. Refugees
are returning voluntarily in large numbers. Internally
displaced persons are leaving protection-of-civilians
sites in sizeable numbers. The economy is already
showing some early signs of recovery. Consumer goods
and commodities have become available, with prices
falling in Juba markets.

While these indications are good and positive
to announce, we cannot remain silent about the
challenges that continue to exist. We all know that
peace implementation is moving very slowly, due to
inadequate funding. Nevertheless, while we hope that
some in the international community will continue to
assist, the Government of the Republic of South Sudan
will carry on with the implementation process using
whatever means and resources are available to it.

In conclusion, the situation in South Sudan has
continued to improve since the signing ofthe Revitalized
Agreement, and the signatories are determined to
implement it in good faith. Accordingly, we urge the
Council, including those who are sceptical, to join with
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the African Union in convincing the few opposition
movements that opted out of signing the Agreement to
sign it andjoin the peace process in South Sudan.

