Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2502
(2019), renewing the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). By this resolution,
the Security Council seeks to endorse the emergence
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo into a new
phase of its history and to mark the importance of
the partnership between the United Nations and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in order to
contribute jointly to the protection of civilians and to
stabilize the country.

That is why the Council calls in particular on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations to jointly develop a transition strategy that
will make it possible to clearly determine the priorities
to be implemented in order to meet the prerequisites
for the eventual withdrawal of MONUSCO, in what
the independent strategic review called a transitional
compact for lasting peace. This initiative will make
it possible to concentrate efforts on the east of the
country, which is still in the grip of violent clashes,
while pursuing efforts to consolidate the State and
its institutions. Through the resolution, the Security
Council also recalls its expectations regarding
the protection of civilians, which is at the heart of
MONUSCO'S Chapter VII mandate and which is the
responsibility of the entire Mission.

But beyond MONUSCO, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo will need the help of all its partners in
order to fully implement the reforms necessary for the
lasting stabilization of the country. I am thinking of
justice and security sector reform, and the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process in particular,
both of which are essential to ending the violence
that continues to affect parts of the country. I am also
thinking of the development programmes carried out by
President Tshilombo Tshisekedi and his Government,
which are aimed at promoting more equitable access to
available resources and basic services and at thereby
reducing tensions, particularly between communities.
The United Nations, international financial institutions
and bilateral and multilateral partners must all mobilize
in support of the Democratic Republic of the Congo so
as to enable it to achieve these objectives. MONUSCO
will not be able to do so alone. The Democratic Republic
of the Congo can count on the support of France. We
have already planned support of €300 million over the
next five years.
Finally, in addition to these partners, it is first and
foremost the region that is called upon to mobilize. The
Great Lakes region has enormous development potential
and the States of the region have a collective destiny to
develop it. This objective has been rooted in the Addis
Ababa Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
since 2013. The eradication of hostile groups, the
normalization of the extractive sector, legal and fiscal
harmonization and the establishment of regional
cooperation in customs and police matters require the
commitment of all States and subregional organizations.

France hopes that all the political leaders of the
region will fully seize the available opportunities to
definitively turn the page of the past and build together
a future in partnership.

