Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like first of all to thank Peru for convening this
important debate on the issue of tripartite cooperation
among the Security Council, the Secretariat and
troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs)
in peacekeeping operations, as well as for inviting
Egypt to participate as one of the largest contributors
to military and police contingents in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. This meeting is especially
timely in the light of the important debates taking place
at the United Nations on the reform and enhancement of
the peacekeeping system. I also express my thanks and
appreciation for the important briefings we heard earlier
in the meeting and to those speakers who preceded me.

We are aware that peacekeeping reform initiatives
tend to focus on strengthening regular capacities and
operational aspects ofpeacekeeping despite the fact that
many ofthese initiatives originate from Boutros-Ghali's
An Agenda for Peace (A/47/277), the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809), the report of High-Level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and finally
the current Secretary-General's Action for Peace (A4P)
initiative, all of which comprehensively addressed
the various political and operational dimensions
of peacekeeping.

The prevailing focus on the technical and
operational elements of peacekeeping effectiveness and
performance has shifted to carrying out consultations
between the Security Council, TCCs and PCCs in
recent years, mainly on the operational and technical
requirements for contingents and staff in performing
certain tasks, although the increasing complexity ofthe
operational environment of peacekeeping operations on
the ground highlights the importance ofa comprehensive
review of the entire mission in order to ensure better
design and implementation of peacekeeping mandates
for better results.

There is a need for a clear political strategy that
supports the implementation of the mandate within
a comprehensive vision for sustained peace. Those
present may agree with me that the availability of a
political framework constitutes a key indicator for
measuring the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations
and determining their suitability for action in specific
contexts, which necessarily differ from one case
to another.

We believe that it is important for the scope and
nature of the dialogue between the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the TCCs/PCCs to be developed.
Although extensive consultations are ongoing in that
regard, we as TCCs continue to see the absence of a
strategic dimension in those dialogues that would
make TCCs real partners in efforts to ensure that
peacekeeping operations meet their strategic objectives.
The current format of the consultations, in accordance
with resolution 1353 (2001), does not rise to the desired
level of triangular cooperation. There is therefore a
need to rethink this old and still existing format.

Based on its continued commitment to enhancing
the effectiveness ofthe peacekeeping system, and being
aware of the enormous challenges facing peacekeeping,
Egypt, as a major TCC, was at the forefront of the
countries supporting the Secretary-General's A4P
initiative and the joint commitments. In the context of
its readiness to assume the presidency of the African
Union, Egypt took the lead in placing African TCCs
and peacekeeping host countries at the centre of the
efforts to implement A4P initiative. In November 2018,
Cairo hosted the first high-level regional conference,
which provided a unique platform for the key actors of
the peacekeeping system to discuss ways to enhance
the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations from a
global perspective that addresses the strategic, political
and operational dimensions across a given operation.

The regional conference resulted in the Cairo
Roadmap for Enhancing the Performance of
Peacekeeping Operations from Mandate to Exit. The
Cairo Roadmap defines the concept of performance
to reflect the broad range of responsibilities and
obligations underpinned by the A4P initiative and
the joint commitments. It focuses in particular on
the priority of conducting field analyses based on
a comprehensive consultative process among the
Mission's leadership, host countries, TCCs/PCCs and
active regional organizations, with the conclusions
and recommendations arising from this analysis to
serve as an important source of information for the
Security Council when reviewing, restructuring and
withdrawing missions.

Hence, the Cairo Roadmap develops the concept
of tripartite consultations into one of quadrilateral
consultations including host countries, TCCs/
PCCs, the Security Council and the Secretariat. The
Roadmap also sets operational and technical capacities
on a par with the policy priorities and the essential
contribution of peacekeeping operations to building
and sustaining peace.

I would also like to point out that the Cairo
Roadmap has benefited from extensive consultations
over the past several months to reflect the experience,
expertise, wisdom and aspirations of a wide range of
key actors and stakeholders, including TCCs and host
countries, most of which are African countries that
contributed to the formulation and development of this
initiative and expressed strong support for its content,
which represents African leadership and ownership.

I therefore call on the Security Council, which
has the inherent competence to maintain international
peace and security, to give serious consideration to the
practical solutions put forward by the Cairo Roadmap
to the challenges undermining the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations, including the strengthening
of mechanisms for consultation among the Council, the
Secretariat, TCCs and host countries.

The Force Commander of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali noted the great challenges and serious and complex
operational difficulties facing his forces in Mali. I
would like to express my thanks and appreciation to
the Force Commander and to his forces, while pointing
out that the most serious tasks in Mali are undertaken
by Egyptian forces, as Egypt is one of the main
contributions to that major United Nations operation in
a sisterly African country.

In conclusion, I would like to thank you once again,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting at a
very important time and during a challenging period for
peacekeeping operations, which requires us all to work
together and demonstrate the genuine will and support
necessary to make United Nations peacekeeping
operations more suited to the purpose established for
them in order to achieve the desired objectives.

