Mr. Ndombasi (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I find myself in a position
that reminds me of the teachings of the "Spanish
Machiavelli", Baltazar Gracian y Morales, about what
one should be and what one should do, in his book The
Courtier's Oracle. I appear here as a courtier, trying to
walk on eggs without crushing them, and obliged to
reassure, to explain and to take a position.

At the outset, I convey to you, Mr. President, and
to the other members of the Council my heartfelt
congratulations on your initiative following the visit of
the Security Council mission to us in Africa.

I should also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of the People's Republic of China and
convey to him our gratitude and our congratulations on
his success in carrying out his mandate as President of
the Council last month. This is the moment to take
advantage of the good omens for your mandate as it
begins, Mr. President, and for us to pay an emphatic
tribute while voicing the hope that the work to be done
under your leadership will be crowned with success so
that a man of the court, like myself, will not vacillate.

The Lusaka Accords, United Nations resolutions
and the United Nations Charter are symbols that guide
us, the Congolese of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to show good will throughout and readiness to
hasten the end to the war to begin national
reconciliation.

Here, in this building, President Laurent-Desire
Kabila addressed the Council, and the terms, the words
and the meaning he imparted are still alive in the minds
of members to show that what I am saying is not
empty, flattering rhetoric, that rather it reflects
commitments, assurances and clarifications I wish to
provide during my statement. The arrival and address
of President Kabila prompted a great deal of hope, as it
led to the adoption of resolution 1291 (1999). That
followed the adoption of resolution 1234 (1999), which
is still alive with the potential it affords us to bring a
speedy end to war.

This good will of all heads of States that are
signatories of the Lusaka Accords is being manifested
through subsequent provisions, particularly those of
Kampala, which set out the process for establishing a
climate of security for our people and for United
Nations forces, who, it goes without saying, benefit
from enhanced security when they are operating in a
country that is not at war.

For us the mere presence of uninvited foreign
forces is an act of war, and nothing can ensure the
security necessary to offer to the troop-contributing
countries who send their children to help us solve our
problems. That security is unstable and fraught with
unpredictable elements, since uninvited foreign armies
occupy the country and push their hostilities to the
point of fighting each other.

In this year of the Africa Cup and Euro 2000,
people can say whatever they please, because we do
not know the hidden sense of their insults; a period to
flex their muscles to the detriment of the infrastructure,
the people and the territorial integrity and national
sovereignty of the Congolese people, and this in
accordance with the symbol which is the United
Nations Charter. As long as these gladiator brothers are
in our country, nothing can be guaranteed, since they
are already in the third round of their championship.
No one can guarantee what will happen from one
moment to the next, even after a ceasefire. No one can
guarantee that clashes will not resume if they remain
on our territory.

What we call aggression against our country by
our brothers from the east remains the key to further
developments and the events that have prompted us to
meet in a quest for peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. With regard to the security of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), the recent
evacuation of 20 of its representatives from Kisangani
shows that as long as all these people are in our
country fighting one another, there will be no security
for MONUC. Evacuating them, given the logic of
events, was an obligation.

As a Minister of State, I am duty-bound to
provide assurances that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo needs the United Nations, needs MONUC. It
would be ridiculous for us to need MONUC, while at
the same time we complicate its work. I can give the
assurance of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that, so far as United Nations
force deployment and the preliminary MONUC
deployment are concerned, in accordance with the
status of forces agreement these forces will enjoy full
freedom of movement; freedom not in the sense such
as Kant spoke of, the freedom of indifference, as in: "I
do what I like when I like and cross the street when
there is a red light". Freedom is freedom of knowledge
of cause, because you know the effect that a vehicle
doing as it wishes can have on a body that crosses its
path. Freedom is organized on the form - I discussed
this with Mr. Morjane - of notification. It is only
natural that as a sovereign Government we know when,
who and where MONUC and United Nations aircraft
will operate in our skies. This is not harassment. It is
simply something designed to avoid having something
unfortunate happen to these people who we need, as I
said a little while ago, to get us out of this business, to
put an end to the war and for us to be able to resume
national reconstruction.

I must also provide assurances to the effect that
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo negotiated, through me personally, the Lusaka
Accords and President Kabila himself signed them.

We are in favour of the Lusaka Agreement and
call for its full implementation, even if, for example,
the timetable was set inconsistently with provisions of
the Agreement. We did not exploit that inconsistency to
call the Agreement itself into question. We are in
favour of the implementation of the Lusaka Agreement.
Everyone should clearly understand that.

Of course, when the veil that shrouds the future is
torn open, it will be easy to judge, but so long as the
present remains blind, no one can forecast with
precision what is going to happen. That is why the
Lusaka Agreement was signed and only later did it
become imperative for the dates on the timetable to be
modified, although the urgency of implementation was
never lessened. Let me repeat: we are in favour of the
Lusaka Agreement and will give our all to ensure that
its implementation is facilitated. My Government
wants inter-Congolese dialogue to be facilitated. Of
course, such facilitation is embodied in one person
whom the Organization of African Unity has appointed
and who has won the agreement of all parties.

My Government has reasons for believing that the
current embodiment of that facilitation is no longer
appropriate to the progress of the operation. We are in
favour of facilitation. We have already asked the
Organization of African Unity to appoint someone else
who, with the consent of the parties, can facilitate
dialogue among all Congolese.

Let me stress that, in the midst of all this, we are
a sovereign Government that is continuing to govern. It
may happen that a lack of prior coordination or
synchronicity between one particular facilitator and our
sovereign decisions leads to contradictions. Let me
assure the Council, however, that we favour
facilitation. We feel that, with respect to ensuring that
the role of facilitator is filled, the ball is in the United
Nations court. I hope this is done soon, contrary to
prior experience, when it took a long time to fill the
post of facilitator, through no fault of our own but as a
result of repeated obstructions from other sides. We are
prepared to work with the new embodiment of
facilitator. Let me repeat that we are for facilitation and
the implementation of the Lusaka Agreement.

So far as we are concerned, the Security
Council's horizons are crisscrossed with references
guiding its actions. These are, in addition to the Lusaka
Agreement, which we have signed, the resolutions of
the Security Council and the United Nations Charter -
the trinity of our Bible. That is how we see it.

In conclusion, let me reassure the Council about
MONUC, which we summoned to our country. When
intolerable and repeated massacres occurred in parts of
our country not under our control, our people were
compelled to express their profound outrage at the
incompetence of the United Nations forces and their
inability to launch such an operation. I know that some
rocks have been hurled at the United Nations building,
but I do not believe that Mr. Morjane is ready to offer
himself as a target for those directed at Mr. Bernard
Kouchner. We will see to it that such incidents do not
recur, though we do understand how young students, in
a city of 5 million that is up in arms and outraged,
might throw some stones - Congolese stones, not
Kosovar.

I give Mr. Morjane my word that he can work in
complete freedom and in full safety and security. He
knows that he can come to my office whenever he
wants and that we have devised an entire system to
facilitate contacts between ourselves and MONUC. We
have established a general government bureau for
MONUC affairs. The commissioner, Mr. Ntuaremba, is
here with me. The bureaucratic apparatus may create
occasional difficulties, but we are determined to solve
any that may arise as we deal with the Security
Council.

I would urge the Council to ensure that its own
resolutions - adopted with unanimity one after the
other, which is rare in itself - support the recent
progress made by our brother Mr. Kofi Annan, who
recently emerged from an atmosphere similar to that
described by Conor Cruise O'Brien in his book To
Katanga and Back. The Council must implement its
own resolutions so that this remarkable progress,
unprecedented in its boldness and courage, can be
exploited to hasten the end of the war and the
restoration of stability. That being our final aim, let us
turn water into electricity, as Paul Eluard put it, and
make each man - even the man to my right - our
brother. That is the aim of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We expect the Council's decisions to speed up
that process. I assure members that my Government is
committed to making inter-Congolese dialogue
easier - to facilitating facilitation and creating
conditions conducive to calm, efficient work
undertaken in secure and safe conditions by the United
Nations forces. We call on all to ensure that this is
handled boldly by, for example, linking phases II and
III, which I hope are soon to follow, in order to hasten
the process. The fact is that we are in a hurry.

