Mr. Hinds: I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for this opportunity for my colleagues and
me to brief the Security Council on the role of United
Nations police in peacekeeping operations and special
political missions. I also look forward to the Council's
adoption of the first Security Council resolution on
United Nations policing. As a Police Commissioner
in the field, that will be a significant outcome, as it
will provide us with the much-needed strategic and
practical guidance that will help us to do our work more
effectively.

I would also like to express my sincere gratitude,
on behalf of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), to the Council and to the police-contributing
countries (PCCs) for the support that we have received
during the Ebola crisis. The commitment and
dedication of the PCC police officers has been and
remains crucial to the maintenance of peace, stability
and security in Liberia in these extremely challenging
and unprecedented times.

My briefing today will focus on the role of
United Nations police in reforming, restructuring and
rebuilding host-State policing institutions. Based on
my experiences in Timor-Leste while working for the
Australian Federal Police in close coordination with the
United Nations Mission there, and in Liberia as head
of the United Nations police component for UNMIL,
I would like to discuss four key factors that I consider
critical to effective police institution-building - clear
and specific mandates for policing, standardized and
cohesive approaches to institution-building, effective
partnerships and, lastly, the skills and expertise that
police components need to effectively build policing
institutions.

First, with regard to developing clear and specific
mandates for policing, the ability of police components
to successfully implement mandates related to police
institution-building is dependent on being provided
with operative language that is specific and realistic and
that clearly acknowledges the political and technical
nature of policing reform. Mandates that outline
specific critical reform areas would be of considerable
assistance in successful institution-building and
mandate implementation. A number of missions have
already benefitted from such mandates, including
the Missions in Timor-Leste and Haiti. And that too
is something that UNMIL's police component is now
focusing on in its impending mandate renewal next
month.

The establishment of governance and accountability
mechanisms for the internal and external management
of police is critical for institution-building. However,
those issues are frequently absent from policing
mandates, which can result in the neglect of reform ofa
more political nature, such as new policing legislation
or the establishment of effective oversight mechanisms.

In Liberia, 11 years since the end ofthe conflict and
the establishment of UNMIL, the legislative framework
for the police remains piecemeal. Moreover, a focus on
the development of a clear legislative framework at a
much earlier stage would have led to those organizational
and institutional limitations being addressed and a
much stronger foundation for subsequent reform being
provided. For example, mandates that include a focus on
implementing community-oriented policing strategies,
which often address the issue of a population's deep-
seated distrust of the police, would improve the more
traditional security-focused mandates by adopting
proven community-oriented processes and approaches
in order to address law-and-order and security concerns.

Secondly, there is a need for a standardized and
cohesive approach to delivering capacity development
at the start ofa mission. Reform planning must be done
in consultation with the host State and key stakeholders,
with the necessary political buy-in to ensure national
ownership, leadership and sustainability. It is essential
that the responsible central ministry within the host
State provide an overarching policy framework and
identify priorities for the reform of policing. It is
also important to formalize the separation of powers
between the ministry and the police in order to ensure
independent policing institutions. These are sensitive
issues, and the value of having the heads of United
Nations missions use their good offices to promote
agreement on those issues at the political level with
host Governments, communities and other stakeholders
cannot be overstated.

Strategic reform planning, including benchmarking,
must occur throughout the life cycle of peacekeeping
missions, and a transition and exit strategy must be
developed for when those benchmarks are achieved.
The approach taken by United Nations police should
include a strategic but joint development plan, utilizing
project management principles in achieving capacity-
building, capability development and reform goals,
as well as setting clear targets that are underpinned
by a robust monitoring and evaluation framework to
measure progress and success. The joint development
frameworks used in UNMIL and in Timor-Leste are
clear examples of a good approach.

Reform in such areas as governance structures,
legal and regulatory frameworks, civilian and
Government oversight, ethical leadership and enabling
services are all essential for ensuring sustainable,
democratic policing services and must be included
in any strategic police development plan. Building
professional institutions requires United Nations police
to help host-State counterparts create efficient human
resource systems, transparent budgeting and public
procurement processes and functioning logistics and
fleet management structures, inter alia. In that respect,
the Police Division's Strategic Guidance Framework for
International Police Peacekeeping will provide a sound
model for building policing institutions and will allow
for a more structured and standardized approach for
United Nations police.

Thirdly, with respect to effective partnerships, the
sustainability of host-State police development efforts
depends on continued support after the end of United
Nations peacekeeping. Partnership building with
United Nations country teams, coupled with bilateral,
multilateral, regional and local partners, is critical from
the outset of a mission to enabling close coordination
and integration of priorities.

The early engagement of partners at the start-up
of a mission provides for a more collaborative and
cooperative platform for development and reform, and
strengthens transitional arrangements at the end of any
United Nations mission. For instance, in Liberia, the
United States of America has well-placed resources
to continue building the capacity of specialized police
resources, while Sweden has invested logistical and
technical support in the development host-State police
forensic capabilities.

Additionally, the further inclusion of police in the
United Nations delivering as one context should be
considered through a police development coordination
framework to ensure a holistic and cohesive approach
to donor activities in relation to police reform and
institution-building. The Global Focal Point for Police,
Justice and Corrections has also been a useful initiative
for coordinating rule-of-law partnerships, as it provides
a mechanism for joint delivery and offers a single point
for United Nations police, justice and corrections
interventions. It has been used successfully in Liberia in
relation to a number of projects designed to strengthen
security-sector responses during the Ebola crisis.

Lastly, with regard to the skills and expertise
that police components need to effectively build
police institutions, in many cases successful
institution-building also calls for transforming
organizational cultures. However, that is a significantly
time- and resource-intensive process and takes years,
even in well-developed organizations. At best, United
Nations police will be able to work with host- State police
colleagues to lay the foundations for a transformation
process, such as establishing clear governance
instruments, appropriate training and revised incentive
structures. But even that requires targeted, highly
specialized skill sets that go way beyond the generalist
police profile that has constituted the bulk of PCC
contributions to United Nations policing over the years.

Experts are needed in such areas as finance,
human resources and fleet and facility management,
and also for strategic planning, legal and policy
development and project management. The complexity
of police-mandated tasks is growing, at a time when
demands for delivery are increasing and accelerating
and resources are becoming more constrained and
scarce.

The continuing mismatch between mandates and
resources must prompt a candid discussion among
missions, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and police-contributing countries as to the type of skill
sets necessary for institution-building that can be made
available to peacekeeping operations and how gaps can
be filled with civilian police experts deployed within
police components. I have seen the success of that
model in Timor-Leste and in Liberia. When we have
the right people with the right skills in the right roles,
the results are decisively positive.

The challenges in obtaining appropriate skill sets
are well known, and considerable efforts have been
made over recent years to develop innovative approaches
to address them. However, we must recognize that
challenges still remain. This is a key issue that could
be considered further by the independent panel during
their strategic review of peacekeeping operations and
special political missions.

I believe the Department ofPeacekeeping Operations
is delivering on its police institution-building mandate,
but I also believe that we can collectively do more.
Opportunities exist for Member States, the Security
Council and the Secretariat to improve our readiness
and our delivery. That can be achieved through careful
and specific mandate development and implementation
that is based on lessons learned and adapted to the
evolving operating environments in which we find
ourselves, delivered through standardized international
approaches to institution-building, supported by the
correct mix of skills and expertise and underpinned
by committed and inclusive partnerships with all the
relevant actors. With the Council's ongoing support and
influence, we can successfully contribute to sustainable
peace through efficient and effective delivery on
police-related mandates.

I thank you again, Madam President, for affording
me this opportunity to brief the Council on United
Nations police institution-building.

