Mr. Lamani (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, Sir,
I take this opportunity to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. We are confident that, under
your able leadership, the Council will successfully
complete the tasks before it. I wish also to thank you
for convening this open meeting, which will help
heighten the international community's concern with
respect to the situation in Somalia. We hope that
debates of this kind will continue, because they
enhance the transparency of the United Nations and of
the Council's decision-making process.

The international community warmly welcomes
the progress along the path of peace and national
reconciliation in Somalia that has come about thanks to
the perseverance and commendable efforts of
international and regional organizations and of
neighbouring States, notably the Republic of Djibouti,
whose active role in the quest for a lasting political
settlement of the crisis in Somalia is well known.

We reaffirm our conviction that the United
Nations should continue its search for lasting peace and
stability in Somalia, in cooperation with the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the
League of Arab States, the Organization of African
Unity and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, as well as with other organizations.
Here, let me make particular mention of the tireless and
praiseworthy efforts of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, and of the important role he is playing in this
process.

We agree with the View expressed in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2001/963) on the need for a
mechanism that would facilitate a uniform approach
and exchange of information among all outside parties
with an interest in a lasting peace in Somalia. We also
welcome the Secretary-General's proposal on
establishing a committee of friends of Somalia to focus
on ways and means of drawing attention to Somalia's
needs in the area of national reconciliation as well as to
help mobilize resources for rehabilitation and
development. We agree with the Secretary-General that
the peace process in Somalia needs support, that the
rule of law should be established and that national
political and judicial institutions should be restored.

As the report says, the security situation in
Somalia has not improved and remains, by and large,
the same as it had been previously and that it has thus
not been possible to deploy a peace-building office in
the country. But it is our View that a tangible United
Nations presence in the area could help overcome the
present obstacles.

Success in the process towards peace and national
reconciliation has led to the formation of a parliament,
the Transitional National Assembly, with the
participation of all the country's factions and views,
and to the appointment of a President, a Prime Minister
and a Government. We affirm our support for the
efforts of the Transitional National Government to
promote the process of national reconciliation and
reconstruction in Somalia, and we believe that the
international community should provide the assistance
needed to help rebuild infrastructure and administrative
and other institutions.

It is indeed fortunate that His Excellency Mr. Ali
Khalif Galaydh, the Prime Minister of Somalia, is
present at today's meeting and that he had the
opportunity to put Somalia's case before the Security
Council. We believe that we are all obliged to help
support the efforts of the Somali Government to regain
control over the country and to put an end to the tragic
situation stemming from the civil and tribal wars that
have long afflicted the Somali people. In this respect,
we are convinced that the primary and ultimate
responsibility for the establishment of peace and
stability in Somalia lies with the Somali people and its
leaders. Support must be provided, however, by the
international community if such efforts are to succeed.

The people of Somalia have suffered immensely
and for a long time. It is high time that the international
community assumed its responsibility in preserving
international peace and security by providing
humanitarian assistance, in View of the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation of the Somali people. It is
our hope that the United Nations agencies and its
international partners will pursue and expand their
humanitarian activities in Somalia to help alleviate the
suffering of the Somali people.

The world is undergoing turbulent times today.
Humanity is ill at ease, racked by war, terrorism,
underdevelopment, religious intolerance, tension and
instability. We all feel the upheavals in international
life. Our international community is seeking to
rearrange and reorder its priorities. This is why we say
we should not postpone solutions to any problem,
because issues of peace and security are serious, urgent
and interrelated. Thus, we believe that the situation in
Somalia demands the immediate intervention of the
international community, through the United Nations,
to support the national institutions in Somalia, so that
peace and stability can prevail and lead to economic
and social development.

In conclusion, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference reiterates the need for the international
community to respect the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity of Somalia.
These are principles that have been emphasized by all
the Islamic Conferences, be they ministerial or at the
summit level.

