Mrs. Wolcott Sanders (United States of America): I would like to thank you, Sir, for organizing
this meeting today, and Ijoin in welcoming the Foreign
Minister of Peru to our discussions.

I should also like to thank Ms. Hannelore Hoppe
for her presentation of the Secretary-General's report.

The illicit flow of weapons, such as small arms,
to areas of conflict and the role they play in
exacerbating humanitarian crises are evident in Darfur,
in the Sudan. Illegal weapons flows from the Sudan's
neighbours and across its porous borders have fuelled
violence and atrocities, created over 2 million
internally displaced persons, and displaced over
200,000 refugees. The United States and the Security
Council have been active in urging the parties in the
Sudan to adhere to the ceasefire and rapidly to
accelerate the peace talks in Abuja. I cannot stress
enough that arms embargoes provide one of the most
significant mechanisms through which to eradicate the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.

Attacking the global illicit traffic in small arms
and light weapons is an important initiative that States
should - indeed, must - address because of its wide-
ranging effects. The illicit traffic in small arms and
light weapons can be used to exacerbate conflict,
threaten civilian populations in regions of conflict,
endanger the work of peacekeeping forces and
humanitarian aid workers, and greatly complicate the
hard work of economically and politically rebuilding
war-torn societies.

Alleviating those problems is in the interests of
all of us. Small arms and light weapons, in our
understanding, are the strictly military arms that are
contributing to continued violence and suffering in
regions of conflict around the world. We separate these
military arms from firearms such as hunting rifles and
pistols, which are commonly owned and used by
citizens in many countries. It is the illicit trade in
military small arms and light weapons that we are here
to address and that should properly concern us.
The United States believes that the most effective
way to prevent small arms and light weapons from
getting into criminal hands is through the national
implementation of strict export and import controls, the
adoption of strong brokering laws, secure storage of
small arms and light weapons and the destruction of
excess small arms and light weapons.

The United States has one of the strongest, most
rigorous systems in the world for regulating the export
of arms. All United States exports of defence articles
and services - including small arms and light

weapons such as automatic rifles, machine guns,
shoulder-fired missile and rocket systems and light
mortars - must be approved by the Department of
State. All transactions are conditioned on United States
authorization for re-export. With respect to both
exports and imports, the United States rigorously
monitors arms transfers and routinely investigates
suspicious activities.

The United States has been active in stemming
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. We
have promoted transparency and greater responsibility
in transfers of conventional arms, and we have worked
to prevent their destabilizing accumulation in forums
such as the Wassenaar Arrangement. We offer bilateral,
financial and technical assistance to help countries
develop national export and import controls, improve
border security against arms smugglers and secure and
destroy illicit stocks of small and light weapons in
conflict-prone regions.

Since 2001 the United States has assisted in the
destruction of more than 800,000 small arms and light
weapons and more than 80 million rounds of
ammunition. In addition, since 2003 we have assisted
in the destruction of more than 18,000 man-portable
defence systems (MANPADS) in 17 countries and have
strongly supported initiatives to promote adherence to
enhanced controls of MANPADS in multilateral
forums such as the Wassenaar Arrangement, the Asia-
Pacific Economic Cooperation and others. Since 2000,
the United States has provided technical assistance to
more than 20 countries in the area of stockpile security
and management, and has assisted many countries in
various regions of the world in their efforts to identify
and trace United States-origin firearms used in criminal
activities, including terrorist acts.

In 2001 United Nations Member States came
together to address the problems caused by the
international illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. The United States continues to stand
unequivocally behind the positions that we expressed
in our official statement at that meeting and that we
have consistently applied since. Since 2001 we have
worked hard with many States present here today to
meet the provisions of the United Nations Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. And it is imperative that we remain focused

on fulfilling the obligations made in 2001, without our
attention being diverted by revisiting old debates or
addressing issues that are tangential to our main
purposes.

The United States has a long-demonstrated
commitment to finding practical and effective ways of
curbing the illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons, such as our own strict export-import controls
and the significant assistance that we have provided to
other States. We remain ready to continue that support,
and we urge others to render similar assistance.

