I thank the South African presidency for convening today's open debate. We appreciate the focus of South Africa on the rule of law during its earlier and current presidencies. I also thank the President of the International Court of Justice for his insightful remarks (annex 1). Over the past 75 years, the International Court of Justice has played a crucial role in upholding the rule of law at the international level and promoting the pacific settlement of international disputes, as stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations. The sustained confidence of the international community in the Court is well manifested through the broad range of subjects and cases being invoked under its general jurisdiction. The jurisdiction ratione materiae of the International Court of Justice in the resolution of disputes among parties to more than 300 bilateral and multilateral treaties and conventions further reinforces the authority and credibility of the Court in matters of international peace and security. The pacific settlement of international disputes prevents such disputes from turning into deadly conflicts. It can also end conflict at any stage and prevent its escalation and recurrence. We therefore believe that the Security Council, as the principal organ of the United Nations responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security, could make more use of the International Court of Justice as an instrument or tool in exercising its mandate. The Court is indeed one of the most cost-effective solutions for upholding the rule of law at the international level and ensuring the effectiveness of the United Nations framework for the maintenance of international peace and security. As a nation with an unequivocal commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes, including through recourse to international law, Bangladesh recognizes the judgments, advisory opinions, orders of provisional measures and other ongoing work of the International Court of Justice regarding various international disputes and compliance with international law. We settled our four-decade-long maritime boundary dispute with our neighbour through the international adjudication system, which thwarted threats of conflict between neighbours. As a host country to the victims of atrocity crimes committed against the Rohingya minorities in Myanmar, we take an interest in the ongoing proceedings at the International Court of Justice between the Gambia and Myanmar under the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. We note the provisional measures announced by the Court in January this year and call for the Council's attention to the parties' compliance with the order. Cooperation between the Council and the Court could contribute to upholding the purposes and principles of the United Nations to serve humankind. Under Article 36, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations, the Council can recommend that the conflicting parties refer their disputes to the International Court of Justice, which has unfortunately not been done much. The Council can also make appropriate use of Article 96, paragraph 1, of the Charter and refer questions of international law and other legal questions pertaining to ongoing or emerging conflicts that arise in the Council's work to the International Court of Justice to seek its advisory opinions. Non-compliance with the orders and judgments of the International Court of Justice poses a serious threat to international peace and security. Article 94, paragraph 2, of the Charter gives the Council the power to "make recommendations or decide" on measures to be taken to give effect to a judgment if a request is made by one of the parties to the dispute, which can assist the Council's efforts to address peace and security in relevant contexts. The Council should take a proactive approach in applicable cases to help uphold the sanctity of the Court's orders by taking measures to implement the Court's judgments. There should be more open discussions and exchange of views between the Council and the Court on issues pertaining to international peace and security. Although the Council and the Court currently engage in an annual private meeting, the frequency of interaction could assist the Council in understanding the legal aspects of disputes that threaten international peace and security or clarify the legal standing of certain Council actions. In that regard, we would welcome more debates in the Council that are open to the participation of all States Members of the United Nations, particularly the countries affected.
