Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Commission of the African Union (AU), I should like to
thank the presidency of the Security Council for kindly
having invited the African Union to this meeting on the
situation in Mali. The holding of this meeting reflects
the importance that the international community
attaches to the ongoing developments in that country.

I should also like to reiterate the AU's gratitude
to the members of the Security Council for having
adopted resolution 2056 (2012). That resolution served
to confer greater authority on the outcomes of the first
meeting of the support and follow-up group, which was
held in Abidjan on 6 June under the joint auspices of the
African Union, the United Nations and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).

I should also like to join Commissioner Suleiman
in thanking the Secretary-General for his detailed
briefing which, among other things, has highlighted the
scope of the challenges we face in Mali.

I welcome the presence of the representative of
Mali, the ECOWAS Commissioner for Political Affairs
and Security and the representatives from Cote d'Ivoire
accompanying her, and the representative of Burkina
Faso, who is here in that country's capacity as mediator
for the crisis in Mali. I would like to reiterate that the
tireless efforts being made by ECOWAS with a view
to resolving the current crisis in Mali deserve our full
appreciation.

I would also like to acknowledge the commitment
of the countries of the region that, by dint of their
proximity, have a crucial contribution to make to the
efforts under way. The statement issued following
the meeting of Foreign Ministers of neighbouring
countries held in Niamey on 6 August - with invited
participants from Libya, Nigeria and Chad - attests to
that commitment.

Like the other members of the international
community, the African Union is deeply worried about
the current situation in Mali, which poses one of the
most serious threats to peace and security facing the
continent. The developments that have taken place
in Mali threaten two of the AU's most fundamental
principles. The first is respect for the unity and territorial
integrity of its member States 4 which is being
jeopardized by the occupation of a significant part of
the country's territory by armed, terrorist and criminal
groups. The other is the rejection of unconstitutional
changes and of the seizing of power by force - being
undermined by the coup d'e'tat of 22 March.

The crisis in Mali also serves to shed light on other
threats to peace and security in the continent. In that
regard, it is worth highlighting how commonplace the
use of armed rebellion has become for pursuing political
ends, especially as there are institutional mechanisms in
place that provide a framework for voicing and taking
into account all legitimate claims. This development
threatens to undermine the democratization process
taking place in the continent.

The situation in Mali is also of concern because of
the presence of terrorist and criminal groups in the north
of the country for many years. Thanks to the armed
rebellion and the 22 March coup d'etat, those groups
have been able to expand their control and now pose an
exponentially larger threat both to the countries of the
region and to the international community as a whole.
In addition, there is the catastrophic humanitarian
situation and grave violations of human rights and other
criminal acts, among which the destruction of historic
monuments in Timbuktu is the most disgraceful.

All those aspects constitute the reason for the
African Union having become actively involved in
finding a speedy resolution to the situation in Mali. The
AU Peace and Security Council has devoted no fewer
than six meetings to this situation, including two at the
ministerial level and one at the level of heads of State
and Government. We have undertaken several initiatives
to facilitate both coordination among the various
stakeholders involved and the mobilization of support
from the international community for the continent's
efforts, namely, by organizing and operationalizing the
support and follow-up group on the situation in Mali.

This Security Council meeting is taking place at
a time when encouraging signs seem to be emerging
when it comes to the process of institutional
normalization in Mali. Following the coup d'etat last
March and the unacceptable physical attack, on 21 May,
on interim President Dioncounda Traore, his return
to Mali and the speech he made shortly thereafter, as
well the consultations under way aimed at establishing
a Government of national unity, give hope for a swift
stabilization of the situation in Bamako. It must be
emphasized that that is an essential precondition
for the mobilization of efforts in Mali, as well as for
more sustained and coordinated commitment from
the international community to facing up to the grave
threats posed by the situation in the north of the country
to the very existence of the Malian State itself.

At the Council no doubt knows, following the 14 July
summit meeting held under the presidency of President
Alassane Ouattara, the AU Peace and Security Council
endorsed the outcome of the ECOWAS contact group
meeting held in Ouagadougou on 7 July concerning
the establishment of a Government of national
unity. Following that meeting, the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, Ambassador
Ramtame Lamamra, and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for West Africa, Ambassador
Said Djinnit, together with representatives ofECOWAS,
the European Union and the International Organization
of la Francophonie, met in Bamako in early August. The
purpose of that joint mission, which took place upon
the return to Mali of President Dioncounda Traore,
was to show the international community's support for
his endeavours and to encourage him to move ahead
quickly.

It is important that our meeting today serve to
encourage Malians to speed up the process of forming a
Government ofnational unity that will permit the lifting
of the suspension of Mali's participation in African
Union activities, imposed by the Peace and Security
Council last March. It is also critical that this meeting
underline that the transition must absolutely uphold the
rule of law, especially with regard to the atrocities and
human rights violations seen in Bamako.
The African Union urges dialogue among the parties
willing to negotiate on the basis of respect for the unity
and territorial integrity of Mali and of full rejection of
the armed rebellion, terrorism and attendant criminal
activities. In that context, we welcome the efforts of the
ECOWAS mediator, and we urge him to persevere in
his work, including through close coordination with the
core countries.

At the same time, as the Commissioner for Peace
and Security Council has repeatedly stressed, other
options must be pursued because we must absolutely
not allow the situation on the ground to continue
indefinitely. That is why the Peace and Security Council
stated from the outset its intention to impose sanctions
on the terrorist and criminal groups operating in the
north of Mali, as well as against any other armed group
impeding progress towards a solution to the crisis and
the efforts of ECOWAS and the African Union. The
Commission of the African Union is in the process of
compiling a list of terrorist and criminal armed groups
operating in the north of Mali in order to add them to
the African Union list of terrorist groups.

It is also important to set in motion the security
and military plans necessary to safeguard transition
institutions, to restructure and reorganize Mali's
defence and security forces, and to restore State
authority in the north, even as we fight the terrorist and
criminal networks on the ground. In that regard, the
African Union supports the ECOWAS planning process
and calls for similar support from the Security Council
and other international players.

Based on the Security Council's request for
clarification at its annual consultation with the Peace
and Security Council this past June in New York, on
the relevant Peace and Security Council decisions, and
on resolution 2056 (2012), it is important to develop a
strategic concept for the political, security and military
measures to be taken for a timely settlement of the
crisis in Mali. The Commission continues to work with
ECOWAS and the core countries, as well as with the
United Nations, the European Union and other partners,
for such a document's swift completion. As the Peace
and Security Council has stressed, that strategic concept
and ECOWAS planning must mutually reinforce each
other.

The severity of the crisis in Mali and the scope
of the stakes involved demand the mobilization of the
entire international community and close coordination
of efforts so as to maximize the impact of actions taken
and achieve the desired results. In that regard, it is
important to maintain and strengthen coherence among
African initiatives in the spirit ofthe declaration on Mali
adopted at the most recent African Union summit in
Addis Ababa in July. It is also important to continue to
work in a spirit of genuine partnership with the Security
Council and other international actors involved so that
they can offer the needed support to African efforts and
take all necessary decisions to that end. The African
Union, through the Peace and Security Council and the
Commission, is devoting every effort to that goal.

