Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to start by congratulating Jordan on its assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. I would
also like to commend the Permanent Mission of France
for its excellent stewardship ofthe Council in December.

(spoke in English)

Last July, when we spoke before this Council,
we commended the efforts of United States Secretary
of State John Kerry towards the resumption of the
Palestinian-Israeli negotiations in the hope that they
would lead to a just and lasting peace, which in our
view can be based only on the principles and rules of
international law, the relevant decisions of the United
Nations, the Madrid terms of reference and the Arab
Peace Initiative. However, we also said - and I
apologize for quoting from our own statement:

"Still, let us state it loud and clear: the
main danger facing such negotiations is the
continuation of provocative Israeli actions capable
of undermining them. To protect the negotiations,
those actions ought to be completely stopped.
Obviously, there is no better example of such
actions than the unabated construction in the past
months of Israeli settlements at an unprecedented
rate, let alone the approval of new settlement units."
(S/PV7007, p. 31)

In October, we sounded the alarm anew, drawing the
attention of the Council once more to the dangers of the
unrelenting Israeli settlement activities to the prospects
for the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations, and we called
on the Council to condemn them in the strongest terms
(see S/PV.7047). While the Council remained silent,
the roar of the Israeli bulldozers destroying Palestinian

homes in Jerusalem and uprooting olive trees in the
West Bank to pave the way for yet more settlements
could be clearly heard. As has already been mentioned,
the Israeli authorities announced earlier this month
their intention to build 1,400 new housing units in the
occupied territories.

We are sure that you, Mr. President, realize that we
are at a historic crossroads. To say the least, the future of
the negotiations has undoubtedly been put in jeopardy
by the unabated settlement activity. The silence of the
Council does not serve the cause of peace. To save the
prospects for peace in our part ofthe world, the Council
ought to make itself heard. For the sake of peace, we
urge it to act without delay.

Let me turn now to another challenge facing the
Council. Last week, on 15 January, at the second
International Humanitarian Pledging Conference for
Syria, hosted by the Government of Kuwait, the figures
spoke for themselves with regard to the magnitude
of the Syrian tragedy - over 120,000 people killed,
including about 11,000 children; 9.6 million people in
need of humanitarian assistance; 6.5 million internally
displaced; and 2.2 million refugees in neighbouring
countries. It is a humanitarian catastrophe that is
unprecedented in recent history. Lebanon welcomes the
generous pledges made during the Conference and will
continue to work closely with the donor community to
alleviate the suffering of the refugees and their host
communities.

As the conflict unfolds in Syria, the flow of
refugees into Lebanon continues unabated at an
average rate of 3,000 a day. Months ago, the number
of refugees exceeded 1 million, which is almost a
quarter of the population of my country. Clearly, that
has begun to have an existential dimension in Lebanon,
which is the smallest of the host countries but has the
highest number of refugees, whether in relation to the
population of those countries or in absolute terms.

The suffering of the Syrians in Syria must end, and
the flow of Syrian refugees must stop. It is high time that
the international community assume its humanitarian
responsibilities and act with one voice so as to ensure
humanitarian corridors for the delivery of aid to Syria
and establish camps within Syria and on its borders.
That could allow for the dignified and gradual return
of Syrian refugees from the host countries to their own
nation. To all those who may believe that approach to
be unrealistic, allow me to say the following. Aware of
its humanitarian responsibilities and legal obligations,
Lebanon has kept its borders open to all those fleeing
the horrors of violence and destruction in Syria and
will continue to do so. It is unrealistic here not to
acknowledge that Lebanon can no longer cope alone
with the pressures and burdens resulting from that
situation.

Moreover, since the Council succeeded in
unanimously adopting resolution 2118 (2013) on
the elimination of chemical weapons in Syria, is it
unrealistic to hope that it could still show a similar
commitment in addressing the humanitarian situation
there? More importantly, on the eve of the date set for
the second Geneva Conference on Syria, is it unrealistic
to also hope that that same international leadership
will be renewed to ensure the full implementation
of the June 2012 Geneva communique and its action
plan (S/2012/522, annex) in order to help fulfil the
aspirations of the Syrian people and put an end to their
ongoing ordeal?

Despite all the challenges facing my country,
Lebanon remains committed to the full implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006) and stresses the need for
the Council to act swiftly so as to put an immediate
end to the systematic Israeli violations of Lebanon's
sovereignty by land, air and sea. My delegation has
kept the Council informed of those violations and has
requested that its letters to that effect be circulated as
official documents of the United Nations.

The most recent ofthose letters was dated 9 January,
when we submitted a complaint against Israel for
launching electronic warfare on Lebanon. We informed
the President ofthe Council that Israel had increased the
number of sites, towers, antennas and other monitoring,
espionage and surveillance devices installed along the
Lebanese border. We called on the Council to assume
its responsibilities in the maintenance of peace and
security by condemning such blatant violations of
international law and by taking the necessary measures
to put an end to them.

Recently, my country was also the victim of several
terrorist attacks, from the targeting of the Iranian
Embassy to the assassination of former Minister
Mohamad Chatah, the car bomb in the southern suburbs
of Beirut and the attack in Hermel. Time and again, the
Council condemned those attacks and stressed the need
to bring the perpetrators to justice. Lebanon expresses
its deep appreciation for the Council's continued
support for its stability and security.

Furthermore, last week, the Council welcomed
the beginning of the trial proceedings of the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon and stressed the vital importance
of combating impunity so as to strengthen the long-
term stability and security in Lebanon. In turn, the
President of the Republic of Lebanon, General Michel
Sleiman, clearly stated that the start of the trials was
a sure step towards uncovering the truth behind the
assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri
and would ensure that the perpetrators did not think
that they could evade justice.

Finally, the launching of the International Support
Group for Lebanon in September was based on the
consensus expressed in the presidential statement
adopted in July by the Council (S/PRST/20l3/9), which
stressed "the need for strong, coordinated international
support for Lebanon to help it continue to withstand
the multiple current challenges to its security and
stability". In that respect, the Group also underlined the
importance of Lebanon's policy of disassociation and
the Baabda Declaration of 12 June 2012.

Today, more than ever, such support is needed to
help shield Lebanon from the spillover of the Syrian
crisis and from my country being turned anew into a
battlefield of regional rivalries and proxy wars.

