The Secretary-General: I am pleased to be here
today, and I thank the Russian presidency for having
convened this debate.

Before turning to the subject at hand, I Wish to say
a few words about the latest developments regarding
the International Criminal Court (ICC). The world has
made enormous strides in building a global system of
international criminal justice, with the International
Criminal Court as its centrepiece. The ICC and other
international tribunals have secured ground-breaking
convictions. Yet we know that these and other gains have
also been accompanied by setbacks and shortcomings.
Prosecutions can take many years. Not all countries
accept the ICC's jurisdiction, and even some of those
that do, do not always support the Court fully.

Some are concerned that the Court has convicted
only Africans, despite evidence of crimes in other parts
of the world. Indeed, in recent days, three African
countries have expressed their intent to withdraw from
the Court. I regret these steps, which could send the
wrong message on these countries' commitment to
justice.

These challenges are best addressed not by
diminishing support for the Court, but by strengthening
it from within Deterring future atrocities, delivering
justice for Victims and defending the rules of war across
the globe are far too important priorities to risk a retreat
from the age of accountability that we have worked so
hard to build and solidify.

I welcome the Secretaries-General of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Vice-Chair of
the Executive Committee of the Commonwealth of
Independent States.

The global peace and security landscape has
become much more complex in the last decade. Brutal
wars raging across the Middle East and beyond continue
to take lives, displace millions and wreck economies.
Hospitals, schools and aid convoys are targeted with
absolute disregard for international law and basic
humanity. The resurgence of ethnic and sectarian
tensions in the midst of these conflicts risks trapping
nations in chaos for many years to come.

I am especially alarmed at the fact that a wide
variety of armed actors are taking advantage of modern
technology and globalization to wreak havoc on a
horrific scale. Meanwhile, growing xenophobic, nativist
and protectionist policies and sentiments in other parts
of the world are cause for serious concern. These
challenges transcend national borders and demand a
collective response by the international community.

To rise to the moment, the United Nations has
completed a number of major reviews of our work.
All emphasized the urgent need to prioritize conflict
prevention in a collective manner that draws on regional
and global partnerships. This has always been one of
my top priorities. After nearly 10 years as Secretary-
General, I am even more convinced that the international
community must come together to promote stability
and defuse tensions wherever they occur.

In this context, and in line with Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter, we are seeking to intensify
our interactions with the heads of regional and
subregional organizations. I have personally engaged in
collaborating with our regional partners for results. The
impact has been meaningful, but we can do even more.

Central Asia is the region where we have our
closest contact with the Collective Security Treaty
Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
and the Commonwealth of Independent States. These
organizations regularly exchange information with
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia on terrorism, violent
extremism, drug trafficking and other issues of shared
interest and concern.

My Special Representative for Central Asia and
Head of the United Nations Regional Centre, Mr. Petko
Draganov, regularly meets with the organizations'
leaders to discuss our joint agenda and the latest
developments. All three organizations actively
participate in supporting the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central Asia.

The United Nations Security Council Counter-
Terrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate
are in direct contact with counterparts in all three
organizations. The United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) cooperates with all three
organizations on drug trafficking, irregular migration
and counter-terrorism. They have conducted joint
operational initiatives in Afghanistan and Central
Asia. Experts from the three organizations participate
regularly in UNODC meetings, including the Paris Pact
Initiative, a partnership to combat illicit trafficking in
opiates from Afghanistan.

On peacekeeping, I am especially grateful that
senior officials from the Collective Security Treaty
Organization participated in the first-ever United
Nations Chiefs of Police Summit in June to discuss
how we can more effectively tackle challenges
together. Our organizations also work to strengthen
confidence-building measures and promote stability in
Afghanistan through the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process.
The United Nations is committed to strengthening this
productive partnership.
We all agree on the value of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations, and we
should not be afraid to confront the difficulties. We
have much in common, but our strategies may at times
pull us in different directions. Resources, capabilities
and mandates vary. Sometimes regional organizations
may have particular challenges that can limit their role
as honest brokers.

That is why it is so important to deepen our strategic
dialogue, forge common approaches to emerging crises
and strive to improve our collective responses to peace
and security threats. In that way, we can make the most
of our respective strengths.

Let us use this valuable Security Council meeting
to advance our partnerships for the sake of the peoples
of these regions and our world.

