Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ould
Abdallah, for his briefing. We would also like to
welcome the statement made by the representative of
Somalia.

China has always believed that the key to the
settlement of the current crisis in Somalia is for its
various factions to carry out national reconciliation,
engage in constructive dialogue, reach a political
understanding and commit themselves to national
reconstruction. We appreciate the large amount of work
done by the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia in that regard. We encourage it to continue its
broad-based dialogue with various factions.

We welcome the appointment of Mr. Nur Hassan
Hussein as Prime Minister of the Transitional Federal
Government. We have noticed his expressed
willingness to continue dialogue with various factions
in Somalia. We believe that he is able to lead the

Somali people in overcoming the current difficulties.
At the same time, we are worried about the health
situation of President Yusuf Ahmed. We hope he will
be well soon.

The efforts by the Transitional Federal
Government alone are far from enough for the
settlement of the Somali question. We once again call
on the factions of Somalia, both inside and outside the
country, to take seriously the aspiration of the Somali
people for peace, to put the interest of the country and
nation above everything else, not to set any
preconditions for dialogue, and to work constructively
for national reconciliation.

The future of Somalia as a State fundamentally
depends on the efforts of the Somali people
themselves; however, the assistance of the international
community is also indispensable. We would like to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Ould Abdullah for his good-offices efforts
since he took office. We hope that the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia will be further
strengthened, and we call on the international
community to support Mr. Ould Abdallah and
cooperate with his work.

China is deeply concerned at the security
situation in Somalia. We highly appreciate the
important role of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) under extremely difficult conditions for
the improvement of the security situation of the
country. There is an urgent need to improve
AMISOM's current difficult situation. It is a top
priority for the international community to provide it
with financial, logistical and technical support so that it
can be fully deployed as soon as possible. That is
essential for the stabilization of the internal security
situation in Somalia, as well as for prompting Ethiopia
to withdraw from Somalia.

China consistently supports the United Nations
taking over for AMISOM. We understand that the
Secretariat is faced with many practical difficulties in
deploying a United Nations peacekeeping operation in
Somalia. However, the international community should
bear in mind the urgent need of the people of Somalia.
We look forward to the stepped-up efforts made by the
Secretariat in formulating a contingency plan and in
regular briefings of the Council in that regard.
China is seriously concerned at the humanitarian
situation in Somalia. The Somali humanitarian crisis
has evolved into one of the most serious humanitarian
disasters on the African continent, even exceeding the
crisis in Darfur. However, compared with the great
attention paid to Darfur, there has been too little input
to Somalia and insufficient attention on the part of the
international community. We call on the international
community to donate generously to the United Nations
and other humanitarian agencies, and we encourage
various factions in Somalia to fully cooperate with the
international relief agencies and their personnel. We
also hope that the humanitarian agencies respect the
sovereignty of Somalia and maintain smooth
communication with the Transitional Federal
Government.

