Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this public debate. The involvement of the
Congo, which chairs the working group on conflict
prevention established in accordance with resolution
1625 (2005), is long-standing and active. We welcome
this involvement and the presence, at the beginning of
this debate, of the Secretary-General, that of the
Deputy Secretary-General and their commitment to
Africa. I would also like to thank Mr. Merores and Mr.
Christian for their statements. I would like to state that
my delegation associates itself fully with the statement
that will be made in a few moments by the Permanent
Representative of Portugal on behalf of the European
Union.

The subject of today's debate is of particular
importance for the French authorities, within the
general framework of our commitment to peace in
Africa. In this spirit, the President of the French

Republic will chair, in New York, in conjunction with
the opening of the upcoming session of the General
Assembly, a Security Council meeting of heads of State
and Government on the theme of Africa and the
challenges to international peace and security. The
Security Council is stepping up its involvement in
combating conflicts, particularly in Africa, increasingly
taking account of their regional dimension, as it did in
its successive dealings with the case of Darfur, and the
regional consequences of this crisis for neighbouring
countries.

We should continue along these lines, but also
give greater thought to prevention. The Council should
perhaps reflect on what is the specific feature of
prevention that would cause it to intervene in sensitive
contexts, where the absence of an open crisis makes it
more difficult - even when time is of the essence -
to justify actions that need to be taken on an
emergency basis. How, specifically, could or should the
Council act in this context?

The Secretary-General shared his thinking on
what could be done to make the Secretariat more
effective in conflict prevention. My delegation would
like to suggest some ways in which we could develop
our thinking on this issue.

First of all, the Council, through the Secretariat,
should doubtless be better and more quickly informed
of the multiple precursors portending a crisis. That
requires a strengthening of the tools of the Secretariat
to become aware of and assess crisis situations. Indeed,
the Secretary-General plays an essential role in this
area, since the Charter of the United Nations authorizes
him to draw the attention of the Council to
different situations, but also because the Secretary-
General plays - often discreetly - an effective
mediation role, as was done on the question of the
border between Cameroon and Nigeria, and
particularly the Bakassi peninsula.

A more ambitious prevention policy also requires
more cooperation, in the case of Africa, between the
United Nations and the African Union, in particular
between the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council, allowing the goal of
prevention to be served by the close links forged
between these organizations with regard to issues such
as Sudan and Darfur. This cooperation of the United
Nations with the African Union as well as with the
European Union or regional organizations such as the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), enables specific actions to be taken in key
areas for conflict prevention. Such key areas include,
for example, the sending of electoral observers at times
that are, by definition, moments of high political
tension, in which the international community has a
role to play both in encouraging the political actors,
and in affirming its vigilance, as the Council did very
recently regarding the elections in Sierra Leone.

The United Nations and the Council should also
continue to work on the causes of instability. First of
all, beyond national political conflicts, they must better
understand and deal with issues such as illegal
exploitation of natural resources, based on what was
done in the case of the blood diamonds, or arms
trafficking, particularly of small arms and light
weapons, the proliferation of which makes it all the
more difficult to extricate countries from crises.

Combating these threats and, more generally, an
active conflict prevention policy also requires steadfast
support to improvements in the capacities of countries
and organizations that are on the front lines in Africa.
The international community must intensify its already
substantial efforts to build African administrative and
judicial capacities, to improve the rule of law, and to
upgrade the organization of the security sector. The
European Union, not only through its training
programmes, but also in the form of an unprecedented
level of financing, in particular, the Peace Facility and
programmes of the European Development Fund, is a
solid partner to national and regional programmes that
contribute to conflict prevention. Consideration is
being given, in particular in West Africa, to tripartite
programmes that would bring together the United
Nations, the European Union and subregional
organizations like ECOWAS.

Furthermore, protection of civilians is also a
condition for avoiding conflicts and their resurgence.
The Council is working in this area, particularly with
respect to the issue of women and children in armed
conflicts. France is pleased at the Secretary-General's
appointment last May of Mr. Francis Deng as Special
Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide.
Finally we should do a better job of allowing for
the risks of resumption of conflict and relapse into
violence. Several countries in Africa, with the support
of the United Nations, have found their way out of the
crises under which they were suffering. The
Peacebuilding Commission must play its full part in
retaining what has been achieved and in guaranteeing a
solid investment by the international community in the
post-conflict phase. Moreover, combating impunity is
an essential factor in consolidating the gains of the
peace process, preventing the resurgence of conflicts
and dissuading those who seek to achieve their ends
through massive violations of human rights. It is one of
the challenges facing international justice in general,
and the International Criminal Court, in particular.

The Security Council therefore has an important
role to play to allow for greater coordination and
greater coherence in conflict prevention, both within
the United Nations system and beyond it, and in close
coordination with partners such as the African Union
or the European Union.

But our debate also speaks to the need for the
international community to go further and to take up,
as a part of its approach to conflict prevention, the
broader challenges that have an impact on stability in
Africa and elsewhere, notably issues of health or of
climate change. It is the wish of France that we will be
able to deal with these issues in a more in-depth
manner during the high-level Security Council event in
September to which I referred earlier.

