Mr. Brahimi: I am delighted to speak under your
presidency today, Sir, in order to brief the Council on
Iraq.

Members will recall that the Security Council, in
its presidential statement of 24 March 2004,
unanimously welcomed and strongly supported the
Secretary-General's decision to dispatch a team, which
I was privileged to lead, as well as an electoral
assistance team, in order to lend assistance and advice
to the Iraqi people in the formation of an interim Iraqi
Government to which sovereignty will be transferred
on 30 June 2004, as well as in the preparations for
direct elections to be held before the end of January
2005.

As members will also recall, the Secretary-
General took that decision in response to explicit
requests from the Iraqi Governing Council and the
Coalition Provisional Authority, on 17 March 2004, for
United Nations assistance in those two specific areas.

Accordingly, as instructed by the Secretary-
General, I Visited Iraq from 4 to 15 April. Prior to
reaching Iraq, I was privileged to represent the
Secretary-General at the International Conference on
Afghanistan, held in Berlin on 31 March and 1 April.
There I had the opportunity to discuss the situation in
Iraq with Chancellor Schroder and his Foreign
Minister, Mr. Joschka Fischer, as well as with the
representatives of other Security Council member
States, including the Foreign Ministers of China and of
the Russian Federation, the Foreign Secretary and the
State Secretary for International Development of the
United Kingdom, and the Secretary of State of the
United States of America.

In addition, in Berlin, I met with the Foreign
Minister of Ireland, which now holds the presidency of
the European Union; the Deputy Foreign Minister of
Iran; the Japanese Prime Minister's Special
Representative; as well as the External Relations
Commissioner of the European Union and His
Highness the Agha Khan.

On route back from Iraq, in Kuwait City, I had a
chance to meet with the Foreign Minister of Kuwait.
On the way back to New York, I was able to have an
audience in Rome with President Ciampi and Prime
Minister Berlusconi, and in Paris with President
Jacques Chirac, in addition to meeting separately with
the respective Foreign Ministers of both countries. In
Paris, I met also with the Foreign Minister of Iran, who
was himself visiting a number of European capitals,
and the Prime Minister of Lebanon.

While in Iraq, I was accompanied by my
spokesperson and three political advisers, who had
been in Iraq for approximately one week in advance of
my arrival in order to help prepare for the visit.

Concurrently with our visit, Carina Perelli, the
Director of the Electoral Assistance Division in the
Department of Political Affairs, was leading an
electoral mission composed of a similarly sized team.

I very much appreciate this opportunity to brief
the members of the Council on our Visit as well as to
outline a few ideas on the potential way forward. I look
forward to hearing the Council's reactions and advice.

As the Council is are aware, I previewed some of
my tentative thoughts in public on the eve of my
departure from Iraq, on 14 April, at a joint press
conference in Baghdad with the Chairman of the
Interim Governing Council for this month, Mr.
Massoud Barzani. I had wanted to be as transparent as
possible and to give the Iraqi leaders and public at
large as clear an idea as possible of those preliminary
thoughts. Thus, much of what I will outline today
should not come as a surprise.

The Council will note, however, that some ideas
have been clarified based on the reactions that we are
already hearing from various quarters in Iraq.
Furthermore, I have now had a chance to brief the
Secretary-General more fully and to obtain his
guidance and advice. But our plans for the way forward
remain very much a work in progress.

I think that, before getting into the details on
possible avenues for the way forward, it is important to
describe for the Council the context within which this
Visit took place.

The security situation, above all else, was and
remains extremely worrying. An atmosphere of great
tension and anxiety persists in the face of the siege of
Fallujah, the Mahdi army's uprising in the south, and
the general increase in violence up and down the
country.

The hopes for a peaceful resolution to the stand-
off in Fallujah which the Secretary-General has
repeatedly expressed in the past weeks, including to the
United States Secretary of State, Colin Powell, have
not yet materialized. As a matter of fact, just before
coming in, we saw that major fighting was taking
place, and therefore my remarks on the subject of
Fallujah seem to have been overtaken by events.

On 22 April, staff of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), now based in
Amman, received a delegation from Fallujah. That
delegation claimed that several hundred of Fallujah's
inhabitants had died and that well over 1,000 had been
wounded - many of them women, children and the
elderly. The United Nations is not in a position to
verify those figures or the causes of death and injury,
but there is little doubt that many lives have been lost
and much suffering endured by civilians.

You also saw on television screens yesterday
images of yet another mosque which had taken a direct
hit. Reports today of attacks from and on that mosque
are a source of shock and dismay. The United Nations
has been active in trying to do whatever it can,
appealing for restraint and working with Iraqi non-
governmental organizations, the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and others to
provide some humanitarian relief to the civilian
population. However, that is just a stopgap measure.
Talks between the Coalition Provisional Authority and
representatives from the city have been ongoing for
some time now. They had secured an uneasy ceasefire,
which, I am afraid, has now been overtaken by events,
as I said earlier. Nevertheless, the Coalition Provisional
Authority is well aware that, unless the standoff - and
now the fighting - is resolved through peaceful means,
there is a great risk of a very bloody confrontation. The
Coalition Provisional Authority knows as well as -
indeed, better than everyone else - that the
consequences of such bloodshed could be dramatic and
long-lasting.

The same is true of the extremely precarious and
complicated situation in Najaf and in Karbala. They are
among the holiest and most beloved of cities for
millions of Shi'a in Iraq and around the world. They
are places for worship, not for military confrontation.
We join our voices to those of the many respected
religious leaders and others in Iraq who have been
appealing for respect for the rule of law and for an
early, peaceful resolution of this crisis.

The nature of these dynamics, together with the
general insecurity prevailing in the country, certainly
had an impact on our visit. It prevented us from
meeting a number of important religious, political and
tribal figures whose advice and views are of great
importance. In addition, our movements, even within
Baghdad, were severely restricted. Had the Coalition
Provisional Authority not dedicated a great deal of
manpower, time and attention to our visit, the latter
might well not have taken place at all. I take this
opportunity to express our sincere appreciation to the
Coalition Provisional Authority for all the support that
it provided.

Even under those circumstances, however, our
team was able to meet with a large number of Iraqis
drawn from across society - politicians, civic and
religious leaders, women's groups, academics,
intellectuals, artists, and businessmen and merchants,
among others - not only in Baghdad, but also in
Mosul and in Basra. We were humbled by the many
Iraqis who faced the perils of travel in today's Iraq and
even inside Baghdad in order to meet with us. We are
profoundly sorry that we failed, because of security
constraints, to meet with some of them.

A key question is whether a credible political
process is even viable under such circumstances. It is
important to note, in this context, that the limited task
we are presently engaged in - which is only the
formation of an administration to assume responsibility
as of 30 June - is part of a much broader political
process, and that this political process has to be seen
against the background of the realities that made it
necessary: namely, war and occupation and, before
that, a very harsh and brutal regime, and severe, even
crippling sanctions, not to mention two earlier
devastating and costly wars.
The political process aims at restoring Iraqi
sovereignty and independence, preserving the country's
unity and territorial integrity and making the Iraqi
people truly the masters of their own destiny, with the
political system of their choice and control over their
own natural resources.

So, is it possible for the process to proceed under
such circumstances? Will it be viable? Will it be
credible? I put it to the Council that there is, in fact, no
alternative but to find a way of making the process
Viable and credible. Between security on the one hand,
and the end of occupation, the restoration of
sovereignty and independence and the advent of a
legitimate Iraqi Government and political regime on
the other, there is a dialectical link that is obvious.
Security is essential for the process to be completed. A
Viable political process is no panacea; it is a powerful
contributing factor to security - hence the importance
of a credible Iraqi Government being in place, leading
the way in the completion of the next phases of the
political process. In the end, the solution to Iraq's
problems will have to come from the Iraqis themselves.
The sooner a credible Iraqi Government is in place to
lead the way, the better, especially because the absence
of such a sovereign Government is part of the problem
in the first place.

For that reason, among others, Virtually every
Iraqi with whom we met urged that there be no delay in
bringing an end to the occupation - by 30 June at the
latest. They maintain that view even though they
understand that a democratically elected, and therefore
fully legitimate, Government will not be in place by
that date.

The elections scheduled to take place by January
2005 are the most important milestone in the process.
Until that time, any Iraqi governing body that exists
will, by definition, be less than fully representative.
There is no substitute for the legitimacy that comes
from free and fair elections. Therefore, Iraq will have a
fully representative Government only after January
2005.

As I said earlier, a United Nations electoral team
has already started work in Baghdad and has made a
number of field visits. In the near future, the
Secretariat will be in a position to brief the Security
Council separately, and in detail, on the observations
and findings of the electoral assistance team's work to
date with regard to the preparations for those elections.

Meanwhile, the question obviously arises as to
whom the Coalition Provisional Authority will yield
power by 30 June. The 15 November 2003 political
agreement and the Transitional Administrative Law
call for the dissolution of the Iraqi Governing Council
by 30 June 2004. Continuing with the Interim
Governing Council, either in its present form or with
some adjustment, is therefore by its own decision not
an option.

The majority of Iraqis with whom we spoke told
us that, under the circumstances, they favoured the
establishment of a new caretaker Government
composed of honest and technically qualified persons.
There is near unanimity that the Government should be
led by a very qualified prime minister. We would
suggest that a president should serve as head of State,
with two vice-presidents. Some Iraqis are asking
whether, at this stage and for such a short period, it is
really necessary to have two vice-presidents in addition
to the head of State. There are certainly people who
feel uneasy about what they see as excessive and,
indeed, negative concern with ethnic balance. On the
other hand, many others strongly support this particular
proposal and point out that useful lessons could be
derived from the existence of a president and two Vice-
presidents for the coming phases of the transition, as
well as for the drafting of the constitution by the
elected national assembly.

In general, there are many permutations one
could explore for the structure of the caretaker
Government. But what we are suggesting here has the
merit of enjoying the support of many of the Iraqis
with whom we have met and is reasonably simple and
straightforward.

What should be the responsibilities of and
constraints on such a caretaker Government? The
caretaker Government, by definition, must be short-
lived, as its sole purpose will be to tend to the day-to-
day administration of the country in as effective and
efficient a manner as possible, and only until such time
as a democratically elected Government can be put in
place. While they carry out these responsibilities, the
members of the caretaker Government must be careful
not to use their positions to try and give advantage to
any political party or group. In order to prevent even
the perception that they might do so, it would be best if
the members of the caretaker Government, including
the interim president, vice-presidents and prime
minister, were to choose not to stand for election.

The caretaker Government also needs to be
mindful at all times of the fact that it has not been
democratically elected. It should therefore refrain to
the maximum extent possible from entering into long-
term commitments that can and should await decision
by an elected Government. In moments of doubt on
that question or when faced with potentially sensitive
or divisive issues, it should err on the side of caution.
It should also seek the advice of representatives of all
parts of Iraqi society. To that end, we suggest the
establishment of a consultative assembly or council,
which would be available to the caretaker Government
for this purpose throughout its short tenure.

Who whould select the caretaker Government?
Ideally, the Iraqi people themselves should select the
Government. They know who is and who is not honest
or qualified. Furthermore, there are honest and
qualified people in every single political party and in
every regional, ethnic and religious group. It should
not be difficult to identify a list of extremely well-
qualified candidates - men and women - for every
single position who are representative of Iraq's
diversity.

The United Nations can certainly help the Iraqi
people in that process, as requested, by meeting with as
many of them as possible and identifying where points
of consensus could be forged. Though it will certainly
not be easy, we believe that it will be possible to
identify by the end of May a group of people respected
by and acceptable to Iraqis across the country, to form
this caretaker Government. Those individuals would
then have approximately one month to prepare to
assume responsibility for governing the country. Those
preparations should include reaching clear
understandings on the nature of the relationship among
the sovereign caretaker Government, the former
occupying Powers - the Powers that by then will be
the former occupying Powers - and any foreign forces
remaining in the country after 30 June, in addition to
an understanding of what assistance, if any, might be
required from the United Nations.

How does the idea of convening a national
conference fit in? Many Iraqis have suggested that the
United Nations convene a national conference,
consisting of at least 1,000 people, to engage in a
genuine national dialogue on the country's challenges.
We could not agree more that there is no greater
priority than forging genuine national consensus, and
that, to that end, it would be extremely worthwhile to
convene a national conference.

In our View, however, the conference should be
convened not by the United Nations or by any other
external body, but by an Iraqi preparatory committee,
which should be established as soon as possible. The
committee should work towards identifying who
should take part in the conference, when and where it
should be convened and how it should be managed.
The committee should comprise a small number of
reputable and distinguished Iraqis - including
prominent and respected judges - who are not seeking
political office. The United Nations is ready to
facilitate consensus among Iraqis on a suitable slate of
names for the committee.

In order to do a proper job, the committee will
need at least one to two months to consult widely
around the country. Under the circumstances, it would
seem that July would be the earliest time to convene
the national conference. From preliminary discussions
of this idea, we see the conference bringing together
anywhere from 1,000 to 1,500 people representing
every province in the country, all political parties,
tribal chiefs and leaders, trade and professional unions,
universities, women's groups, youth organizations,
writers, poets and artists, as well as religious leaders,
among many others.

For the past three decades, Iraqis were not
communicating with one another inside their country.
"We were even afraid to talk in front of our children",
many of them told us. The conference will, to begin
with, allow such a wide and representative sample of
Iraqi society to talk to one another and discuss their
painful past as well as the future of their country. They
will no doubt discuss, first and foremost, the security
situation and perhaps contribute ideas on how it should
be addressed. They will also talk about the forthcoming
elections and will contribute ideas on how to ensure
that they are organized in a timely and successful
manner. They will further discuss those aspects of the
Transitional Administrative Law that are still the
subject of much debate and misunderstanding.

In that connection, I welcome the clarification
made recently by Ambassador Paul Bremer, the
Administrator of the Coalition Provisional Authority,
who, among other things, stressed that "the interim
Government will not have the power to do anything
which cannot be undone by the elected Government,
which takes power early next year".

The fact is that the Transitional Administrative
Law is exactly what it says it is: a transitional
administrative law for the transition period. It is not a
permanent constitution. Indeed, it is not a constitution
at all. The Transitional Law - or any other law
adopted in the present circumstances - cannot, in our
opinion, tie the hands of the national assembly, which
will be elected in January 2005 and will have the
sovereign responsibility of freely drafting Iraq's
permanent constitution. But, again as Ambassador
Bremer said,

"Iraqi unity requires a constitution that all of
Iraq's communities can support. It is a
fundamental principle of democracy that the
constitution should provide for majority rule but
also protect minority rights."

Finally, the conference will appoint a consultative
council, which will be available to provide advice to
the Government. The council would conduct plenary
debates to convey the preoccupations of the people to
the Government, and it would form committees, which
would receive reports from ministers.

As one can see, the convening of the national
conference may ultimately constitute an important step
towards many things, not least national reconciliation.
Questions were raised by some of our Iraqi
interlocutors about what that term - "national
reconciliation" - actually entails and requires. Of
course, the preparatory committee will have to address
this issue in due course. But what can be said at this
stage is that no one, inside or outside Iraq, is thinking
of bringing back the old regime or any of its leaders.
Nor should anyone contemplate condoning, directly or
indirectly, the gross abuses of the painful past or
abandoning the principle of accountability for past
crimes. National reconciliation is not a euphemism for
impunity.

The issues I have mentioned - including how
Iraqis will come to terms with the past - ultimately
need to be addressed by the Iraqi people themselves.
But the actions that the Coalition Provisional Authority
takes in the meantime will affect those discussions and
could help to reduce existing tensions significantly. I
have in mind in particular - as I mentioned in
Baghdad - the manner in which the new army is
formed, how the issue of "de-Baathification" is
handled and how concerns about due process for
current detainees are addressed.

In that regard, I would draw the Council's
attention to public remarks made recently by
Ambassador Bremer. In those remarks, he indicated
that more officers with honourable records -
including officers from the former army - would be
brought back, into the new army. He announced that
beginning on 10 May the Coalition Provisional
Authority would regularly post lists of detainees at
police stations and courthouses throughout the country.
He indicated that action would be taken to address
legitimate grievances about the way in which the "de-
Baathification" policy has been implemented, and he
mentioned measures to immediately address that with
respect to desperately needed teachers, university
professors and so on. If, as a result, thousands of
teachers will indeed be able to go back to work, and if
thousands more will indeed begin to receive their
pensions, then that would be an important step towards
the kind of reconciliation that people are currently
discussing in Iraq. Such steps may well have a positive
effect, even on the security situation.

Another important step that the Coalition
Provisional Authority has been considering is the
dissolution of existing militias, including the Mahdi
Army but of course not only that Army.

In general, I draw attention to those remarks as an
illustration of the types of actions that we believe
would begin to address very serious grievances raised
by Iraqis around the country. In turn, that would help to
improve - at least a little - the general atmosphere in
which the political process needs to take place.

Looking to the days, weeks and months ahead,
our intention is to resume our consultations in Iraq as
soon as possible. We earnestly hope that the next phase
of consultations will help to consolidate a consensus
around the ideas that I have just outlined. Adjustments
may be required in order to build as broad a base of
support as possible. Once broad support for the
framework is evident, we will then proceed to help to
facilitate an Iraqi consensus on the actual composition
of the caretaker Government and of the preparatory
committee for the national conference.

As I have indicated, I hope all of that can be
completed before the end of May 2004. We will, of
course, be consulting constantly with Iraqis inside and
outside the Governing Council - as well as with the
Coalition Provisional Authority - throughout this
period. We plan also to intensify dialogue with
interested Member States, Iraq's neighbours in
particular, in order to seek their advice on and support
for this political transition process.

There is much to do, and time is short. The tasks
that the Security Council has welcomed and strongly
supported us in doing at this juncture - namely, to
assist with the establishment of an interim Government
by 30 June 2004 and with the preparation of elections
to be held by January 2005 - will not be easy. To the
contrary, there will be potentially dangerous pitfalls
and massive obstacles at every step of the way. But the
job is doable so long as we set principled but realistic
targets and move towards them with deliberate steps,
and so long as we are not alone as we take those steps.
In particular, we will need the Security Council to be
united behind us and with us.

