Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Secretary-General for being with us today. I
say this very sincerely because I think that, among the
people in the Chamber, he is one of the ones who has
travelled the most and who has witnessed the abuses
that have been committed against hospitals and doctors
in different parts of the world. I therefore think it is
excellent that he is with us today.

I also thank the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross. It was a pleasure to work
with him when he was an Ambassador at the United
Nations. It is also a pleasure to see how effectively he
leads that organization and that he fully appreciates
what it means to negotiate a Security Council resolution.
I also thank Ms. Joanne Liu for her impressive and
heartfelt briefing, which really touched us. In addition, I
thank and pay tribute to our experts from the Permanent
Mission of Spain for their hard work leading up to the
adoption of resolution 2286 (2016).

In January 2015, a warplane dropped 13 cluster
bombs on a Medecins Sans Frontieres hospital in
Frandala, which served 150 people at that time. Council
members may ask why I start by mentioning that
example. It is very simple: because my country had just
joined the Security Council and the news of that event
affected us very strongly. We have now completed two
thirds of our term in the Security Council. Throughout
that time there has not been a single day when there was
not an attack against doctors or hospitals in different
places around the world. The first news I read upon
waking up this morning was about an attack against
a hospital in Aleppo. That attack has already been
condemned by the International Committee of the Red
Cross. Such attacks are so frequent that, unfortunately,
we will wind up becoming used to them, and yet we
should have zero tolerance for them. There is no reason,
no circumstance, that can justify an attack against a
hospital. In any conflict situation, clinics and health
centres make their location known to combatants. Just
a few days ago I heard Stephen O'Brien say that, for
civilians in a conflict situation, the most dangerous
thing was to live near a medical centre (see S/PV.7682).
That is a sad truth, because hospitals often maintain
open channels of communication, including with
terrorists when necessary.

Some attacks are caused by technical mistakes or
human error. In those cases, the equipment, the training
and the rules of engagement need to be adapted so that
those kinds of mistakes can be avoided in the future.
However, other attacks are absolutely deliberate. That is
why the resolution calls for investigating incidents and
taking measures against the perpetrators. The Syrian
soldier who steals surgical equipment from a medical
convoy in broad daylight has to know that one day he
will face trial. Doctors in Aleppo today are forced to
work underground because they are aware that their
lives are hanging by a thread. We need to change that
situation, acknowledge the sacrifices they are making
and not be afraid to demand accountability from those
who are responsible.

The resolution envisions other aspects of medical
assistance in conflict that may not receive as much
attention in the media. We lack a lot of information.
There is no detailed picture of all the attacks that are
committed against doctors and hospitals around the
world. We all know, for example, that there have been
multiple air strikes against hospitals in various parts
of Yemen since the hostilities began more than year
ago. However, what is less known are the kidnappings
of the personnel of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, which unfortunately occur more frequently
than we think, whether it be in Yemen and the rest of
the Middle East, Somalia or the Sahel. We also need to
make sure that we uphold the ban on punishing doctors
for simply fulfilling their mandate. I will explain a bit
more. As we heard earlier, the doctor of your enemy is
not your enemy.

In drafting this resolution we had the privilege of
getting to know better the specialized organizations
that are dedicated to providing medical assistance
in dangerous areas. They are idealistic, but they do
not expect miracles. We were also surprised by the
pragmatism of the two briefers. They only request
was that everyone comply with the rules of the game,
because even war has a minimum set ofrules that need to
be respected. Today's briefers are ready to do whatever
it takes. I noticed one very apposite phrase uttered
by Joanne Liu today that I think everyone probably
remembers, "We will not leave patients behind".
Thank God for that statement and for everything that
it signifies.

That is why we welcome the fact that resolution
2286 (2016) enjoyed the sponsorhip of no less than 85
States. We interpret each one of those sponsorships
as silent support for the thousands of doctors, nurses,
ambulance drivers who, while we are meeting here,
are saving lives in the most difficult circumstances in
various corners of the planet. They certainly deserve the
moral and political recognition of the Security Council.
They also deserve that the Security Council review at
least once a year the measures taken to improve their
protection.

In conclusion, Spain would like to thank the
members of the Council who have supported this
initiative - our travel companions - above all, Egypt,
Japan, New Zealand and Uruguay, which helped draft
the resolution, as well as the five other elected members
of the Council, who were the first to add their names
to the resolution. I would also like to thank the five
permanent members of the Council, which participated
actively in the negotiations and will play an essential
role in implementing the resolution. We often use
the term "constructive engagement". Sometimes it
appears to have somewhat lost its meaning. In this
case, it really describes very aptly the spirit that has
guided the negotiations on resolution 2286 (2016).
It involved a true team effort, and I am sure that the
actual implementation of this resolution will also be a
team effort.

Allow me at the very end to express personal
gratitude to my team, to Counsellor Alejandra del Rio
Novo and Counsellor Mrs. Maria Palacios Pallacios,
who have worked for weeks behind the scenes in the
negotiations on this resolution. I would also like to
thank my Egyptian colleague, because I cannot imagine
a better way to start a presidency.

