Mr. Da Gama (Guinea-Bissau): Through you,
Mr. President, my delegation wants to thank all members
of the Security Council for keeping the situation in my
country, Guinea-Bissau, on its agenda.

(spoke in French)

I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and to wish you, Sir, every
success in your work.

I would like to thank Mr. Jose' Ramos-Horta,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Guinea-Bissau, for the very informative and accurate
report (S/2013/262) he has just introduced, as well as to
express our complete confidence in him and, above all,
our full readiness to cooperate with him as he carries
out his duties.

I would also like to thank Ambassador Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, Chair ofthe Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), Ambassador
Antonio Gumende and Ambassador Youssoufou Bamba
for their ongoing efforts in the peacebuilding process in
Guinea-Bissau.

I would also like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the commitment of the Economic Community
ofWest African States (ECOWAS) and the West African
Economic and Monetary Union for the financial support
they have continued to provide to Guinea-Bissau during
this transitional period.

I am addressing the Security Council today with a
special feeling of optimism, for the one-year extension
of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
recommended in the report of the Secretary-General is
a testament to the staunch commitment of the United
Nations to continue providing assistance to Guinea-
Bissau as it seeks to build peace.

That optimism is all the greater given the fact that,
as contrasted with the period preceeding the coup d'e'tat
of April 2012, today we are increasingly seeing greater
understanding among the various national actors and a
convergence ofpositions on the part of Guinea-Bissau's
partner international organizations. The latter was
illustrated in December 2012 when, at the initiative
of the African Union, a joint assessment mission
composed of the United Nations, the African Union,
ECOWAS, the European Union and the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP) was deployed
to Guinea-Bissau. We consider its recommendations to
be important for their continued cooperation.

The presentation of this report comes at a time
when Guinea-Bissau is about to enter a new phase of
the transition, which is the result of the commitment
of national stakeholders and in accordance with the
requirements of the international community, to lead
the country back to constitutional order as quickly as
possible by holding free, fair and transparent elections.

In that regard, we are delighted to note that a political
agreement of principle was concluded on 30 April by
the various political parties, civil society and military
leaders. The agreement extends the transition period
until 31 December 2013, sets the holding of elections
for November of this year and calls for the formation
of a more inclusive Government and the appointment
of the President of the National Electoral Commission.
The efforts to make the transition inclusive are
further illustrated by the development of a new regime
pact, which is under consideration for approval by the
National Assembly. It should be underscored that, under
the pact, a forum for coordination among transition
stakeholders would be set up under the oversight of the
National Assembly.

For several days now, the Transitional President
has been carrying out intensive consultations with the
various political and social stakeholders and others
aimed at forming an inclusive Government. Everything
leads us to believe that a Government will be established
in the days or even hours to come.

We are pleased to note that the Secretary-General
recommends in his report that the peacebuilding process
in Guinea-Bissau be carried out in two phases. The first
phase would culminate in the holding of presidential
and legislative elections in a free, fair and transparent
manner. The second, post-electoral, phase would be
completed by the end of the mandate of the Government
to be elected. That phase would focus on strengthening
the political, social, economic and security environment
through reforms and the bolstering of State institutions.

Guinea-Bissau alone can hardly cope with the
challenges it will face during the two phases I have
described, given the lack of the necessary means and
resources required for such an undertaking and the
extreme fragility of State institutions. For those reasons,
therefore, we ask for the support of the international
community and we thank it for the assistance kindly
extended to our country throughout its history.

Despite the difficult situation that our country has
experienced throughout its 40 years as an independent
nation, Guinea-Bissau and its people still believe in
the viability of our country. We will spare no effort in
building the State dreamed of by our founding father,
Amilcar Cabral. We will do so by carrying out reforms
aimed at strengthening State institutions, in particular
in the defence, security and justice sectors so that they
work effectively to fight against impunity. We will do
so in order to ensure that justice in our country is within
the reach of every citizen and so that Guinea-Bissau is a
place of peace and prosperity that is pleasant to live in.
As I speak here, every public school is once again
on strike - triggered three days ago by the teachers'
union at the national level. That will curtail the school
year for at least one month.

The cashew harvest, which is Guinea-Bissau's
main export product, is being seriously jeopardized by
the lack of market credit liquidity.

Our economy - largely dependent upon external
assitance - is practically in ruins following the cut-off
from our major partners that resulted from the April
2012 coup.

In conclusion, it is for all those reasons that it is
both necessary and urgent that humanitarian assistance
be exceptionally granted to our country in order to help
us overcome the current challenges.

