Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, as
well as the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Daeie, and the
Ambassador of Kosovo, Ms. Citaku, for their briefings.
Considering the situation described by the Special
Representative, I will underscore three points.

First, the commitment of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights in Kosovo and the region must continue to be
commended. In particular, France welcomes UNMIK's
activities involving bringing together communities and
promoting the women and peace and security agenda,
together with UN-Women. As the members of the
European Union who sit on the Security Council have
underscored, we must continue to be attentive to the
realignment of UNMIK's work so that United Nations
resources can be fully adapted to the situation on the
ground. At a time when there is debate concerning
the future of peacekeeping operations, it is our
responsibility, as members of the Security Council, to
attend to such adaptation, as well as to the coordination
of the work of UNMIK with that of other international
actors in Kosovo.

Secondly, the strategy for European Union
engagement with the Western Balkans published on
6 February attests to the commitment of the European
Union countries with regard to the countries of the
Western Balkans. The strategy clearly recalls the
European perspective concerning those countries,
while emphasizing the work that is expected of them
so that they might move forward in that direction.
France stands steadfastly with Kosovo so that it can
pursue its development efforts and the progress made
over the past 10 years, deal with issues facing it and
meet the needs of the Kosovar people. We call on
the Kosovar authorities to pursue reform efforts with
a view to consolidating Kosovo's institutions and its
economic and social development, and on all political
forces to work towards building political consensus on
key issues for the country's future. We firmly condemn
the use of violent means, such as the use of tear gas, to
disrupt the functioning of Parliament.

The Council knows of our commitment to the
consolidation of the rule oflaw in Kosovo, which must
be pursued, as well as to the struggle against corruption
and organized crime. We welcomed the significant
development represented by the ratification of the
territorial delineation agreement with Montenegro
on 21 March, which was the result of a difficult
process and will contribute to strengthening good-
neighbourly relations at the regional level. The report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/407) also highlights
the positive work done by the Kosovar authorities to
further protect victims of sexual violence.

Lastly, France regrets that, since this past January,
several incidents have cast a shadow on the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina. My country calls on
each party to refrain from any action or statement
likely to provoke tensions and to try to resolve their
differences through dialogue so as to create an
environment sustainably conducive to the progress
that remains to be made. The Serbian and Kosovar
Presidents expressed their willingness to move forward
towards the conclusion of a comprehensive agreement
on the normalization of relations between Serbia and
Kosovo. That commitment must be underscored.
Despite difficulties that might arise, that path must
be resolutely followed. France fully supports such a
perspective and the work carried out to that end by the
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy. Ms. Mogherini.

We noted with interest the resumption of efforts by
Kosovar authorities to draft the statute of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities, which
is one of the fundamental commitments provided for
in the Brussels agreements. France believes that the
comprehensive normalization of relations between
the two countries is the only way forward for the two
countries and their future generations and - as was
recalled in the European Union strategy - a prerequisite
for moving forward on their respective European paths.

