Niger welcomes and fully supports the appeal by the Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Pedersen, for a complete and immediate ceasefire everywhere in Syria. We hope that all belligerents involved will respect this call. In these unprecedented times, we have to focus on the common adversary, which is COVID-19. According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, only 50 per cent of public hospitals and 47 per cent of public primary health-care centres are fully functional. If the outbreak accelerates, it will be very challenging for health workers to accommodate large amounts of patients. Similarly, a large number of vulnerable people, including internally displaced persons and refugees, mostly women and kids, are at high risk of contracting the virus. This would create a larger crisis, given that social distancing is near impossible in overcrowded camps. The COVID-19 does not respect travel bans or closed borders, therefore, maximum access to humanitarian workers and materials is necessary to face this pandemic. My delegation calls on the Syrian government and the organizations to work together on additional partnership initiatives to protect Syrians in all parts of the country. On the political topic, Niger would like to make two points: ¢ Our belief remains that the Syrian crisis must be resolved politically and not militarily, via a process led by the Syrians themselves and various components of their society. We welcome the recent positive evolution of the Constitutional Committee, as the Special Envoy informed us; ¢ We also still believe that the political and humanitarian situations in Syria cannot be dealt with independently of each other. 16/24 Therefore, my delegation hopes that the Special Envoy's ceasefire appeal is a step toward the implementation of the other components of Security Council resolution 2254 (2015). To conclude, I encourage Council members to work together to help the Syrian population during this health crisis and avoid politicizing the subject. Syrians desperately need our help and solidarity now, because tomorrow it will be late.
