I would like to thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his informative briefing today. At the outset, my delegation welcomes the holding of the third session of the small body within the framework of the Syrian-owned and Syrian-led Constitutional Committee at the end of last month. It is not an easy task to achieve significant progress within a few days of meeting. However, it is crucial that the parties sit together in an effort to find a solution to the decade-long conflict. While substantial differences may remain, we take note with encouragement that the Syrian parties are working hard towards identifying some common ground and the way to move the process forward. Viet Nam calls on all parties to continue to actively engage in constructive dialogue and negotiations. It is important to further exchange views and to finalize and agree upon an agenda for the next meeting of the Constitutional Committee. We would like to reiterate our belief that the only viable path towards sustainable peace and security for the people of Syria is through an inclusive political solution, led and owned by the Syrian people, as set out in resolution 2254 (2015), in full conformity with international law and the Charter of the United Nations, and with full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria and non-interference in its internal affairs. Regarding the security situation, we believe that only when a period of calm is sustained will the concerned parties have a chance to make tangible achievements on the political track. Insecurity incidents continue to occur in different parts of Syria, including in the north-west, even though the ceasefire agreement there is largely holding. We are concerned about the resurgence of terrorist activities in some areas. The protection of civilians and critical infrastructure continues to be a great challenge. According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, unrest or explosive devices have caused great loss of life, injuries and damage during the recent period. We call on all parties to exercise restraint and to refrain from violence, as well as to continue efforts to counter terrorism, in line with their obligations under international law, including humanitarian law. As regards diplomatic efforts, we fully support any viable endeavour that could bring hope for a peaceful settlement of the situation in Syria. We would like to take this opportunity to express our support for the work of the United Nations, the Special Envoy and his team, including recent visits and activities, and also for all diplomatic and political engagements of international partners with a view to facilitating a peaceful resolution to the decade-long conflict in Syria. Last but not least, we would like to stress the importance of continued assistance for Syria in all areas and by all practical means. Without it, the devastating impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic and the socioeconomic and humanitarian crises could undermine the efforts and long-term goals of the political track.
