Mr. Lukwiya (Uganda): My delegation also
welcomes to the Council His Excellency Mr. Kanat
Saudabayev, Chairman-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Kazakhstan. We congratulate him on his assumption of
the chairmanship of the OSCE and thank him for his
insightful briefing on the priorities and plans for 2010.

It is becoming increasingly clear that maintaining
international peace and security is a shared
responsibility in which the United Nations and other
regional organizations such as the OSCE have critical
roles to play. We share the view of the Minister that the
productive utilization of the potential of the OSCE can
complement the efforts of the United Nations, and of
the Security Council in particular, in dealing with
threats to international peace and security. That is why
Uganda has continued to urge the United Nations to
strengthen cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations in order to take advantage of their
respective strengths and contributions in that collective
endeavour.

We welcome the progress that OSCE member
States have made over the past two decades in the area
of security. We also welcome the intention of the
Chairman-in-Office to strengthen the role of the OSCE
in the European security architecture, including the
continuation of the renewed dialogue format on
security in the framework of the Corfu process. We
commend the Minister for his efforts, which we trust
will help to strengthen partnership and cooperation in
the OSCE area.

While there is an obvious need to deal with the
traditional security challenges and problems that
remain unresolved, attention also needs to be paid to
new threats and emerging challenges. In the light of the
cross-dimensional nature of security in the world, it is
necessary to devise new strategies to tackle
transnational threats such as terrorism, human
trafficking, drugs and cybercrime. Furthermore, as
pointed out at the OSCE Foreign Ministers' meeting in
Athens, protracted conflicts, ethnic tensions and
unresolved border disputes continue to plague parts of
the OSCE area, with the potential to turn into serious
crises. In addition, new threats such as energy security,
illegal migration and rising instability in regions
adjacent to the OSCE area, such as Afghanistan, have
become potential security concerns, not only for OSCE
States but for the international community as well.

We welcome the regional approach that the OSCE
intends to focus on, particularly with regard to
enhancing the capacity of Afghanistan to manage its
borders with its Central Asian neighbours, including
through the training of Afghan personnel. We are
convinced that by promoting regional cooperation,
opportunities for Afghanistan and the countries of the
region will be greatly enhanced to deal with common
security challenges, while also facilitating economic
growth and development. However, coordination and
the harmonization of OSCE activities with other bodies
will remain crucial to avoid the duplication of efforts.
We therefore welcome the OSCE's intention to
undertake an initiative in full coordination with the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and
other United Nations entities.

We call on the OSCE to strengthen cooperation
with other international organizations, and in particular
to work closely with the United Nations and other
regional organizations to tackle this new threat to
regional and global security. We also encourage the
OSCE to build linkages and share experiences with the
African Union, which is already working on a
comprehensive peace and security architecture for the
continent. We welcome the OSCE ministerial
declaration on non-proliferation, adopted in Athens in
December 2009, which marks a positive step towards
increasing the OSCE's contribution to achieving the
goals of resolution 1540 (2004).

Finally, we thank once again the Chairman-in-

Office of the OSCE for his briefing on the priorities
and plans for 2010.

