Mr. Oyarzun (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Before
we begin to consider the implementation of
presidential note S/2010/507 on the working methods
of the Security Council, I believe that a triple
manifestation of gratitude is both necessary and just.
First of all, my delegation thanks Portugal for having
taken the initiative to convene this open debate on the
working methods of the Security Council and for the
excellent concept note (S/2011/726) it has distributed.
We welcome the opportunity to speak on a subject of
such importance to us all. We also thank Belgium and
Japan for having convened similar open debates during
their respective presidencies of the Council.

We are fully aware of the difficulties and
understand that organizing open debates on this subject
is not an easy task and that a certain resistance must be
overcome. But it is worthwhile. The working methods
of the Security Council may not always be the hottest
issue on the current international agenda, but there is
no denying that it remains relevant for all of us in our
daily work at the United Nations.

Secondly, we wish to thank the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, and especially the four countries that have
chaired it since 2006: Japan, on three separate
occasions; Slovakia; Panama; and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Their excellent work led to the milestone
presidential note S/2006/507 and its 2010 update. We
are further indebted to Japan for updating the

handbook on the working methods of the Security
Council in December 2010.

Thirdly, we would like to recognize the important
role played in this matter by the group of five small
nations - Costa Rica, Jordan, Liechtenstein,
Singapore and Switzerland (S-5) - first by submitting
a draft resolution in March 2006 containing a list of
concrete measures for the Council's consideration, and
most recently by submitting in March a second draft
resolution with additional measures, which was revised
in June. The S-5's continued contribution to this matter
has been outstanding.

The members of the Security Council have
committed themselves to implementing the measures
contained in note 507. Some are already being
implemented; these include those related to the
Council's monthly programme of work, such as the
publication of the preliminary forecast, the briefings by
the incoming presidency and the ongoing updates to
the programme of work.

Other measures could be implemented more
effectively and in a more consistent manner; these
include the measures contained in paragraph 28 of the
note on open debates; paragraph 44 on draft
resolutions, presidential statements and press
statements; paragraph 59 on informal interactive
dialogues; and paragraph 65 on the famous Arria
Formula.

We agree with the fives-5 that note 507 must be
continuously updated and enhanced through additional
measures. Its most recent draft resolution on working
methods, which was submitted to us all in its letter of
25 March, contained a list of measures that the Council
could use as a guide. I would like to express Spain's
support for some of these measures, in particular the
following three: briefings by the outgoing presidency
on the implementation of its programme of work; the
establishment of a working group on lessons learned
that would be responsible for analyzing suggested
mechanisms aimed at enhancing implementation of the
Council's decisions and proposing mechanisms for
improving it; and the inclusion of a specific section in
the annual report of the Council to the General
Assembly on the implementation of its working
methods.
We should like to propose an additional measure
that was not included in the list drafted by the S-5. We
consider it important to provide updated information

on the composition of the groups responsible for
preparing the initial drafts of resolutions. We
encourage the distribution of those initial drafts, to the
extent possible, before they are passed on to informal
consultations of the whole. I know that is an ambitious
proposal, but if it were put into even partial practice it
would certainly enhance the transparency of the
Council's work.

It is a fact that note 507 contains no specific
measures regarding the veto. Such measures appear,
however, in the S-5 list. My delegation is in favour of
including those measures in future updates of the note.
It should not be a problem for the permanent members
of the Council to commit to implementing those
measures, which are supported by the overwhelming
majority of Member States. For example, the following
two measures are aimed at limiting the use of the veto:
an explanation should be provided for the reasons for
resort to the veto, equivalent to an explanation of vote;
and resort to the veto should be avoided in cases of
genocide, ethnic cleansing, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. It would not be an obligation to
produce a result, but it would be, at the least, an
obligation of conduct.

In conclusion, we believe that we should maintain
our current approach to improving the Council's
working methods. We are in favour of the regular
convening of open debates, perhaps every two years, as
proposed by the representative of Australia, and of
updating presidential note 507 periodically, perhaps
every four years. It is our hope that the members of the
Council, permanent and non-permanent alike, will
commit to considering and eventually to implementing
new practical measures as a result of today's open
debate.

Moreover, Spain believes that it is the collective
duty of all Member States to contribute to improving
the working methods of the Security Council in order
to make it more transparent, inclusive, efficient and
effective. I would like to conclude by reiterating the
thanks offered by the Ambassador of Morocco to you,
Sir, for the excellent work of your presidency this
month.

