Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I would like to thank the
Permanent Representatives of Germany, India and
South Africa for their very insightful briefings on the
activities of the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004),
respectively.

Nigeria commends the 1373 Committee, under
the dynamic leadership of Ambassador Hardeep Singh
Puri, on the success of its special meeting held on
20 September to commemorate the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001). The meeting
afforded us all an opportunity to review the progress
made in achieving the objectives that we established
10 years ago. There is no gainsaying that significant
efforts have been made in the past 10 years in
facilitating technical assistance and promoting outreach
activities and cooperation among States and other
stakeholders.

We pay special tribute to the diligent efforts of
the Committee as well as of Mr. Mike Smith and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and its Monitoring Team. The efforts of the
Committee in updating the global survey on the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) are also
commendable.

Despite those improvements, much more needs to
be done to enhance the institutional capacity of many
States, strengthen the existing framework of
international cooperation and build new partnerships,
particularly in and among regions.

In the same vein, greater emphasis is needed on
conditions conducive to the existence and spread of
terrorism. Nigeria believes that the effectiveness of our
efforts in fighting terrorism correlates with our ability
to successfully address the economic, social and
political conditions that feed that phenomenon. It is
therefore essential that preventing and countering
incitement to commit terrorist acts, including that
motivated by extremism and intolerance, mark a point
of departure in finding a durable solution to the threat
of terrorism.

In that regard, we call on the Committee to
expedite action on the preparation of a global survey of
the implementation of resolution 1624 (2005). There is
no doubt that a proper assessment of the different
levels of experience and challenges that exist within
countries and regions on the implementation of the
resolution would greatly enhance the work of the
Committee.

The 1540 Committee plays a crucial role in
enhancing the efforts to counter proliferation-related
threats. We appreciate the work done by Ambassador
Baso Sangqu and the Committee, as well as its Group
of Experts, since our last meeting in May (see S/PV.6536). We believe that the Committee worked
assiduously in promoting greater understanding of
resolution 1540 (2004) among stakeholders, and more
visibility for the Committee.

We welcome the adoption of the report (see S/2011/579) of the Committee on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), as well as its tenth
programme of work.

The conclusion of work on the establishment of a
group of experts is needed to underpin those efforts.
Nigeria appreciates the clearing house role of the
Committee. The Committee has made great strides
forward in improving its procedures for matching
offers and requests for assistance. It should strive to
sustain those efforts, particularly those aimed at raising
awareness of assistance needs and requests by States.

The active engagement of all States is vital in
ensuring the effective implementation of resolutions
1540 (2004) and 1977 (2011). In that connection, we
commend the Government of the United States of
America for hosting the Committee in September. Such
country visits are helpful in promoting dialogue,
information sharing and cooperation between the
Committee and Member States. It is our hope that the
visit by the United States will engender more requests
for that type of mission.

Nigeria attaches great importance to the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999). We commend Ambassador Peter Wittig, the
Committee and the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team for sustaining reforms of the
sanctions regime. The continuous improvement of the
sanctions regime will go a long way in ensuring a
reliable and transparent procedure.

We reiterate the importance of consulting affected
States during the listing and de-listing of individuals

and entities from the consolidated list and of
consistencies with international standards of due
process, international law and respect for human rights,
in order to reinforce the credibility of the sanctions
regime.

The decision of the Council to split its regime
relating to resolution 1267 (1999) has positioned the
Committee for better performance. This will also help
to refocus attention on preventing and addressing
existing threats in a more effective manner. The
Committee should conclude the process of revising the
guidelines and the conduct of its work in order to
ensure that evolving Al-Qaida threats are adequately
addressed.

The giant stride to improve the working methods,
including the decision to publish narrative summaries
of reasons for listings on its website and the addition of
the Ombudsperson's recommendation to cases
reviewed by her Office, are important developments in
the Committee's reform process. We welcome the
remarkable efforts of Ms. Kimberly Prost in assisting
the Committee's work.

Nigeria is pleased with the close cooperation
among the three Security Council Committees and with
other organizations, within and outside the United
Nations. We encourage them to sustain their joint
efforts to improve information-sharing and to
coordinate relationships with relevant international,
regional and subregional organizations and
participation within the framework of the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force.

