Mr. Larrain (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
I should like first of all, Madam, to express my
delegation's satisfaction at seeing you preside over the
Council. Needless to say, you can count on Chile's
unwavering cooperation in the fulfilment of your
important tasks.

I wish also to express my delegation's appreciation
to Ambassador Weston for his outstanding presidency
during the month of January.

I should like to say that we are grateful for the
report submitted to us by the Secretary-General, which
describes the status of the peace process in Angola. We
note that the peace process continues to be marked by the
instability that existed prior to the Lusaka agreements
remain, and we believe it necessary to appeal to the
parties to redouble their efforts to implement fully the
commitments undertaken on that occasion.

There can be no doubt that the support of the
international community is strongly influenced by
outbreaks of violence such as those that occurred recently
in the Soyo region.

One way of offsetting the discouragement resulting
from this type of event is for the troop-quartering process

 

to resume immediately, proceeding as circumstances allow,
and for the cease-fire to be strictly respected.

We deeply regret the campaign of threats and hostility
against the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III). The parties to the conflict must commit
themselves to putting an end to this harassment and give
assurances to the United Nations that will allow its organs
to continue with their work in the field.

We believe that there can be no justification for such
attacks against UNAVEM. III troops and that this hostile
attitude strongly affects the willingness of the international
community to continue to lend its support to Angola, thus
threatening the very foundations of the peace process.
We wish once again to draw the attention of the
Angolan political leaders, especially those of UNITA, to the
need to spare their populations further suffering. All that
energy that was devoted for so many years to war and
destruction should now be channelled into building a solid
foundation for the development of the country.

The fruitless sacrifice of the people of Angola during
so many years of conflict must come to an end and give
way to better days, in keeping with the changes that have
taken place in the world.

We make a special appeal that the will of the people
of Angola, freely expressed through electoral mechanisms
that reflect democratic practices, be recognized and heeded.

The current international political situation presents
developing countries with many challenges regarding their
place in the new structure of world power, and also with
great opportunities for development within the new
structures of the international economy.

To benefit from the new circumstances requires more
energy and creativity than that used to wage war. This is
the greatest challenge confronting the political leaders of
the developing world.

