Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like, at the outset, to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this debate on the Security Council's
working methods. I also wish to thank the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina for his
introduction, as well as for his outstanding work as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.

This debate should first be an opportunity to hear
from Members of the Organization about the way in
which the Security Council works. On our part, we
consider the working methods to be a tool for the
Council to work effectively. In that regard, I should
like to make several comments.

My first comment has to do with the efforts that
have been made to improve the Council's working
methods. The 2010 revision of presidential note 507
(S/2010/507) on best practices clarified our working
methods, for which we thank the delegation of Japan.
Several points are worthy of mention. The presidency
has a responsibility to provide all Members and
officials of the Organization with the information they
need with regard to the Council's work. It is therefore
important to continue with the established practice of
providing them the programme of work at the
beginning of each month.

Most of the Council's meetings are held in public
or entail a public part. Moreover, there are today more
debates open to all delegations, which is a good thing.
We believe that the public format should prevail when
it comes to issues of general interest. Recently, we
should have heard from the High Commissioner for
Human Rights here in the Chamber, rather than in
consultations.

On the initiative of France and the United
Kingdom, a regular dialogue has been established with
troop contributors to peacekeeping operations. With the
agreement of all delegations concerned, we should now
make that dialogue more substantial. Another positive
aspect is the fact that the President of the Council now
meets regularly with the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and that the Chairs of the country-
specific configurations are invited to participate in the
Council's meetings.

My second comment pertains to the fact that the
Council has demonstrated its ability to adapt to new
demands. The Council is the master of its agenda and
its procedures, which are uncomplicated and allow for
its practices to change with the needs. It is an asset for
the Council to be able to adapt its work and
functioning to new demands. Many examples point to
the fact that it can do so. The Council meets more
frequently to hold thematic debates, which make it
possible for it to refine its approach to issues pertaining
to international peace and security. To that end, it turns
to the expertise of regional organizations and
specialized international bodies, as well as to civil
society in general. At the same time, we should
implement the recommendation of the group of five
small nations to strengthen the links between the
Security Council's work on thematic issues - such as
the rule of law, combating impunity, protecting
civilians and new threats - and its efforts on specific
situations.

Another example is the fact that the Council now
has regular exchanges with the Department of Political
Affairs on situations of risk that merit particular
attention. In doing so, it is better able to anticipate and
predict crises. It is important to pursue that effort and
to bring in representatives of the Secretary-General on
thematic issues, in particular when it comes to
preventing war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide.

Lastly, today the Council has better follow-up of
crisis situations and of the decisions it takes. In that
connection, during its presidency in May, France
organized a debate on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (see S/PV.6539) that brought together the main
stakeholders as well as other Congolese officials. The
meeting was preceded by a seminar with
non-governmental organizations that made it possible
to consolidate consensus on a complex issue. We
believe that such an exercise, including broad
agreement, could be useful and productive.

Finally, I would like to underscore the importance
of continuing to innovate. In the course of the past
month, the reality on the international stage has
compelled the Council to take important decisions in
difficult circumstances. It is also worth noting that, in
spite of our political differences at times, cases of
recourse to procedural points were the rare exception.
That illustrates that the Security Council works well.
We should therefore continue to innovate to take better
decisions. To that end, various avenues could be
pursued. First, missions to the field provide an
opportunity for members of the Council to better
understand the reality and to speak directly with local
stakeholders. There should be a way to better define
the goals for such missions in more operational terms.

Videoconferencing is now being used to
communicate with United Nations missions on the
ground. That makes it possible for the Council to be
informed directly and in real time. It also allows
United Nations officials to avoid having to make a trip
to New York when it is important for them to be
present in the field. The use of this tool could perhaps
be made more systematic.

The Council has developed a new meeting format
that allows it to better exchange Views with Members
of the United Nations on situations that concern them
directly. In that regard, the interactive dialogue format
is sufficiently flexible to respond to several categories
of need. For instance, it made it possible to hold
several meetings with Chadian officials before we
withdrew the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad. In principle, we support
this type of exercise.

In conclusion, today we will hear many ideas for
improving the Council's working methods. We
encourage the Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation to compile the operational
recommendations to be made.

