Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): The representative of
Luxembourg will speak later on behalf of the European
Union. Sweden fully associates itself with that statement.

In the last six months, Albania and its people have
indeed experienced a difficult and uncertain time. The
international community played an important supporting
role in overcoming chaos and the risk of civil war, but the
key to resolving the situation always remained with Albania
itself. For the future, it is equally true that the responsibility
for achieving constructive development and reform remains
firmly with the people, the Government and all the political
forces of Albania.

The case of Albania emphasizes the need for the
international community to be vigilant about early warning
signals of potential conflict and unrest. Decreasing faith in
political institutions, in combination with economic and
social hardship, provides fertile ground for civil unrest. The
multinational protection force constituted a last-minute
response to a grave situation.

When assisting Albania to create a stable society and
to prevent similar crises in the future, the original causes
for the unrest should be borne in mind. If international
support is to yield lasting results, Albania needs
reconciliation not only in the political arena, but also in the
building of democratic institutions. Popular confidence in
the impartiality of the public administration is a prerequisite
for the return to normalcy. This development will require
international contributions of know-how and experience.
The successful holding of elections in the most
challenging of circumstances should be credited not least to
the efforts of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and its Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights. We welcome the crucial
role played by the multinational protection force in
providing a secure environment, as well as logistical
support, in that election process. Of equal importance was
that the force created the conditions necessary for
international organizations to provide humanitarian
assistance in Albania. For this we extend our appreciation
to the troop-contributing countries, in particular Italy, which
took the lead in this important mission. Sweden also
welcomes Mr. Vranitzky's efforts so far and his stated
willingness to head an OSCE mission designed to
coordinate the efforts in the stabilization and
reconstruction phase of Albania's recovery.

Although working conditions have not been ideal,
the Western European Union, through its Multinational
Advisory Police Element, is making a significant
contribution, helping Albania to build a democratically-
controlled and capable police force, which will be needed
to guarantee internal security in the future.

The security situation in Albania still gives rise to
concern. The positive results achieved so far cannot be
allowed to be reversed. As the protection force has been
scaled down there have been numerous reports on the
dangers of a possible security vacuum. Common criminals
as well as more organized gangs have increased their
activities anew. There is certainly a need to continue to
monitor this development closely.

Further efforts by the international community will
be needed following the withdrawal of the multinational
force. If a security-related presence is deemed necessary,
the form of such a venture should of course be considered
carefully. The current North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) plan to study the prospects for the reconstruction
of the national army in the framework of Partnership for
Peace cooperation is welcome.

Considering the difficult situation in Albania a few
months ago, achievements have been remarkable. The
international community is ready to support Albania in
consolidating stability, democracy and prosperity. What is
asked of Albania is that, in cooperation with the
international community, it use the resources made
available to achieve positive and sustainable results in the
fields of security, democratic consolidation and economic
reconstruction.
