Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin by thanking the Secretary-General
for introducing his report on peacebuilding
(S/2009/304) and for his presence here. We would also
like to thank Lord Malloch-Brown, Ambassador
Mufioz, Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Mr. Ryan and Mr. McKechnie for their participation in
our debate and for their contributions.

Costa Rica believes that peacebuilding is not just
an ingredient that we should think of when we are
preparing to end a peacekeeping operation. It is
actually an objective that we should bear in mind
whenever we are preparing for the United Nations to
intervene, as has been repeatedly recalled here today.
We advocate that the international community include
that aspect from the earliest stages of a peacekeeping
operation. If the international community, led by the
United Nations system, acts rapidly, coherently and
effectively, it will significantly increase the
possibilities of building peace and laying the
foundations for sustainable development.

We must always bear in mind the fact that
peacebuilding is, first and foremost, a national
responsibility that naturally requires the primary
participation of national actors to build sustainable and
lasting peace. Consequently, peacebuilding must be
centred on building up national capacities.
Strengthening the authorities so that they exercise their
responsibility is the basis on which a society can build
coexistence, reconciliation and tolerance and generate
a common purpose as a nation.

However, that responsibility is also a shared one,
which the international community must actively
support, as the Secretary-General pointed out, under a
well-established international leadership capable of
coordinating a coherent effort within a common
strategy that produces tangible and credible results.

The United Nations must offer a rapid and
effective response to countries devastated by conflict,
which requires the augmentation of the existing
national capacities and a robust deployment that can
support national efforts in the most diverse tasks. The
effort of the international community quite often
focuses on the necessary presence of forces whose
objective is to end the violence. Costa Rica believes
that it is necessary to increase the contingents of
international civilian experts available to support the
most diverse development needs of national capacities
in all phases of the intervention.

Poverty and economic and social differences are
a threat to the sustainability of the achievements
reached during peacekeeping operations. Fighting
those threats means fostering economic growth and
fairness. Economic revitalization and early
employment generation, in particular for young people
and demobilized former combatants, are essential.

Women play a predominant role in those tasks,
since, in most cases, they have been the greatest
victims of the conflicts and their involvement is key to
the revitalization of the economy and the reconciliation
and peacebuilding processes. The United Nations must
do everything within its scope to protect them and their
children during the conflict phases and to encourage
their active participation in the peacebuilding and
peace consolidation tasks.

The issue of the sustainability of peace being
linked to economic growth will not yield the desired
success without the consideration of fairness. Public
policies and ethical practices that foster equal
opportunities, giving access to basic State services
such as education and health, are indispensable for
early peace dividends to arise in the process. In
addition, development cooperation, which must play a
relevant role in conflict prevention and peacebuilding,
as well as in establishing the foundations for
sustainable development, has an important place.

Reducing military spending is one of the most
effective ways to boost socio-economic development.
Costa Rica is a clear example of that. Redirecting our
military spending to sectors with social impact has
borne visible dividends for my country, even for the
most sceptical, guaranteed the population relatively
high levels of human development and increased our
contribution to peace and regional stability. If the
international community's intervention encourages and
stimulates the decision of countries in post-conflict
situations to moderate their military spending and to
invest increasingly more in health, education and
housing and increasingly less in weapons and soldiers,
that step will undoubtedly open more opportunities for
greater peace dividends.

I wish to conclude by taking advantage of this
opportunity to praise the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission and of the Support Office of that
Commission. We believe the expertise that both those
bodies can contribute to be very valuable to the
drafting of mandates of the peacekeeping missions that
this Council authorizes.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his
commitment to this topic and for his report, which, in
our View, represents considerable progress in the area
of peacebuilding processes and, together with his plan
of action, constitutes the beginning of the
implementation of initiatives to promote a peace that is
seen not only as the lack of conflict but rather as a
lasting and sustainable peace based on reconciliation,
coexistence and tolerance and centred on the belief in
the country's shared purpose to eradicate the causes
and the incentives of the conflict.

I wish to express the appreciation and the support
of my country for the work on the draft presidential
statement that the delegation of Uganda has put
forward for the conclusion of this debate.

