Major General Gaye (spoke in French): There
were in fact two questions addressed to other Force
Commanders.
The first had to do with the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan. The concept of operations
for the Mission consists of increasing the relative
size of the force by mobilizing reserve battalions.
That mobility must be guided by an awareness of the
situation. Situational awareness is therefore crucial to
the Mission. Following the crisis in December 2011,
it was the observations made from helicopters that
made it possible to alert Government authorities that
confrontations among the various communities were
about to take place in Jonglei. It was our action - the
very swift response by the Force Commander on the
ground to shift some troops - that made it possible
to keep the violence, which unfortunately nevertheless
took place, to a minimum. The Mission in South Sudan
is an emblematic case of where good knowledge of the
situation using modern technology makes it possible to
make maximum use of reserves, as well as to react to
deploy battalions.

The second question, concering the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), had to
do with the strengths and weaknesses of the support
we provide to humanitarian actors. Mandates usually
give a force responsibility for ensuring the security of
humanitarian actors and United Nations personnel. It is
up to the various Deputy Special Representatives of the
missions to coordinate the efforts of all humanitarian
actors and to ensure that they support the force. In
the specific instance of MINUSTAH, it was possible,
following the earthquake, to significantly boost an
engineering company. MINUSTAH is genuninely a very
interesting laboratory of what a military engineering
company can do in a post-conflict country. For all that
that company was able to accomplish, however, we
must nevertheless admit that, for several reasons, we
are still unsatisfied.

First, to be of most use, an engineering company
must be deployed on the basis of planning. Engineering
companies do not work on the basis of a couple of
days; they prefer to work on a long-term basis and by
deploying their its assets. That is why MINUSTAH
has established a quaraterly meeting to deal with the
planning and coordination of engineering unites. It
was the Department of Peacekeeping Operations that
encouraged the Mission to do so, and they did so quite
well.

We are also unsatisfied because, even with all
that planning, the use of engineering units entails
significant financial implications. Having the ability to
build a road out of asphalt nevertheless requires that
you crush the stone and so forth. At a time of financial
constraints, we certainly do not have an answer to that
problem.

Nevertheless, the issue of engineering units is one
that clearly illustrates the link between a mission and
all the humanitarian actors involved in benefitting the
population.

With regard to the regional aspect, on which
General Iqbal Asi place great emphasis, I would like
to confirm that that is indeed an aspect that touches
on many of the Council's mandates. In particular with
regard to the Lord's Resistance Army, we have asked
the missions to cooperate. That has led to a trend of
regular quarterly meetings among the forces. In some
regions that works well, while it functions less so
owing to the situation. With regard to Cote d'Ivoire and
Liberia, as the Council is aware, there is a meeting
between the two countries and the two missions. That
four-way meeting illustrates the fact that there is a
trend to address the refugee issue on a regional basis. I
am sure that Mr. Koenders, who is at the centre of such
efforts, will lead the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali in the same
direction very soon.

