Mr. Balestra (San Marino): I would like to
commend the members of the Security Council and you
in particular, Sir, for having taken up the issue of
justice and the rule of law - a subject that, in our
opinion, is extremely important and yet sometimes
forgotten in this era when the attention of this body has
been drawn by other more urgent matters.

For my delegation, this is indeed an historic
occasion, since this is the first time the Republic of San
Marino is addressing the Security Council. In this
regard, nothing honours me more than to address this
body on such an important issue as the principles that
should guide the United Nations in promoting justice
and the rule of law in the reconstruction of societies
and peoples affected by internal or international crises.

Students of post-war history in our contemporary
age have observed that, among other things, justice and
the rule of law have regrettably not always commanded
mankind's attention in the formulation of national and
foreign policies. Every human institution is
understandably imperfect, but the miracle of
civilization is such that people consistently strive to
correct those imperfections. Today's proceedings
before this Council are testament to that.

Justice and the rule of law are concepts
universally shared, yet uniquely defined along
standards that are relevant to our own individual
statehood experiences. People define justice and the
rule of law by how they are served and protected by
these principles. Their definitions are created by their
own experience of freedom and statehood, the
codification of domestic laws that ultimately define a
judiciary, and a constitution that protects their welfare
and interests. The history of San Marino, for example,
shows that our people have had 17 uninterrupted
centuries of experience in defining their own concepts
of independence, justice and law, such that we have
now a greater appreciation for and empathy with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
and the community of Member States. Our presence in
this Council today bears witness to this.

Concepts of justice and the role of law are
studiously researched, commented upon and drafted by
international legal and historical academic scholars.
Despite the diversity of legal theory, one theme
remains: in order for civilization to live in peace, there
has to be mutual respect for the order of law and the
promulgation of justice. Laws must be drafted and
executed in order to promote the gradual evolution of
the protection of peoples in their daily lives, no matter
what the economic and social challenges may be at any
given point.

Academics have for decades studied the role of
the United Nations in the execution of the rules of
justice and law as it carries out its duties and
responsibilities. Yet, as the Secretary-General rightly
pointed out in the Council on 24 September, given the
current challenges that confront the Organization, this
task has become more complicated and complex-
above and beyond any given legal theory. But as
history has shown, the United Nations has in fact been
successful in its earnest endeavour to set forth concepts
ofjustice and the rule of law.

One need only consider its many activities. In the
political, social and humanitarian fields, the United
Nations has striven for such a definition of justice,
whether it has to do with improving the social and
economic lives of millions through cooperation, food
programmes or financial assistance, or with sending
civil and military personnel as peacekeeping operatives
for the purpose of preserving life and security in
troubled lands. Important legal institutions have been
established, such as the International Criminal Court,
which my Government strongly supports. We were the
first European country to ratify the Rome Statute of the
Court, which was created to fight impunity and to
ensure peace, security and the rule of law through the
realization of justice.

Some of these initiatives, of course, run the risk
of criticism, and there are understandable fears, such as
that of politicization. But the historical lessons
concerning the creation of the International Court of
Justice and other international criminal courts and
tribunals show that those fears are inevitably
transformed into a broader and more universal
relationship of cooperation that can only have a more
positive effect.

While justice and the rule of law must be the
inspiration for and the leading principles behind the
building of societies and nations, we should not forget
the words of warning of the Secretary-General, who,
addressing the Council last week, said, "the relentless
pursuit of justice may sometimes be an obstacle to
peace." (S/PV4833, p. 3)

In seeking the realization of justice and the
prevalence of the rule of law, one should not forget the
need to promote national reconciliation and
institutional stability. Sometimes it is difficult to attain
all those goals simultaneously, and Governments and
international organizations must act and make their
choices very carefully.

The people of San Marino proudly associate
themselves with the work of the United Nations and its
aspirations to fully ensure justice and the rule of law
throughout the world. We offer our support for those
initiatives, with the primary goal being the betterment
of mankind through the universal application of the
concepts of justice and the rule of law. Once that
application is achieved, then - and only then - can
we truly say that we have fulfilled the historical
promises set forth by the founders of this Organization.

