Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I will speak
very briefly. I simply wish to express our gratitude to
all those States that have spoken over the past two days
and to those that have offered and continue to offer
their support for a political solution to the Iraqi
question.

Over these two days, we have heard a clear
majority opinion of States, and I wish to thank those
that have rightly paid tribute to Iraq's cooperation, the
work of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification
and Inspection Commission and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, and the positive results
achieved on the ground since the return of the
inspectors. Those States have also affirmed their
rejection of the use of force and the importance of
resorting to peaceful means that are consistent with the
United Nations Charter and international law.

I also wish to refer to those States that have
associated themselves with the United States and the
United Kingdom and their draft resolution declaring
war on Iraq. I simply want to remind them that they
have no interest in such a war, which will wreak
incalculable catastrophe upon the world. Although I
understand why they have joined the United States and
the United Kingdom, I cannot justify it. They are small
States that have no interest in the occupation of Iraq
and its oil fields by the world super-Power or in
dividing the region. They have been compelled to take
this position and I respect their decision and their
views, since Iraq is a small State too.
I understand the magnitude of the pressure that
has been brought directly and indirectly to bear by the
United States and the United Kingdom on everybody,
small States and large, without exception. Some have
been able to opt for law, peace and the United Nations
Charter, while others have included parts of the Anglo-
American draft resolution in their statements to satisfy
the United States and the United Kingdom. There are
also other States that are in full agreement with the
United States and its expansionist objectives of
exercising hegemony and domination over the world.

I also understand the position of other States that
are occupied by hundreds of thousands of United States
soldiers; these States cannot speak their minds, as some
others did yesterday and today. Some of these States
have been and continue to be paid. I respect their
choice, too.

I should like, however, to reassure the members
of the Council, those States that have spoken and those
that have not that Iraq has taken a strategic decision, as
expressed last year by President Saddam Hussain of
Iraq when he asserted that we do not have weapons of
mass destruction and have no desire to join such a club
now or in the future. Throughout this period, the
inspectors have searched every corner of Iraq and left
no stone unturned. Despite an unprecedented and
strengthened inspections regime and unannounced
inspections, they said a few days ago that they have
been unable to find any weapons of mass destruction or
evidence of prohibited programmes in the nuclear or
any other field.

As I noted in my statement, the entire question
boils down to a single point: Iraq destroyed its
weapons of mass destruction unilaterally in 1991. We
are now being asked about the number of weapons
destroyed, where and when they were destroyed This is
not an easy question to answer; it is not a coat that can
be put on and taken off. It is a 13-year old question.
During that time, numerous weapons of mass
destruction have been destroyed in various areas. Iraq
only requires time to provide what evidence it can to
the international community to prove that it has no
weapons of mass destruction and to disclose what it
currently possesses.

The question is not about the presence or absence
of weapons of mass destruction. That is a moot point;
regardless of the circumstances, the days ahead will
reveal the fact that such weapons do not exist. Thus,
those who have joined the caravan of war, led by the
United States and the United Kingdom, to destroy Iraq
and its people and to occupy the region will regret and
rue their decision.

I should have liked them to opt for peace. Why?
Because it might have helped to prevent the United
States from deploying weapons far worse than weapons
of mass destruction. The United States Chief of Staff
has announced that 3,000 long-range missiles will
strike Iraq. On the first day alone, 800 will be launched
at us. The United States Secretary of Defense bragged
yesterday about a weapon that is being called "the
mother of all bombs", weighing 21,000 pounds, with
which he threatened Iraq, just as he has threatened to
strike Iraq with weapons of mass destruction of a
tactical nuclear nature. This is the threat with which
many small countries - which have absolutely no
interest in such weapons being unleashed against Iraq
or in the deployment of such arsenals from all sides
around my country - have associated themselves.

I wish the Security Council, by exercising its
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, would stand up to the new weapons
of mass destruction that will be launched against Iraq. I
hope that it will not stand idly by in the face of this
threat, which is clear, present and serious. It is your
responsibility, Mr. President. I leave you with these
questions, along with those I asked the Council in my
statement yesterday with respect to myriad issues that
have no substance except in the imaginations of the
United States and the United Kingdom.

