The President: I thank the representative of Jamaica
for his kind words addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Canada.

Let me begin by thanking those who have welcomed
me to the Council Chamber. I appreciate their remarks. I
also want to thank Mr. John Renninger for his sombre but
informative briefing on the situation in Afghanistan, and
Ambassador Listre for his very important report.

Of course, I would like very much to welcome
Angela King to our proceedings. Her presence here, I
think, underlines an important aspect of the conflict,
which preys upon the rights of women and girls in
Afghanistan. Their plight demonstrates again today how,
in armed conflict, it is the civilians who suffer most. And,
as for all victims of armed conflict, the Council bears
responsibility for their protection.

The comments of so many speakers today have
made it plain that, in Afghanistan, the only unambiguous
reality after two decades of civil war, destruction,
brutality, violence and deprivation is that Afghan
civilians - women, men and children - suffer most
from this endless and senseless conflict.

All aspects of this conflict are reprehensible. Some,
however, stand out more than others. Some 5 to 7 million
anti-personnel landmines are strewn indiscriminately
across Afghanistan. They have limited military
significance, but continue to kill or maim more than a
dozen Afghan civilians every day. The United Nations
Mine Action Programme for Afghanistan is making
considerable efforts to rid the country of these horrible
weapons, yet the Secretary-General's most recent report
indicates that new mining is under way, negating those

 

de-mining efforts and in flagrant violation of the provisions
of the Ottawa Convention.

Interference with humanitarian operations, particularly
the denial of safe and unhindered access to affected
populations, imperils the lives of those dependent on such
operations for food and medical care. It is only through the
efforts of United Nations agencies, the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and various non-
governmental groups that famine has been averted. At a
minimum, it is essential that humanitarian operations in
Afghanistan be allowed to continue if the war is not to
claim hundreds of thousands more victims, directly or
indirectly.

Perhaps most disturbing is the Taliban's systematic
pattern of violation of the human rights of half the
population - women and girls - a violation which the
Taliban misrepresent as having a religious foundation. The
interdiction on women travelling for any purpose except in
the company of a close male relative has been rigorously
and, indeed, brutally enforced by the Taliban's virtue and
vice squads. Women daring to transgress their ordinances
are subject to harsh punishment, including public beatings
and torture, but those who obey are virtual prisoners and
still subject to harassment and physical abuse.

Restrictions on women's mobility, first introduced in
Kabul and other cities by the United Front and retained or
extended by the Taliban since their seizure of control, not
only deprive women of their human rights and the most
basic degree of personal autonomy, but also impede - as
we have heard so often today - their access to
employment, education and health care.

These restrictions are a matter not of mere neglect, but
of active, directed policy. They have compound effects on
the situation of women and girls. Maternal mortality rates
in Afghanistan are the second highest in the world and,
while overall literacy rates are estimated at 30 per cent, for
females this number is 13 per cent.

I note in reports that we have heard today that there
has been a modest, if localized amelioration, with the
Taliban permitting home-schooling for girls, for example.
This incremental progress needs to be redoubled, however,
if it is to represent even a first step towards meeting the
minimal standards required by the international community.
It is fair to say that people around the world are
outraged over the treatment of women and girls in
Afghanistan. Canadians are no exception. Two years ago,
I personally delivered some 5,000 letters from Canadians
to the Secretary-General expressing their concerns about
the situation in Afghanistan. A group of concerned
Canadians recently formed a National Coalition in
Support of Afghan Women, which is working to mobilize
worldwide action to address the status of women in
Afghanistan. If I might add a personal note, this initiative
is very much in keeping with the engagement of
individual Canadian women in promoting human rights,
such as that of the late Mrs. Rae Scott, a prominent
activist whose memorial service is being held today. I
hope that today's discussion is a justification for the active
work that she did over the years.

I am also pleased to announce that, in that same
spirit, Canada will provide $300,000 through the United
Nations trust fund for human rights to support activities
of local and international non-governmental organizations
involved in human rights training and programming to
benefit Afghan women and girls.

What is very clear is that Afghanistan has joined the
small but growing number of countries where the State
has disintegrated, leaving a vacuum. The Taliban claim to
be a bona fide Government, but behave as a criminal
gang, harbouring international terrorists and allowing their
country to become the world's largest exporter of illegal
opiates. The acceptance they crave must be earned
through national reconciliation, the formation of a broad-
based and representative Government, the end of
tolerance for terrorism and drug trafficking and, above all,
through respect for human rights, including women's
human rights.

I have spoken of the civil war in Afghanistan.
However, it was a foreign invasion that touched off the
war, which has been sustained for two decades by
material support from various foreign sources. The "six
plus two" group has a special responsibility in bringing a
peaceful solution to the Afghan conflict. Regrettably, as
the Secretary-General's most recent report notes, certain
members of this group pay lip service to the objective of
peace and continue to support the belligerents. While it is
true that only the Afghans themselves can bring peace to
their country, members of the "six plus two" can make a
difference in their ability to wage war.

The Security Council has a vital role to play in
Afghanistan. There are concrete actions it can take to
address the situation. It can insist on full and unhindered
access to affected populations by United Nations and
associated personnel, the ICRC and other humanitarian

 

personnel, and on guarantees for the safety and security of
such staff. It can demand that all parties acquit their
responsibilities towards the entire civilian population, with
particular attention to restoring the human rights of women.
It can demand an immediate end to hostilities, the
beginning of honest negotiations and the involvement of the
good offices of the Secretary-General and his Personal
Representative in the search for peace and national
reconciliation. It can look for ways to pressure the warring
factions to the negotiating table. Finally, it can consider
measures to cut off the supply of weapons to belligerents.
I believe that most of these recommendations are contained
in the presidential statement.

In October 1999, the Security Council adopted a
resolution condemning the Taliban for its harbouring of
Usama bin Laden and calling for the imposition of
sanctions if the Taliban failed to deliver the indicted
terrorist to the appropriate authorities. Canada's support of
that resolution is founded on our firm opposition to acts of
terrorism, but we recognize that it is also important - and
we expressed this view - that the Council show similar
commitment in addressing the serious humanitarian and
human rights situation in that country.

The discussion today and the presidential statement we
will adopt today should underline further the Council's
profound dismay with the continued suffering of the Afghan
people and our determination to press forward in exploring
means to usefully contribute to a resolution of the conflict.

I shall now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker is the representative of Afghanistan,
on whom I now call.

