Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes Peru's initiative to convene today's high-
level open meeting. We welcome your presence here in
New York, Foreign Minister Popolizio Bardales, and
thank you for presiding over today's meeting.

As the key organ of the United Nations responsible
for peace and security, the Security Council bears
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The Council should
therefore play an important role in strengthening the
work of the United Nations in the areas of peacebuilding
and sustaining peace.

To that end, I wish to emphasize the following points.

First, we must push for political solutions to
the hotspot issues that exist in various regions. The
Security Council and the international community
should, on the basis of respect for the sovereignty of the
countries concerned, actively support those countries
in promoting the process of achieving peace in
keeping with their specific situation; promote national
reconciliation; continue to de-escalate the situation;
seek to resolve such hotspot issues; and effectively
prevent a relapse into conflict by creating conditions
conducive to peacebuilding.

Secondly, the relevant United Nations agencies, in
their peacebuilding efforts, should have a strong focus
and clearly identified priorities. The United Nations
should respect the will and ownership of post-conflict
countries when providing constructive support and
assistance based on their needs on the ground and
strictly carry out its work in accordance with mandates.
Thirdly, we must ensure that the advisory role of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) to the Security
Council is fully undertaken. The PBC, which is jointly
mandated by the General Assembly and the Security
Council, has the advantage of integrating the political,
security and development aspects. We welcome a
greater role for the PBC as it provides useful and
valuable recommendations to the Security Council.

Fourthly, we must ensure a smooth transition
between peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding.
It is imperative that, once the desired objectives for
peacekeeping operations have been largely achieved,
peacebuilding should follow suit in a timely manner
to prevent the countries concerned from returning to
conflict. In the later stages of peacekeeping operations,
there should be plans for peacebuilding efforts after
the withdrawal of such operations. If their mandates
already include peacebuilding-related elements,
peacekeeping operations should ensure a smooth
transition of related functions.

The United Nations peacebuilding architecture is
mandated by the General Assembly and the Security
Council. China stands ready to actively assist the
Security Council to play its role in building peace
and fulfilling its Charter responsibilities to maintain
international peace and security.

