Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me at the beginning to express my gratitude to you,
Madame President, for having convened this important
meeting at a time of significant developments in the
Middle East and the Muslim world.

Popular uprisings in the Middle East and North
Africa demonstrate a pressing need for change. The
aspiration of peoples to democracy, the rule of law and
independence, as well as their affection for Islamic
values, cannot simply be overruled. We believe that
addressing the legitimate demands of the people
through a peaceful political process and away from
foreign interventions is the only way out of crisis and
to avoid violence.

The Palestinian bid to become a full member of
the United Nations will soon come up for decision. For
the past six decades, the Palestinian people have lived
under the most severe pressure and atrocities of the
Israeli regime. All negotiations with the occupying
regime have so far proved futile, while the continued
inaction of the Security Council has made the regime
more audacious in pursuing its inhuman policies. In
past decades, the veto power was used at least 46 times
to defeat draft resolutions condemning Israel. The
question is how to consolidate our efforts in order to
secure the inalienable and inherent rights of the
Palestinians, including their right of return, and to
ensure the establishment of an independent and viable
State in all the Palestinian territories and that the
membership of Palestine, as a full-fledged State, is
realized.

Last week's release of a noteworthy number of
Palestinian prisoners brought a wave of joy to the
occupied territories and among freedom-loving people
of the world. Yet, there are disturbing reports on the
worsening situation of Palestinian political prisoners
and detainees being illegally imprisoned and detained
by the Israeli regime, in violation of international law,
including international humanitarian law. Hence, we
should not forget that the conditions of the more than
6,000 Palestinian civilians, including at least 280
children and 38 women, as well as 22 elected officials,
who continue to be imprisoned or arbitrarily detained
by the Israeli regime. We hope that the efforts to secure
the release of those prisoners would continue.

In addition to concerns about the deteriorating
situation of Palestinian prisoners, we are disturbed by
reports in recent weeks confirming the escalation of
acts of violence and terrorism against Palestinian
civilians and their properties in the occupied
Palestinian territory perpetrated by illegal Israeli
settlers, many of whom are armed. The burning of the
Qusra mosque, the desecration of mosques in the
Palestinian villages, the uprooting of trees, burning
agricultural land and the constant harassment and
humiliation of Palestinians, including children, on a
daily basis are but a few examples of such a brutality
by settlers. Such illegal actions by Israeli settlers occur
in full view of the occupying forces, who take no

ll-56143
action to hold those settlers accountable for their
crimes and continue to offer them impunity and
protection while they carry out such crimes.

These examples constitute further confirmation of
the dire situation that prevails in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, which
requires the international community's urgent
attention. The Israeli regime must be held responsible
for its illegal and provocative acts. The international
community cannot continue to stand idly by as the
Israeli regime continues to colonize the Palestinian
territory, allowing its illegal settlers to rampage
unbridled and to incrementally continue its violations
of international law, thereby upholding its record of
war crimes, acts of State terrorism and systematic
human rights violations.

With regard to the situation in Syria, my
delegation wishes to emphasize that, taking into
account the multi-ethnic Syrian society and the
exceptional geopolitical situation of Syria, any foreign
intervention in the domestic affairs of Syria and
fomenting divisions and sectarian differences among
the people would jeopardize peace and stability in the
whole region. The people in Syria realize that the key
to their independence and dignity is to keep their ranks
united and to remain steadfast in their resistance and
struggle against Israeli occupation and aggression.

On Lebanon, the Israeli regime has continued its
violations of the land, sea and air space of Lebanon and
refuses to withdraw from Lebanese occupied villages.
Such occupations and acts of aggression should stop
immediately.

Before concluding, I would like to react to the
allegations against my country in the statement
delivered this morning by the representative of the
Israeli regime. It is no wonder that, by levelling
baseless allegations with regard to terrorism and Iran's
nuclear programme, the Zionist regime has
preposterously attempted, once again, to misuse the
main debate at this Chamber and to deflect attention
from its long and dark catalogue of crimes and
atrocities, such as occupation, aggression, militarism,
State terrorism and crimes against humanity, as
reflected in the Goldstone report (A/HRC/ 12/48) and
the report on the Marmara incident.

On the ridiculous accusation of the so-called plot
to assassinate the Saudi Ambassador in Washington, it
is very clear to us that that story has been ineptly
fabricated to implicate Iran. That is a pre-planned
scenario, supported by the Israeli regime, on the
assumption that at the end it is its main beneficiary.
With more than 6,000 years of history and civilization,
the Iranian nation has never engaged and will not
engage in such a despicable attempt. Such an
operation, if true in nature, could only be planned and
carried out by such a regime, whose short history is
full of assassinations of its opponents, even high-
ranking officials of other States. So I do not even tax
the patience of the members of the Council to delve
into it and to respond to such baseless allegations made
by the representative of such a criminal regime.

On the nuclear issue, I should say that the Israeli
regime's clandestine development and unlawful
possession of hundreds of nuclear warheads and a
nuclear weapons arsenal are the only and single threat
to regional and international peace and security. The
Israeli regime has clearly defied the demand of the
overwhelming majority of United Nations Member
States that have, time and again, called on that regime
to renounce nuclear weapons and to accede to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT). Regrettably, the inaction of the relevant United
Nations organs in dealing with such Israeli policies and
practices has emboldened that dangerous regime.
Indeed, peace and stability cannot be achieved in the
Middle East, where the massive Israeli nuclear arsenal
continues to threaten the region and beyond.

