Mr. Kamanzi (Rwanda): Mr. President, we wish
to thank you for convening this meeting to discuss the
completion strategies of the International Criminal
Tribunals for Rwanda and the Former Yugoslavia.

My delegation wishes to express its thanks to
Tribunal Presidents Judge Erik Mose and Judge Fausto
Pocar and Chief Prosecutors Hassan Jallow and Carla
Del Ponte for their respective presentations. We
commend them for their continued hard work and
commitment to the successful implementation of their
completion strategies in accordance with Security
Council resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004).

We wish to focus our remarks on the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). My
Government wishes to express its satisfaction with our
good working relationship with the Tribunal and to
reiterate once again our commitment to continuing to
work with the Tribunal in a constructive and
collaborative spirit to bring to justice those who hear
the greatest responsibility for the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda.

As 2005 draws to a close, we recognize that there
is not very much time before the Tribunal is supposed
to complete its work in accordance with the completion
strategy. We welcome the efforts of the Tribunal to be
focused and systematic in its approach as it works
towards ensuring the successful completion of its
mandate.

On the basis of the information contained in the
updated and revised version of the completion strategy,
the Tribunal expects to have completed trials involving
65 to 70 persons by 2008. While we welcome this
assessment, we also recall that a few years ago the
Office of the Prosecutor had targeted for trial as many
as 300 suspects who bear the greatest responsibility for
the genocide. This figure has been revised downward
over the years, until today we are at a point where we
are talking about roughly one quarter of the number of
original targets.

While the number of persons targeted for
prosecution has gone down, serious accusations remain
against many of the suspects who are no longer being
considered for prosecution. One such suspect is
Callixte Mbarushimana, who should face justice
instead of being considered for compensation for
income lost from United Nations employment.

Among those indicted by the Prosecutor, 19
remain at large and are being provided with a haven
from international justice by Member States of the
United Nations. We once again appeal to the
Prosecutor to enforce the relevant provisions of the
Tribunal's Statute to ensure that all States cooperate
and hand over these fugitives. The Prosecutor should,
for example, consider providing the Security Council
with a list of indictees still at large, along with the
countries in which they currently reside.

The concern of the Government and people of
Rwanda, particularly the genocide survivors, is that the
perpetrators of the genocide not be allowed to evade
justice. The Tribunal's completion strategy should not
be seen as an exit strategy from the obligations of the
international community to bring all the suspects of the
crime of genocide to trial at the ICTR or in Rwanda.
The serious nature of the crime of genocide requires
that we ensure that there is no impunity; we therefore
cannot accept the notion that some accused may never
be arrested. Measures must be put in place to ensure
that all accused are brought to justice, even after the
Tribunal's mandate has expired.

We welcome the more aggressive programme
from the prosecution for tracking and apprehending
fugitives. We also appreciate the commitment by some
Member States to cooperate with the Tribunal in
apprehending and transferring suspects for prosecution.
We urge Member States to intensify these efforts. This
is the only way to ensure that notorious suspects such
as Felicien Kabuga, Augustine Ngirabatware and
Francois Bucyibaruta are arrested and brought to
justice.

With the Tribunal only a couple of years away
from the completion of its work, we believe that the
Security Council should reflect on the legacy issues of
the ICTR, particularly in Rwanda.

To its credit, the Tribunal has brought to justice
many leading suspects of the genocide. It has also set
many legal precedents and contributed immensely to
the body of international law.

However, much work remains to be done with
respect to its impact on the justice and reconciliation
process in Rwanda. This may be due to the
geographical distance between Arusha and Rwanda,
coupled with the failure to establish an effective and
proactive outreach programme. It may also be due to
the witness protection problems and to the management
and ethical challenges that have plagued the Tribunal,
particularly in its earlier years.

The legacy of the Tribunal with respect to
strengthening the Rwandan judiciary also requires
attention. We welcome the support given thus far to
strengthen our judiciary, although we would highly
appreciate more, especially in training investigators,
lawyers and judges, as well as upgrading the existing
infrastructure, including through enhancing
information and communications technology
capabilities. This would support our own efforts, which
have already resulted in a significant strengthening of
the judiciary.

Since the establishment of the Tribunal in 1994,
my Government has strongly advocated for the transfer
of some cases for trial in Rwanda. It is a widely
accepted principle that trials should always take place
as close as possible to where the crimes were
committed. The crimes before the ICTR were
committed in Rwanda. It is my Government's view that
all trials targeted for transfer should take place in
Rwanda. This would help address the legacy problem I
mentioned earlier, because people would be able to
relate to a legal process that is taking place close to
them. It would also help eradicate the culture of
impunity, as justice would not only be done, but would
be seen to be done by Rwandans in Rwanda. Those two
factors would also contribute to the promotion of
national reconciliation and healing.

The Rwandan Government therefore welcomes
the transfer of 45 investigation files from the ICTR to
Rwanda. We would encourage the Tribunal to continue
to identify cases for transfer.

Two issues have been raised with respect to
Rwanda's capacity to handle such cases. First, we have
on several occasions informed the ICTR that since
1998 a moratorium has been in force on the death
penalty, and that in any case the Government is willing
to enter into an agreement with the Tribunal not to
exercise the death penalty in any of the transferred
cases.

Secondly, on the question of the capacity of the
Rwandan judicial system to handle such cases, given
the large caseload from thousands of local cases, we
wish to bring the following to the attention of the
Council.

First, the strain of cases on the ordinary courts
was eased with the commencement of Gacaca
community trials earlier this year. The vast majority of
cases are expected to be tried by the Gacaca
community court and appeals process. This has freed
up the ordinary courts, which will now be able to
handle the cases transferred by the Tribunal and a
handful of cases that may be referred back to it by the
Gacaca courts.

Secondly, since 1994 the Rwanda Government
has been engaged in an intensive programme to build a
strong and respected judiciary. We have trained three
times as many lawyers and investigators in the past 10
years as in the three decades preceding the genocide.
With the assistance of a number of friendly
Governments, we have transformed the infrastructure,
particularly courtrooms, and have provided judges and
prosecutors with the facilitation that has made them
more effective.

For those reasons, therefore, the Rwanda
Government believes that it has the capacity to handle
all the cases transferred from the ICTR, and we hope
that the Office of the Prosecutor will, at the appropriate
time, make the decision to transfer all those cases to
Rwanda.

We do not suggest that our judiciary is perfect.
Challenges remain, but we are determined to continue
to make progress and further strengthen our judiciary.
Naturally, we would welcome continued international
assistance to enable us further to enhance our improved
capacity, in the same way that the former Yugoslavia
was supported in preparation for the transfer of cases
to national jurisdictions. I wish to take this opportunity
to thank Judge Mose for the appeal made to the
international community along those lines.

It is also important that sentences be served
inside Rwanda. This is another point that the Rwanda
Government has advocated since 1994. Here again,
both common sense and natural justice would suggest
that sentences should be served where the crimes were
committed. This would advance the cause of justice,
combat impunity and promote national reconciliation.
In that context, we wish to recall that a new detention
facility that meets United Nations standards was
completed more than a year and a half ago.

The security of witnesses who testify before the
Tribunal continues to be an issue of concern to my
Government. We commend the Prosecutor's decision to
assign a special counsel to investigate such matters and
welcome the directives given by the Appeals Chamber
on this issue in the case of Jean de Dieu Kamuhanda.
We urge other Chambers to deal with the issue with
seriousness and follow this procedure in all cases
where threats to witness security have been reported.
We therefore invite the Tribunal to develop with us a
joint mechanism for ensuring witness security,
including by signing a memorandum of understanding
on cooperation with the Government of Rwanda on all
aspects of witness protection.

Finally, we would like to express our appreciation
to the international community for its continued
support of the Tribunal through both assessed and
voluntary contributions. In particular, we would like to
thank the Governments of Norway and the United
Kingdom, which paid for the construction of a new
courtroom at Arusha. This new courtroom will enable
more cases to be heard at the same time, thereby
supporting the implementation of the completion
strategy. We also greatly appreciate the assistance from
the international community that enabled us to
construct new courtrooms and a detention facility in
Rwanda, which will be used exclusively for the cases
transferred to Rwanda from the Tribunal.

We would also like to take this opportunity to
urge Member States to make their financial
contributions to the Tribunal on time, in full and
without conditions. Late payment or non-payment of
contributions has a negative impact on the completion
strategy.

