Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): As the Security Council is aware, Syria has on
many occasions said in the Council that we fully
cooperate, on an ongoing basis, with the Committees
established by the Council pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). My country
resolutely condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, in particular State terrorism. Terrorism
is indeed a crime that affects all peoples. We firmly
believe that the United Nations plays an essential role
in combating terrorism. There is no denying that
terrorism should not be linked to any religion,
nationality, culture or civilization. Under no
circumstances is it appropriate to fail to distinguish
terrorism from the right of peoples to self-
determination and independence.

The famous resolution adopted by the General
Assembly in 1974, resolution 3314 (XXIX), defines
occupation as constituting the worst possible form of
aggression. The representatives of Israel may say what
they wish when it comes to lies and untruths beyond
the realm of international legality. Within that realm,
however, there are many resolutions condemning and
denouncing Israel's acts and its violations of the rights
of the Palestinian, Lebanese and Syrian peoples living
under its occupation for decades.

The representative of Israel has once again taken
advantage of the forum of the Security Council for
propaganda, which cannot stand against truth. He
obviously thought that, in inappropriately mentioning
my country's name in his statement, it would be
possible to deflect attention from the root causes of
problems in the Middle East, namely, the continuing
occupation by Israel of Palestinian territories, and

ensure that people's gazes were averted from the
crimes perpetrated by Israel against the unarmed
Palestinian people.

The whole world knows that Israel, as an
occupying Power, is implementing a sadistic holocaust
against the Palestinians, a holocaust based on
settlements and the displacement of people and the
annexation of Arab territories. State terrorism is the
worst form of terrorism in the world. There is a special
archive, an encyclopedia and a museum testifying to
the crimes of genocide and war crimes perpetrated by
Israel since it began its occupation of the territories.

State terrorism perpetrated by Israel has affected
the United Arab Emirates, as the Council is aware, and
the Sudan. Other areas have been affected as well,
including European and non-European capitals alike,
which have seen assassinations of Palestinians and
other Arabs. Israel is the State that has introduced
official terrorism to the region. All of that in the
knowledge that Zionist terrorist groups such as the
Stern Gang, the Irgun, the Hagganah and the Balmakh
have massacred thousands of Palestinians and caused
their exodus, as well as killing Count Folke
Bernadotte, a United Nations representative, in 1948.
The first terrorist act in the region was committed by
Israel, in 1954 - I repeat, in 1954 - with the
hijacking of a Syrian civilian aircraft. In those days,
nobody spoke of Hamas or Hizbullah.

I shall conclude by quoting what I read in an
Israeli newspaper. In 2009, Or Ben-David Katz, a
19-year-old Israeli girl, stated that she fully intended to
flout Israeli law by refusing to perform military
service. In an open letter to the Israeli Government,
that young woman declared:

"To refuse means to say no. No to the military
rule in the West Bank, no to the use of violence as
a means of defence no to war and no to a
society that claims to be democratic, but forces
youths to carry weapons, kill and be killed".

That young woman has been imprisoned three times for
her views.

