Mr. Catarino (Portugal) (interpretation from French):
Allow me first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month
of July. I have no doubts regarding the effectiveness with
which you will be conducting the work of the Council. Let
me also take this opportunity to congratulate the Permanent
Representative of Egypt, Ambassador Elaraby, and his
delegation for the remarkable manner in which they
guided the deliberations of the Council during the month
of June.

(spoke in English)

On the occasion of the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) by the Security Council, Portugal is
pleased to note some positive developments which have
taken place in the past two months.

It is a fact that the overall military situation in
Angola remains calm, and one cannot really talk about
any serious violations of the cease-fire. The conclusion of
the military talks between the parties and the beginning of
the incorporation of UNITA military personnel into the
Angolan Armed Forces, together with the progress
achieved in the quartering of UNITA troops and the
quartering of the rapid reaction police, are all positive
signs that the peace process in Angola is moving forward.

Nevertheless, we must also note that the pace of the
implementation of the process is still too slow; time is
becoming more and more pressing for the parties, and
especially UNITA, to give a clear indication that they are
willing to fulfil their commitments to make peace
irreversible in Angola.

Both the Government of Angola and UNITA are the
parties mainly responsible for the achievement of peace
and, of course, those who should be most interested in
that goal. We appeal to them here, and strongly encourage
them to take the necessary steps to finally make possible
the achievement of the lasting peace to which all
Angolans aspire.

We must also stress, however, that some of the
recent positive developments should have been brought
about earlier and more expeditiously, which would have
boosted the confidence needed to consolidate the peace
process and to make the Lusaka Protocol a reality.

My delegation is pleased to note the progress
achieved so far in the registration of UNITA personnel in
quartering areas, and the closing of eight out of the 15
such areas to the induction of additional troops. It is now
urgent that this process be completed in a credible way,
in accordance with the timetable established by the Joint
Commission, and by the handing over of heavy military
equipment to UNAVEM. III. At the same time, it is
important to continue the withdrawal of Angolan armed

 

forces to barracks in accordance with the procedures agreed
with UNAVEM. regarding such operations.

All of these are crucial steps, on the one hand, to
move forward with the completion of the national armed
forces of Angola, and, on the other, to implement a
programme of the demobilization and social reintegration of
former combatants.

Parallel to these provisions, it is also of utmost
importance that the efforts regarding the demining of the
country be intensified. We are pleased to note that in the
past two months some progress has been registered in this
area.
Angolan roads free of mines, along with a
commitment from both parties on total freedom of
movement, will contribute in a significant way to an
effective flow of humanitarian assistance, and will make
possible the free circulation of people and goods. These are
also key elements for improving the atmosphere of trust
that is still so sorely needed.

Turning to political issues, Portugal, as a member of
the troika of observer countries of the peace process, can
only describe as encouraging and positive the possibility of
a meeting at the earliest opportunity and in Angolan
territory between President Eduardo dos Santos and Mr.
Jonas Savimbi in order to seek solutions for all outstanding
issues concerning the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol, and mainly its provisions on national
reconciliation. It is also important that such a political
dialogue be pursued at all levels, between both parties, in
order to consolidate mutual trust in a spirit of tolerance. In
this regard, we also note as a positive element the reports
of a reduction in the intensity and frequency of hostile
propaganda.

While Portugal encourages all efforts aimed at
transforming UNITA into a political party, we also look
forward to concrete measures leading to the formation of a
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation. A fully
functioning Parliament of Angola, with all elected members
occupying their seats, and the incorporation of UNITA
personnel into the State administration at all levels -
national, provincial and local - are also crucial to fostering
a true spirit of national reconciliation.

The resolution of all military issues, followed by an
appropriate and duly supported programme of the
demobilization and social reintegration of former
combatants, together with the creation of political
conditions for national reconciliation, will pave the way
to lasting peace in Angola. At the same time, the effective
rehabilitation and reconstruction of the infrastructures and
economy of Angola is essential.

By fulfilling the commitments assumed under the
Lusaka Protocol, both the Government of Angola and
UNITA will be showing the international community and
the donor countries that they are worthy of the pledges of
assistance aimed at rebuilding the economy of Angola and
increasing the well-being of its people. In this context,
funds must be provided also so that Angola can integrate
former soldiers into civilian life, while dealing at the
same time with the flow of refugees and displaced
persons.

As a member of the troika of observer States, as a
troop contributing country to UNAVEM. III, as a donor
nation, and through enhanced bilateral cooperation,
Portugal continues to be fully committed to the successful
completion of the Angolan peace process. We believe that
national reconciliation can only be achieved through the
full implementation of the "Acordos de Paz" and of the
Lusaka Protocol.

In this context, we fully support the continuing
commitment of the Security Council to bringing peace to
Angola.

In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to the
efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye, and to the
personnel of UNAVEM. III, the largest current peace-
keeping operation, as well as to the work of United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations.

