Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, permit me, like
others, to thank today's briefers.

I will focus my intervention on addressing three
points related to humanitarian situation. I think that
that is supposed to be our main focus today.

First, we are deeply concerned about the
deteriorating humanitarian situation, which we have
been following closely. As we heard in today's briefing,
the people of Venezuela are experiencing many
difficulties. They cannot and must not be ignored.
The facts also show that there are millions of refugees
crossing the border, affecting neighbouring countries,
and that issue should also be addressed. We thank the
countries that have received those refugees. We fully
support United Nations efforts to provide humanitarian
assistance to alleviate the hardship experienced by the
people of Venezuela. Of course, we also support the
work of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs thus far. I have taken note of the three areas that
deserve the Council's attention, as duly presented by
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock. I thank him
very much for that.

I believe that many countries represented in the
Chamber care about the plight of the Venezuelan
people and have the best of intentions. But the best
intentions are not enough. It should not matter how
assistance is being delivered. Countries should channel
their assistance to the United Nations system, which is
impartial, and gain the trust of the Venezuelan people.
What is most important is that assistance reach those
who are really in need - the people of Venezuela.

This is the time for the United Nations to once
again play the crucial role not only of good offices but
also of a good guardian of humanity, by coordinating
the delivery of international assistance. The United
Nations has the mandate and expertise, as stated in
its Charter,

"to achieve international cooperation in solving

international problems of an economic, social,

cultural, or humanitarian character".

We urge that any delivery of assistance by any parties
be guided by General Assembly resolution 46/182 and
the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence. Many have already alluded to those
points. Such assistance must be free from political
objectives and should be delivered on the basis of need,
in close coordination with the Venezuelan Government
and in full respect for the country's sovereignty and
territorial integrity. Certainly, it is also necessary
to create conditions that will enable the successful
provision of humanitarian assistance to the people
in need. We appreciate the granting of full access to
humanitarian personnel in Venezuela. Humanitarian
assistance should also be provided to refugees in
neighbouring countries.

That brings me to my second point, which is the
need for dialogue. Indonesia reiterates that dialogue is
the key that will significantly enable the best conditions
for the smooth flow of humanitarian aid. Indeed, to
resolve the broader situation in Venezuela, we would
once again urge all parties to prioritize dialogue and
accept the Secretary-General's good offices in helping
resolve the crisis. In that regard, we encourage countries
that have an influence on the parties to play a positive
role. Indonesia has always believed that there has to be
a negotiated solution based on dialogue among all those
involved, including the option set forth in Chapter VI of
the Charter of the United Nations.

Thirdly, the Security Council, as a whole, must do

everything it can to not impede but open up avenues
that result in constructively and peacefully resolving
the ongoing situation. The Security Council has met
three times to discuss the situation in Venezuela, yet so
far it has failed to make any difference in the country.
Once again, it is another sad day for the Council. Based
on the principles of the Charter, the Council must
discharge its responsibility by assisting Venezuela in
stabilizing itself and restoring normalcy. It should work
in unity. The humanitarian challenge that has resulted
from economic and political difficulties cannot be met
unless the Council resolves to rise above its differences.
Borrowing from the national motto of Indonesia,
"Unity in diversity", although the Council might be
diverse in its views, it must be united in its action for
the greater good of humankind. Let us show the people
of Venezuela that the Security Council can and will be
united. Let us show that we care and will not leave them
in despair and hopelessness.

I am reminded of what Dag Hammarskjold
said: "The United Nations was not created to take
mankind to heaven, but to save humanity from hell".
Indonesia implores the Security Council to act with
unity and determination so as to be on the right side
of history - the side of peace for Venezuela. I would
like to echo the call of Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for us to separate humanitarian objectives
from political objectives. Now is not the time for
naming and shaming. Let us focus on saving lives and
on the many children of Venezuela so that they have a
better future. I must say that after my last statement to
the Council on this issue (see S/PV.8476), I got calls
from ordinary people in Caracas, not only thanking us
for our statement but also reminding us all here in the
Council to put aside our differences and think about
all of the people of Venezuela. We have opened the
curtains in the Security Council; now let us open our
hearts and bring light to Venezuela.

