Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's meeting. Due to time limitations,
I will make only the salient points of my statement.
Copies ofmy full text will be circulated in the Chamber.

Japan welcomes the adoption today of the
presidential statement on the Afghan presidential
elections (S/PRST/2014/ll). We echo Security Council
members in welcoming the holding of the second round
of voting that took place on 14 June, as scheduled. The
voting was conducted in relative calm, although security
threats were witnessed in some areas. We express our
admiration for the Afghan people, the security forces
and all those involved in carrying out the election.

In support of the elections, Japan provided
$16 million. We hope that the process leading up
to the announcement of the final results, which is
scheduled for 22 July, will proceed in a fair, prompt and
peaceful manner. In that regard, it is essential that both
candidates, Mr. Abdullah Abdullah and Mr. Ashraf
Ghani, respect the mandate of the election bodies
and cooperate to avoid worsening the situation. Once
electoral complaints have been adjudicated according
to the law, both candidates and their supporters need
to accept the outcome. The electoral bodies, for their
part, must demonstrate transparency and integrity as
they count ballots and deal with complaints submitted
by the candidates. We hope to see the orderly transition
to an inclusive and reform-minded new Government
led by the new president. The new Government will
have to address important challenges, such as security,
reconciliation with the Taliban and sustainable
economic development.

Allow me to touch upon the third challenge,
namely, sustainable economic development, especially
in relation to the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, which many speakers referred to today.
Last month, Japan hosted an International Contact
Group meeting in Tokyo. Participants affirmed that the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework will continue
to serve as a reference for relations between donors
and a new Afghan Government. As both presidential
candidates have acknowledged, the future Government
will have the responsibility to implement Afghanistan's
commitments made in Tokyo. We look forward to
seeing the tangible results of Afghanistan's efforts on
the occasion of the follow-up ministerial meeting to
be held in London in November 2014. We also hope
that the London conference will serve as a venue for
the Tokyo Framework to be shared by the new Afghan
Government and the international community.

On a related note, we welcome the adoption today
of a presidential statement on the issue of illicit drugs
proposed by the Russian Federation (S/PRST/2014/12).
When I served as Japanese Special Representative
for Afghanistan and Pakistan, I had the pleasure of
initiating a joint cooperation project between Japan and
Russia on that issue. Under ourjoint efforts, 60 Afghan
security agents have already received training on
anti-narcotic law enforcement at the Police Academy
in Moscow. We believe that such efforts are useful with
a view to promoting the international cooperation that
today's presidential statement calls for.

Let me conclude by referring to Japan's
contributions to Afghanistan. Since 2001, we have
contributed a total of $5.4 billion to Afghanistan for its
development efforts. Japan is the second largest donor
after the United States. At the Tokyo Conference in July
2012, the international community made a commitment
to provide more than $16 billion through 2015. For its
part, Japan has been steadily implementing its promise
to provide up to $3 billion over five years. I would like to
reaffirm our commitment to stand by the Government
and the people of Afghanistan in their endeavours to
achieve long-term stability.

