On behalf of the Government of Malta, I would like to thank Estonia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for organizing this exchange. Malta welcomes this debate and remains convinced that the Security Council has a central role to play in ensuring the maintenance of international peace and security in today's world. The world is constantly facing new challenges, some of which, like the coronavirus disease pandemic we are currently experiencing, are completely unforeseen. It is therefore important that the Council remain vigilant and ready to respond to new challenges in a united and decisive manner. Unfortunately, while most of the time the Council works in unison, there are instances where geopolitical interests get in the way, hindering its effectiveness, efficiency and credibility. Malta welcomes the fact that the Council has found a way to quickly adapt to the current situation and managed to reinvent the way it works in just a few weeks. We understand that this was no easy task, but welcome the fact that a solution has been found and that the Council's work has continued smoothly. In this context, we also thank Council members for making current meetings as open and transparent as possible and for keeping the wider membership and the general public informed about its work. In recent years, the Security Council has taken several steps to increase its transparency, efficiency and effectiveness. It now holds more public meetings and gives the opportunity to non-Council member States to speak before it. The inclusion of civil society and non-governmental organizations in Council meetings is most welcome, and Malta fully supports that approach. Such briefings provide us with important insights into the actual situation on the ground and allow us to better understand the struggles that civilians and the most vulnerable sectors of society face in times of conflict. The notion of accountability is also of key importance. In order to ensure a just and lasting peace, perpetrators of war crimes must be brought to justice. This is the only way victims can heal and societies move forward. Against this backdrop, Malta reiterates its support for the Franco-Mexican initiative on the use of the veto in cases of atrocities. We are pleased to note that, over recent months, the Security Council has continued to work towards strengthening justice and accountability. It is just over a year since the Security Council adopted a landmark resolution on conflict-related sexual violence. Resolution 2467 (2019) represents a powerful new instrument in the ongoing fight to eradicate these heinous crimes, and significantly strengthening prevention through justice and affirming accountability. Moreover, through this resolution, for the very first time it was formally acknowledged that a survivor- centred approach must guide every aspect of the response of affected countries and the international community. We hope that similar initiatives continue to be brought to the table. In conclusion, Malta once again calls for cooperation among all States and reinforces the need to maintain and continue strengthening these three pillars: transparency, efficiency and effectiveness. The work of the Security Council affects all countries, and collective action in the interest of the common good should be its guiding light.
