Mr. Emvula (Namibia): Madam President, while
joining others in congratulating you on your country's
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of February, I wish to thank you for convening
this meeting and for the choice of the theme "The
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security", which
is most appropriate. The importance of this topic will
go a long way towards helping expand the consensus of
States in strengthening the rule of law, especially at the
international level.

As a State founded on the principle of the rule
of law, Namibia reiterates its commitment to the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law as a
necessary precondition to help maintain peace, promote
development and enhance cooperation that is aimed at
building a harmonious world.

As an important manifestation of human
civilization and progress, the consolidation of the
rule of law at the international level is of the utmost
importance. Namibia believes that the United Nations
remains the central point for the consolidation of the
rule of law internationally. The United Nations system
should therefore serve as a banner of transparency and
democracy that involves the participation of the entire
international community in finding lasting solutions to
contemporary global issues.

The primary role of the General Assembly, as the
sole organ with universal membership, is central to
the promotion and strengthening of the rule of law,
and its exclusive function to progressively develop and
codify international law cannot be overemphasized. We
welcome the Security Council's continuous engagement
in considering this issue, as it is important for the
promotion and maintenance of peace and security.

At the 2005 World Summit, world leaders
unanimously recognized the need for universal
adherence to and the implementation of the rule of law
at both the national and international levels: a further
commitment to an international order based on the rule
of law and international law was reaffirmed.

Drawing from that general consensus on the
international rule of law, three basic elements should be
identified. First, public power should not be exercised
arbitrarily. This incorporates the rejection of the rule of
man and requires that laws be prospective, accessible
and clear to all. Secondly, the law should apply to the
public authority itself, which implies that the law should
reign supreme. And, thirdly, the law must apply to all
persons equally, which implies equality before the law.

While being mindful of those key principles of
our common understanding of the rule of law, it is
important to note that those principles cannot be
translated directly. At the national level, the rule
of law regulates subjects in a vertical relation to the
sovereign, while at the international level, the rule of
law is to regulate entities that are perceived to be equal
in a horizontal relationship. In that context, we need
to be cautious with regard to the legitimacy of certain
Council activities, especially when it passes resolutions
of a law-making character.

Namibia attaches great importance to universal
adherence to and the implementation of the rule of law.
The promotion ofjustice and the rule of law is essential
for peace, the prevention of armed conflicts and
cooperation among States. International law is therefore
important for fostering stability in international
relations. It also provides a framework for addressing
our common challenges, thereby contributing to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

As international peace and security are critical for
the promotion of the rule of law, the Security Council is
at the heart of this endeavour. The Charter of the United

Nations assigns the Security Council the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. However, with the passage of time
it has become clear that the current composition and
structure of the Council have become unrepresentative
and undemocratic and do not truly reflect contemporary
geopolitical realities.
In that context, Namibia reiterates its call for
comprehensive reform of the Security Council to
make it more democratic and transparent, so that it
may better serve humankind. We note that in the face
of some of the current international conflicts, action
or inaction by the Security Council is based on self-
serving political considerations, which may hinder
the effective implementation of its mandate. Calls for
Council reform, therefore, cannot be overstated.

The protection of humankind from the scourge of
war is the principle foundation of the United Nations.
We therefore believe that that noble goal can be
achieved only when all States Members of the United
Nations refrain from the use or threat of use of force
in any manner inconsistent with the purpose and
principles ofjustice and international law. The right to
self-determination, non-interference in the domestic
affairs of other States, respect for human rights and
respect for equal rights of all without distinction as to
race, language, religion, cultural or social character are
obligations under the Charter that should guide State
conduct at the international level.

The Council's effectiveness as a political actor
and its legitimacy as a legal actor are connected. The
international community's readiness to recognize
the Council's authority significantly depends on how
responsible and accountable it is, and how it is seen
to be exercising its extraordinary power on behalf
of the international community. It is therefore in our
collective interest to ensure that the Council's role in
promoting the rule of law ensures that its decisions are
both effective and legitimate.

