Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): As the
penholder for this topic, the delegation of Senegal
welcomes this opportunity to introduce the draft
resolution before us (S/2017/153) with a view to
extending the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
until 28 February 2018. My delegation takes this
opportunity to thank all the members of the Security
Council, express its gratitude for their constructive
cooperation and contribution to the negotiations on the
draft resolution, with special gratitude to the experts of
all delegations.

In the draft resolution, the Security Council takes
note of the Secretary-General's report on Guinea-
Bissau of7 February (S/2017/111) and expresses its full
support to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, the Head of UNIOGBIS, Mr. Modibo Ibrahim
Toure. Through the draft resolution, the Council
endorses the recommendations made by the Department
of Political Affairs, which carried out a strategic
analysis of UNIOGBIS aimed at refocusing its work
on its political capacities, including through support
for the good offices and mediation role of the Special
Representative, thereby streamlining its management
structure through the creation of a single post of deputy
special representative for rule of law and deputy head
of mission, who would also serve as coordinator.

The Council also notes with concern the
institutional and political tensions that persist between
the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister, the
Speaker of the National Assembly and other leaders
of the political parties. In short, the political impasse
would appear to be centred on the political class of
Guinea-Bissau. In that context, the Council believes
that the security and defence forces must continue to
refrain from any involvement in the political situation
and welcomes the restraint that they have shown in that
regard. It also commends the calm shown by the people
of Guinea-Bissau.

In the draft resolution, the Council commends the
work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and all other stakeholders seeking to find a
way out of the crisis, in particular the current Chairman
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS); Mr. Alpha Conde, in his capacity as
ECOWAS Mediator for Guinea-Bissau and President
of the African Union; the Special Representative and
Head of the African Union Liaison Office in Guinea-
Bissau, Ovidio Pequeno; and other participants.

In that connection, the Council welcomes the
adoption by ECOWAS on 10 September 2016 of the six-
point road map it brokered for overcoming the crisis
in Guinea-Bissau, and the Conakry Agreement on the
road map's implementation. In the draft resolution,
the Council urges all political stakeholders to put the
country's interests first and thereby respect the road
map and the Conakry Agreement.

With today's draft resolution, the Security Council
also welcomes the contribution of the ECOWAS
Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) to ensuring
stability in Guinea-Bissau and urges ECOWAS to
extend the Mission's mandate. To that end, the Council
asks the bilateral, regional and international partners to
consider providing major support to ECOWAS in order
to enable it to maintain ECOMIB. The Council also
commends the European Union for its major financial
support to the Mission and welcomes its willingness to
consider options for providing further support.

In view of all of this, the Senegal delegation urges
the Security Council and its bilateral, regional and
international partners to remain engaged in helping
Guinea-Bissau to overcome its political impasse, whose
main victims continue to be the people of Guinea-
Bissau.

