Ms. Bavdaz Kuret (Slovenia): I wish to join others
in thanking the Polish presidency for organizing this
open debate. The protection of children, especially
those in armed conflicts and post-conflict situations, is
one of Slovenia's priorities in the field of human rights.

I also wish to align myself with the statement to
be delivered on behalf of the European Union and the
Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, and
wish to add a couple of remarks in my national capacity.

We would like to join others in thanking all the
briefers. They have our support for their endeavours in
the protection of children affected by armed conflicts
throughout the world and in the promotion of their rights.
It has been 10 years since the adoption of resolution
1882 (2009), which is focused on the killing and
maiming of children and sexual violence against
children in conflict. This year also marks the twentieth
anniversary since the Security Council adopted
resolution 1261 (1999), its first resolution on children
and armed conflict, on which the protection mechanism
is based.

Slovenia shares the concerns of the Secretary-
General, presented in his latest report (S/2019/509). The
report documents the highest number of verified cases
of the killing and maiming of children yet, especially
due to explosive weapons used in populated areas.
We again call on all parties to conflict to take action
to protect children, in accordance with international
humanitarian law and human rights law, respect for
which is not a choice but an obligation. We also call
on all parties to facilitate safe, timely and unimpeded
access of humanitarian aid to children and other
civilians in need.

Slovenia has a good and long tradition of
supporting projects and activities to protect children
from unexploded remnants of conflict and to provide
children affected by armed conflict with psychosocial
and physical rehabilitation. Our ongoing projects
include the following.

First, a mine-risk education programme for Syrian
refugee children is carried out by the Slovenian
organization International Trust Fund for Enhancing
Human Security in northern Jordan.

Secondly, we provide psychosocial well-being
services for children and young people from Ukraine
who have suffered traumatic experiences due to the
armed conflict in the country, and we support the
physical rehabilitation of a Ukrainian teenage girl who
lost her foot in an explosion.

Thirdly, we provide psychosocial rehabilitation to
Syrian refugee children and their mothers in Jordan.

Fourthly, we offer psychosocial assistance to child
victims of armed conflict in Gaza and their parents.

In addition, Slovenia is contributing to the activities
of the International Committee of the Red Cross to
address sexual violence in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and to those of UNICEF on behalf of
children in Yemen.

Since the development of the protection of children
agenda began, the tireless efforts of various actors all
over the globe have had tangible results. Efforts such
as the Paris Principles, the Safe Schools Declaration
and the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the
Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers
need our continuous support and implementation. We
reiterate our call on all States that have not yet done so
to also become a party to the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child.

We support the recommendations that the Secretary-
General presents in his report. We feel particularly
strongly about the prevention of violence against
children and education both for children and adults,
which would empower children to know their rights
and claim them and adults to fight the abuse, killing
and maiming of and other crimes against children. It
is vital that children grow up to be promoters of peace
and tolerance and participate in the peaceful settlement
of disputes.

In that light, Slovenia will continue to engage in
national projects, such as the human rights education
campaign for children, entitled "Our Rights", which
is currently being carried out in Morocco and Egypt
and has benefitted more than 200,000 children in 20
countries over the past 12 years. We will also continue
to support school and peer mediation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We further support the Secretary-
General's call on the Council to ensure that provisions
for the protection of children are included in the relevant
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations.

For the prevention of grave violations against
children in armed conflict and non-recurrence, it is
crucial that perpetrators be held to account. Slovenia
supports the efforts of international criminal justice,
especially the International Criminal Court, and in
that regard welcomes the recent conviction of Bosco
Ntaganda for war crimes and crimes against humanity,
including sexual violence and the recruitment of
children and their use in hostilities.

In order to complement existing international
criminal law, especially much-needed cooperation,
Slovenia has, together with Argentina, the Netherlands,
Belgium, Senegal and Mongolia, proposed the adoption
of a multilateral procedural instrument concerning
mutual legal assistance and extradition for the domestic
prosecution of the most serious international crimes.
We believe that such an initiative would contribute
positively to the protection of children in armed conflict
as well.

