Mr. Ghafoorzhi (Afghanistan): In the name of the
bereaved Afghan nation, I wish to extend gratitude to all
those who took part in today's meeting and expressed their
support for the cause of peace and stability in Afghanistan
either on behalf of their countries or, as in the case of Italy
and Ireland, on behalf of a group of countries. I remind
those who expressed their disapproval of the continuation
of the conflict in our country that we supported talks and
negotiations to take the place of military confrontation and
lead to the formation of a broad-based government of
national unity representing every Afghan side.

Certainly, a military solution will not solve the crisis
in Afghanistan. All the Afghan sides must have realized
this. The occupation of a city, on the one hand, or the
repulsion of force on the other cannot solve the problem in
an intermingled society such as ours, particularly not in the
face of increasingly widespread foreign intervention.

We believe that all sides must abstain from the search
for unilateral, monopoly power. All sides must consider the
other parties to the Afghan conflict to be equal and
fraternal. So that equality can reign in the future political
life of Afghanistan, each party should be able to guarantee
and secure their political independence, national unity and
territorial integrity through the civilized practice of
negotiations.

But we cannot improve the situation if the Taliban
continues to reject any viable solution to the problem -
and it is the only side in the conflict to do so. As far as
Islamic status is concerned, we have always steadfastly
supported that principle, whether we were in a strong
position or a defensive posture, because we believe that this
path is beneficial to the higher interests of our country and
of our people. Surely, the record of the United Nations
Special Mission for Afghanistan shows this.

Moreover, now and in the past we have always
accorded special importance to the role of the United
Nations Special Mission. It would not be far from the truth

 

to say that the Islamic State of Afghanistan has been one
of the parties that has been most cooperative with the
Special Mission. We highly value the good offices of
His Excellency the Secretary-General and His Excellency
Mr. Norbert Holl's tireless efforts as a friend of the
Afghan people. The emphasis at this crucial juncture is on
further strengthening the Special Mission, as suggested in
our proposed draft resolution, distributed this morning.
This is indicative of our belief in the competence and
capability of the Special Mission and of the facilities that
it has at its disposal to promote an early return of peace
to war-shattered Afghanistan.

The Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan
made some remarks in his statement that call for some
brief response. The Minister of State for Foreign Affairs
of Pakistan once again reaffirmed his country's attitude
and position of not having a one-sided approach towards
the groups and parties in Afghanistan.

Permit me once again briefly to state what happened
just yesterday, as I mentioned in my statement this
morning. After General Dostum joined the Government of
the Islamic State of Afghanistan, the Pakistani Interior
Minister, Mr. Babar, flew to Mazar-i-Sharif yesterday to
meet General Dostum. We are not sure what was
discussed in that meeting, but one subject we are sure
was not raised with General Dostum was congratulations
on his decision to join the Islamic State of Afghanistan
headed by Mr. Rabbani. It must have been quite to the
contrary.

It should be remembered that the Pakistani
authorities have always said they have a policy of
according no preferential treatment to any Afghan side. In
this very explosive and volatile situation, I wonder if any
member of the Council would consider such a trip on the
part of the Interior Minister of Pakistan to Kabul and then
to Mazar-i-Sharif and then finally to Kandahar, the
headquarters of the Taliban, anything but a contradiction
of the claim that has been made. The immediate
implication of this trip is that it can only exacerbate the
conflict. Is this not interference? How else could it be
described other than as a gesture that is provocative and
destructive to intra-Afghan dialogue.
 

Mr. Nasirullah Babar would know that he is not the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan and responsible for
coordinating policies in support of its subordinates, the
Taliban. His trip as Interior Minister of Pakistan must mean
something other than was explained.

In brief, I should like to say that the people of
Afghanistan, who enjoy deep-rooted religious, historical and
cultural ties and bonds of brotherhood with the people of
Pakistan, still appreciate the assistance of our Pakistani
brothers and sisters during the 14 years of our rightful jihad
and national struggle. All this means that the Pakistani
representative should do something better than continue to
deny the negative role of his authorities in the Afghan
conflict.

Ironically. in his statement before the Security Council
this afternoon, the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of
Pakistan blames the continued conflict on the interference
of others. 1 would just like to respond to the Minister of
State for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan by referring to the
saying about the fox in the coop, with eggs and the chicken
in his mouth, blaming the cow in the field for causing the
chicken to cry out.

