Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the
presence of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-Moon.

Firmly committed to nuclear disarmament and
the elimination of weapons of mass destruction, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela voted in favour
of resolution 2321 (2016) in response to the nuclear
test undertaken on 9 September by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, as we believe that it affects
international peace and security, particularly on the
Korean peninsula and enhances the risk of possible
confrontation. That country's other nuclear tests this
year and launch of ballistic missiles violate Security
Council resolutions on the issue and the nuclear
non-proliferation regime. The resolution adopted today
is part of the global focus on mechanisms and formulas
to build a sustainable environment conducive to forginh
a path towards a political and sustainable solution to the
nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula.

We call on the Security Council to step up its efforts
in promoting dialogue and negotiations between the
parties in order to contribute to a negotiated solution
of the issue. The sanctions regime applied to the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea should be seen
as a means and not an end in itself. Its ultimate goal
should be aimed at denuclearization, peace and stability
in the region through a negotiated political solution.
Furthermore, we urge the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to meet its obligations under the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, and we appeal to
all parties to act cautiously so as to avoid heightening
tensions that could lead to an armed conflict.

We reiterate that the measures contained in
the resolutions adopted on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea should be applied in full respect for
the principles of international law, with specific goals,
in a responsible, transparent manner and with clear
criteria for ending them if the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea ends its nuclear programme. At the
same time, we must ensure that the measures contained
in the resolution do not have a negative humanitarian
impact on the civilian population. We are concerned
that the restrictions imposed on the export of primary
goods could affect its population.

We also believe that those controls should not serve
as a precedent for limiting the rights of States to manage
their own natural resources in a sovereign manner to
meet their socioeconomic goals, in line with General
Assembly resolution 1803 (XVII). The implementation
ofthe measures contained in resolutions 2321 (2016) and
2270 (2016) should in no way impede the coordination
of international organizations providing technical and
humanitarian assistance to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. Those organizations should continue
to cooperate in the development of projects and the
establishment of conditions conducive to the stability
and well-being of the North Korean people.

In conclusion, we reiterate our appeal to Member
States with influence on the issue to demonstrate the
political will to find a mutually acceptable solution for
all parties and to make the necessary efforts to establish
a climate of trust that would help to resolve in a peaceful
and constructive way the relaunching of the Six-Party
Talks, such as the important and unique mechanism to
peacefully resolve the intentions and differences on the
Korean peninsula.

