Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing and welcome Foreign Minister Drame, who is joining today's meeting via video-teleconference.We condemn the attack on a camp of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) on 9 January and wish the wounded a speedy recovery. The Secretary-General's most recent report (S/2019/983) points to the continued complexity and fragility of Mali's security situation, grave violence within and between communities andadire humanitarian situation. The security and economic situation in northern and central Mali is a cause for concern, while terrorist forces are threatening regional security. The Government of Mali and the parties concerned must take action to resolve the aforementioned issues. First, the Government of Mali must play an effective role and resolve differences peacefully in full consultation with all parties in Mali in order to promote the peace process and stay jointly committed to national peace and development. As observed in the Secretary- General's report, accelerating the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali is the only viable path to lasting peace and stability in the country, which will require the sustained and intensified efforts of the Malian Government. Secondly, the Government of Mali must enhance regional cooperation so as to respond to cross-border terrorist operations through holistic means. The security dynamics in Mali and the surrounding Sahel region have posed challenges to the implementation of the peace agreement. The Government of Mali must truly and effectively assume its primary responsibilities of protecting its own territory and people, enhance its security and counter-terrorism capacities, and gradually take charge of its own security in order to maintain stability in northern and central Mali. Thirdly, the Government of Mali needs to consolidate its economic bases, improve the livelihoods of its people and make great efforts to achieve independent and sustainable development so as to promote peace through development. The Government should increase its input in northern and central Mali so that local people can enjoy the peace dividend at an early date. MINUSMA and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General have played an important role in keeping Mali stable, enhancing its security capacities and supporting and facilitating its peace process, which is crucial to security and stability in Mali and the Sahel region. MINUSMA is one of the most dangerous peacekeeping missions of the United Nations. We encourage the Government to fully collaborate with the Mission and coordinate with its continuous efforts to enhance the safety and security of its peacekeepers.
