Mr. Al-Qahtani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs for his briefing, which we believe
has raised awareness and concern about the
humanitarian difficulties faced by some African States.
We join other States in calling for the humanitarian
situation in those countries to be addressed as soon as
possible and for the provision of the necessary
humanitarian assistance to the countries that have been
affected by the conflicts to which he referred.

There is no doubt that the humanitarian situation
in Darfur, Chad and the Central African Republic
requires that we keep working to ensure that the
Governments of those countries continue their efforts
to address it. That should be done in cooperation and
coordination with the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs in an effort to provide the
necessary protection for the staff of humanitarian relief
organizations.

We welcome the explicit pledges made in recent
weeks by the Sudanese Government as a result of the
positive meetings held by the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs. The steps taken by the
Government of the Sudan, as described by the Under-
Secretary-General, are the best proof of progress on
this issue.

On the political level, my delegation welcomes
the constructive meetings held in Khartoum in recent
weeks between the President of the Sudan and
Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim to revive the Darfur Peace
Agreement. We believe that will lead to a resolution of
the differences between the Sudanese Government and
the United Nations as regards the three-phased plan
provided for in the Darfur Peace Agreement, the Addis
Ababa talks and the Abuja agreements. We welcome
the efforts made by the States of the region; moreover,
the Arab Summit in Riyadh also addressed the issue of
Darfur in an effort to find speedy and effective
solutions to that crisis.

We should not miss any opportunity to bring
about peace, whether in Darfur or in any other area of
conflict. We must build on the progress that has been
achieved in order to bring about peace, stability and a
full understanding of the root causes of these problems.
We believe that the military option is not conducive to
the resolution of any crisis, regardless of its source. We
also believe that the way to emerge from a crisis is to
identify a mechanism for frank discussions based on
respect and genuine and sincere political will at the
national, regional and international levels.

The three States that I have mentioned bear
primary responsibility to protect their civilians, while
taking all necessary legitimate steps to protect their
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We call upon those
Governments to undertake every necessary measure to
bring to justice all those responsible for crimes, so as
to put an end to impunity and establish the rule of law.

We have a few questions for the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs. First, as Mr. Holmes
has not been involved in the political efforts
undertaken by Mr. Salim Ahmed Salem and Mr. Jan
Eliasson, we would like to know his view of those
efforts. Secondly, the Government of the Sudan has not
rejected the three-phased proposal, but has stated that
some aspects of that proposal contradict the Darfur
Peace Agreement. Has Mr. Holmes taken up that issue
with the Sudanese Government?

