Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): Several
things about our work in November were unique. For
one, great changes have taken place in the situation in
Afghanistan. Despite the fact that the Council's
schedule was very tight this month, the presidency still
made timely arrangements for briefings and
discussions. That illustrates the importance we attach
to the question of Afghanistan. We have achieved good
results.
Another thing that makes November unique is
that we made good use of the presence of foreign
ministers attending the general debate of the General
Assembly here in New York to hold a series of
important meetings that have had notable results,
especially with regard to the situation in Africa.

A third aspect that made November unique was
the fact that the work of the Council was more
transparent, and that it was very thoughtfully and
meticulously arranged by the President. We made our
plans at the beginning of the month, and now, at the
end of the month, we are wrapping up. The presidency
also distributed written materials to that end. We would
also like to express our gratitude to you, Madam
President, and your Mission for your excellent
performance this month.

I would like to make three brief comments by
way of reviewing the goals we set for this month.

First, as mentioned before, making good use of
the presence of ministers for the General Assembly to
convene ministerial meetings focussed on important
questions is conducive to strengthening direct contacts
between the Security Council and the leaders of
various countries, as well as to promoting the
resolution of specific issues. It is worth reflecting on
our experience in this regard and attaching some
importance to it. Of course, the question of whether it
is necessary to regularly convene ministerial meetings
during the plenary session of the General Assembly
should be determined for the most part by prevailing
circumstances and necessities.

Secondly, we are in favour of the Security
Council's giving greater heed to the opinions and
recommendations of parties concerned in the questions
on its agenda. The Chinese delegation has maintained
that, before making important decisions, the Security
Council should provide opportunities to hear the
opinions of non-members. We hope that we shall be
able to reach consensus on this question and implement
it.

At present, we engage in various formalities, such
as private formal meetings, Arria formula meetings and
direct contact between the presidency and the parties
concerned. All these can be made good use of. We also
support the strengthening of cooperation and
communication among the Security Council, troop-
contributing countries and the Secretariat. We also
appreciate the efforts made by Ambassador Ward in
presiding over the Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations. We believe that the
discussions of the Working Group will have a positive
outcome.

Thirdly, the Security Council held thematic
debates this month, such as on children and armed
conflict and the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. These issues have many elements in common,
including the measures and recommendations made
concerning them. Provided that the overall result does
not suffer, it would be a good idea to lump related
questions together and to discuss them jointly, which
could enhance our efficiency and avoid repetition. The
result of this would be even better than what we have
now.

As far as the Security Council is concerned, the
best way to protect civilians is to redouble its efforts to
end conflicts as soon as possible. At the same time, we
are also in favour of improving coordination and
cooperation between the Security Council and other
organs of the United Nations so that we can make joint
efforts to solve the problems before us.

