Mr. Kaiser (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the

Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.

Let me begin by thanking Mr. Ould Abdallah, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his comprehensive briefing. I would also like to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi
Omaar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia, and
thank him for his contribution to today's debate.

During the past two months, the Djibouti peace
process has generated a new scenario for Somalia with
opportunities for an inclusive political solution. The
EU welcomes the expansion of the transitional
parliament, the election of President Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed, followed by the appointment of the
Prime Minister, Omar Sharmarke, and his Cabinet. The
EU encourages President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed
and Prime Minister Omar Sharmarke to continue their
efforts to achieve a cessation of hostilities and to create
an inclusive peace process involving all parties to the
conflict. Such a process must also give women a voice.
The EU welcomes the intention of the President to
reach out to those groups that remain opposed to the
Djibouti process.

The EU looks forward to working with the
President, the enlarged Transitional Federal Parliament
and the Government of national unity in their
endeavours and will continue to support the political
process as it takes on challenges and opportunities to
further consolidate reconciliation, to restore peace for
all the Somali people and to rebuild the country.

Despite positive developments at the political
level, the situation on the ground remains extremely
volatile. Security constraints continue to hamper
humanitarian operations across Somalia and have led
to a wave of attacks on humanitarian workers,
peacekeepers and human rights defenders, with the
civilian population bearing the brunt of the casualties.
The European Union acknowledges that the support of
the international community to the Somali Joint
Security Force and the Somali Police Service is key.

In that context, the EU condemns the attack of
22 February on AMISOM, leading to the death of
11 Burundian peacekeepers and injuries to others, and
those against humanitarian workers. The humanitarian
situation remains critical. More than 3 million people
in Somalia still need humanitarian assistance. The acts
of piracy off the coast of Somalia remain a source of
real concern to the Somali people and, in particular, to
the millions who depend on the assistance transferred
to Somalia by sea by the World Food Programme.

The EU welcomes the Secretary-General's
recommendations contained in his comprehensive
report (S/2009/132). The Security Council has
expressed, in resolution 1863 (2009), its intent to
establish a United Nations peacekeeping operation in
Somalia as a follow-on force to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), subject to its further
decision by 1 June 2009. In any case, in the upcoming
months, AMISOM, as well as Somali security
institutions, will continue to play an important role in
ensuring security, stability and law and order and in
supporting the political process and facilitating
humanitarian activities. That is why both the
reinforcement of AMISOM. and the establishment of an
effective Somali security sector should be supported,
as widely as possible, by the international community.
In that regard, the European Union supports the
requests contained in Security Council resolution 1863
(2009) to provide a United Nations logistical support
package to support AMISOM. and to establish a trust
fund.

Through its Joint Strategy Paper 2008-2013, the
European Union continues to ensure medium- to long-
term assistance to Somalia. Priority is given to
promoting a peaceful and secure environment, human
rights, democratic processes and institution-building.
The European Community's support programme for the
same period amounts to €215 million, with good
governance, security, education, economic
development and support of livelihoods as priority
sectors.

With regard to support for AMISOM, the
European Commission has so far committed a total of
€40 million. Recognizing the need for immediate
actions in favour of the Somali security sector,
financial support from the European Commission and
EU member States to the civilian Somali Police Force
will also continue, through the United Nations
Development Programme, under its Rule of Law and
Security Programme and/or through other new
channels, such as the African Union and AMISOM.

In February, the African Union requested that the
European Union financially support the immediate and

short-term needs of the AMISOM. police component.
The European Commission is, in principle, open to
contributing through the African Peace Facility.

The direct engagement of the European Union in
the fight against piracy started in September 2008,
when it completed the actions launched by some
European member States in November 2007, which
continued until 8 December 2008, when they were
replaced by a naval operation, Operation Atalanta. In
accordance with the provisions of resolution 1846
(2008), Operation Atalanta focuses on three primary
tasks: first, the protection of World Food Programme
shipping providing assistance to Somalis dependent on
humanitarian assistance; secondly, the escort of some
of the most vulnerable vessels in the area of
responsibility; and thirdly, to the utmost extent
possible, the deterrence and repression of acts of piracy
through surveillance and patrolling in the maritime
areas where the pirates have proved to be most active.

However, suppressing piracy off the coast of
Somalia can only be achieved by addressing the root
causes of the problem, which the instability and the
lack of rule of law and good governance, and by
assisting the development of the capacities of the State
of Somalia.

Operation Atalanta currently has a strength of
some 1,000 personnel from 12 member States. The
naval force is currently comprised of five frigates
provided by France, Germany, Greece, Spain and Italy.
Helicopters and maritime patrol aircraft were made
available by France and Spain. One more Spanish
warship is expected to join the operation soon, as are
three Swedish ships in May. In August, Norway will
deploy a frigate, and the Netherlands and Belgium will
deploy their frigates in the second semester of 2009.
Other contributors such as Croatia, Ukraine and
Switzerland are also considering possible
contributions.
The European Union operation is commanded by
a British admiral from multinational headquarters in
Northwood, United Kingdom. That headquarters is also
the location for the Maritime Security Centre-Horn of
Africa, a joint enterprise between the EU military
operation and the shipping industry, which is helping to
ensure the most effective interaction with the industry
and the widest possible application of agreed best
practice, thus minimizing risk.
The EU operation is effectively fighting piracy
together with other countries that have deployed their
naval units in the Gulf of Aden and that work with
Combined Task Force 151, operating in the area, as
well as countries of the region.

The EU Secretary-General and High
Representative, Javier Solana, stated, in his letter
addressed to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, that the
European Union is ready, through its naval Operation
Atalanta, to contribute, within its means and
capabilities, to the protection at sea of the United
Nations vessels delivering the logistical support
package to AMISOM. In this context, it is very
important for the European Union to continue to have
an operational contact point in the Secretariat in New
York, in addition to the focal point of the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia in Nairobi.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that the
international community should continue to support the
political process in Somalia. This support should be
complemented by the efforts of Somalis themselves,
who are ultimately responsible for the achievement of
full national reconciliation. The EU stands ready to
continue to assist Somalia. The EU is, inter alia,
currently working on a comprehensive and coherent
approach towards the Horn of Africa, including the
regional dimension of the situation in Somalia.

