Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2036 (2012) on
enhancing the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). The resolution comes at a critical stage
when the Transitional Federal Government in Somalia
continues to make significant progress in the
implementation of the road map, as witnessed at the
Garowe conferences. The security situation in Somalia
has also witnessed a marked improvement, with
AMISOM. patrolling almost 90 per cent of Mogadishu.
Despite all the positive developments, we are not
oblivious to the many challenges still besetting the
country at the political, security and humanitarian
levels.

The resolution just adopted offers a significant
improvement in the logistical support package
provided to AMISOM. and increases the troop level
from 12,000 to 17,731. As the recent report of the
Secretary-General states, the revised African Union-
United Nations joint strategic concept of the for
AMISOM. "represents the most pragmatic way forward,
in view of the prevailing circumstances on the ground,
even though confronted with risks and challenges"
(S/2012/74, para. 43).

We are therefore concerned that not all of the
proposals of the Secretary-General and the African
Union have been taken into account. Full support for
the strategic concept is necessary to the effective
implementation of AMISOM's operations. We also
regret that the hurried manner in which the text of the
resolution was negotiated has compelled us to adopt a
resolution that does not take into account all of our
concerns. For example, the resolution makes no
mention of the essential maritime component, and does
not explicitly mention the intention of rehatting
AMISOM. once conditions allow. We hope that these
issues will be addressed through bilateral and
multilateral support, including uncaveated contributions
of support to the AMISOM. Trust Fund and in future
resolutions.

We look forward to the London conference to be
held tomorrow, which we hope will garner a unified
international response to the political, security and
humanitarian challenges confronting Somalia. This
should be an opportunity to consolidate existing
measures and efforts to resolve the Somali crisis. We
12-23786
encourage greater strategic coherence between the
United Nations and the African Union, in line with
resolution 2033 (2012).

Finally, South Africa believes that the only
sustainable resolution of the Somali crisis is through an
all-inclusive Somali-led dialogue and consultation
process in line with the Djibouti Agreement.

