Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I begin by
thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ould Abdallah, for his briefing and also
the representative of Somalia for his contribution.

Somalia remains a challenge for the Security
Council and for the United Nations and the African
Union as a whole. Making progress there, as today's
briefing makes clear, is a long-term task and a vital
one. The United Nations is uniquely placed to help
address all the range of needs in Somalia:
humanitarian, political, security and developmental.
We warmly support Mr. Ould Abdallah's efforts to
address those complex problems and to coordinate and
lead an effective United Nations response. We
welcome in particular his discussions with the
Transitional Federal Government leadership, with the
regional and international players and with a wide
range of Somali stake-holders, who will have a part to
play in Somalia's future.

My delegation welcomes the United Nations
Humanitarian Coordinator's recent visit to Somalia.
Easing the humanitarian crisis should be our immediate
priority. That will require continuing efforts from the
United Nations, and it will take action and cooperation
also by Somali actors on the ground, both Government
and rebels, to ensure humanitarian access. In particular,
the Transitional Federal Government should ensure that
humanitarian relief can be delivered freely throughout
all the areas it controls, and it should also protect those
in receipt of humanitarian relief and the displaced
persons who are trying to return to their homes.

On the political process, we welcome the
appointment of the new Prime Minister, Mr. Nur
Hassan Hussein. His appointment provides an

opportunity to revitalize the political process. We look
forward to him beginning work in earnest, once he has
finalized the new Government cabinet. Full
implementation of the conclusions of the National
Reconciliation Congress will be crucial, in particular
launching a constitutional process, establishing a clear,
timetabled road map to elections at the end of the
transitional period and advancing a full and meaningful
dialogue with all actors in Somalia's political process:
clan leaders and elders, religious groups, opposition
groups, civil society and business. We will need to
support the Special Representative's new initiatives to
get this process moving forward.

On security, we welcome the Special
Representative's new thinking. We support the
proposal for a technical assessment mission to Somalia
to help advance the contingency planning of the United
Nations.

On the role of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), we believe that the United
Nations should continue to support that force. The
Ugandan contingent is doing a demanding job in
difficult conditions. We welcome the news that
Burundi hopes to deploy troops very soon, and we call
on Ghana and Nigeria to honour as soon as possible
their commitments to AMISOM. The United Kingdom
has extended financial support to the force, including
support for Burundi's deployment, and we are ready to
consider further support for other countries to deploy.
We hope our partners will also consider similar such
backing.

