At the outset, South Africa wishes to thank the Dominican Republic for convening this meeting to address the link between hunger and conflict. We thank Mr. Dongyu, Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization, Mr. Beasley, Executive Director of the World Food Programme, and Mr. Egeland, Secretary General of the Norwegian Refugee Council, for their detailed and factual briefings. Hunger is both a cause and effect of war and conflict. The link between hunger and conflict is a persistent issue. It therefore comes as no surprise that 60 per cent of people suffering from food insecurity worldwide live in countries affected by conflict. Armed conflict disrupts food systems, causes mass displacement of people, destroys livelihoods and triggers food insecurity. Food insecurity and competition for natural resources have in turn resulted in many current conflicts that we deal with today. Those factors set the stage for multiple years of food shortages, especially where such conflicts are exacerbated by natural disasters, including the impact of climate change. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is exacerbating the already difficult situation in those countries, since it has led to food shortages, destructive competition for limited resources and the manipulation of food provisions. Civilians, particularly women, children, the elderly and the disabled, are the primary victims of these vicious cycles of food insecurity and armed conflict. Civilian and essential infrastructure, aid convoys and humanitarian workers are also targeted during conflict situations. In that regard, we emphasize the plight of internally displaced persons, refugees and migrants, who are subjected to difficult living conditions during conflict situations and, more often than not, have limited access to humanitarian assistance, including food. We therefore underscore the importance and urgency of ensuring that all vulnerable groups have unimpeded access to food aid and humanitarian assistance. At the same time, we are witnessing an increase in parties to conflict using hunger as a weapon of war, which constitutes a violation of international humanitarian law and potentially a war crime. Violations of international humanitarian law must not be condoned, and the perpetrators must be held accountable for their actions. In order to do more to minimize and prevent conflict-induced hunger, the Council should consider making more effective use of prevention and early-warning systems, such as integrating indicators on alarming food insecurity levels and the restriction of humanitarian access to populations in peacekeeping operations and country reports submitted to the Security Council. It could also require coordinated and multifaceted responses, as well as close cooperation between humanitarian relief and development efforts as part of the humanitarian-development nexus. The Council could also promote gender- and age-sensitive humanitarian assistance that remain responsive to the different needs of the population, thereby ensuring that those needs are integrated into the humanitarian response, and could make the provision of adequate health services in conflict areas as part of a strategy to eradicate hunger. In addition, the Council could take into consideration the impact of economic sanctions imposed on a country in conflict, which may inadvertently also give rise to conflict-related hunger, as civilians could have less access to nutrition and medicine and could face higher prices for foodstuffs. Finally, the Council could ensure that all parties to a conflict fully comply with relevant international humanitarian law and international human rights law, as well as hold accountable those who violate such laws. Let me conclude by underscoring that peace and food security go hand in hand. In order to end hunger, as the Security Council, we need to address the root causes of conflicts and end all wars, in the spirit of the Silencing the Guns initiative.
