Mr. Mladenov: We meet today as rapidly shifting
developments in the Middle East continue to underscore
the growing threat to international peace and security.
As new, dangerous flashpoints emerge in the region,
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict also remains one of the
drivers of extremism and instability. The occupation
continues and no progress has been made in realizing a
negotiated two-State solution. It is a multigenerational
tragedy for the peoples of this land.

On 26 September at the General Assembly (see A/74/PV.7), President Abbas announced his intention
to set a date for Palestinian elections. If that decision
were to materialize, it would be the first Palestinian
elections since 2006, giving renewed legitimacy to
national institutions. The international community
should support this process if it strengthens national
unity and not division. That includes an agreement for
elections that take place across the occupied Palestinian
territory, in line with relevant legislation, international
best practices and an agreed national political platform
that is based on existing agreements.

The past month has also witnessed the continuing
deterioration of the situation on the ground. With no
prospect of final-status negotiations on the horizon,
facts on the ground continue to deteriorate, pushing
us ever further from a viable two-State solution.
During the past month it has been reported that the
Israeli authorities advanced plans for housing units in
Area C settlements. The exact numbers are yet to be
confirmed. Even without this latest advancement, the
number of units advanced or approved in 2019 so far is
already greater than that for all of 2018. Settlements are
illegal under international law and remain a substantial
obstacle to peace. They must cease immediately.

Meanwhile, demolitions and seizures of
Palestinian-owned structures also continued across the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Citing
the absence of Israeli-issued building permits, which
are nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain, the
authorities demolished or seized 51 structures, resulting
in the displacement of 80 Palestinians, including 40
children. Four of the structures were demolished based
on Military Order 1797.

Demolitions and confiscations of infrastructures
and internationally funded humanitarian projects in
Area C also continue at a concerning pace. The Israeli
authorities must stop this practice, which is not in line
with international humanitarian law, and compensate
the population affected commensurately with the
damages incurred.

Violence continues to be a major part of the day-to-
day reality ofthe conflict. In recent weeks we have seen
a welcome reduction of violence in Gaza, including
in the launching of rockets. The agreements for calm
brokered by the United Nations and Egypt continue to
hold. Despite the overall improvement, however, three
Palestinians were killed by the Israel Defense Forces,
and more than 500 have been injured during protests at
the Gaza perimeter fence.

I take this opportunity to reiterate the concerns
expressed on 10 October by Deputy Special Coordinator
and Humanitarian Coordinator Jamie McGoldrick on
the impact that the Violence at these demonstrations
has had on children. The Israeli security forces have
the responsibility to exercise maximum restraint and
use lethal force only when strictly necessary, as a last
resort. I also reiterate the call on Hamas to uphold its
responsibility to ensure the safety of children in Gaza,
including by preventing them from being used and
exposed to the risk of violence.

During the reporting period, six rockets were
launched from Gaza towards Israel, causing no injuries.
Additionally, for the first time in a month, no fires
were caused by incendiary balloons. Meanwhile, in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, two Palestinians
were killed, including one infant following tear-gas
inhalation. In addition, 88 Palestinians, including 11
children, were injured in various incidents, including
during clashes, military operations and settler-related
violence. Six Palestinian security forces personnel were
also injured by home-made explosive devices during
clashes with Palestinians. Four Israelis, including two
Israel security forces personnel, were also injured,
including one by Israeli settlers.

Among the overall incidents, according to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
settler-related violence resulted in 11 Palestinians and
one Israeli injured. In addition, there were 33 incidents
resulting in damage to Palestinian property, including
some 1,236 trees and 63 vehicles, and one incident
resulting in damage to an Israeli vehicle.

I am particularly concerned by the worrying attacks
by settlers in the occupied West Bank, in the context of
the annual olive harvest. As the olive harvest begins,
I call on the authorities to ensure smooth access of
Palestinian farmers to their land and to protect farmers
and their property from attacks.
On 16 October, in an alarming incident, Palestinian
farmers and Israeli and foreign volunteers harvesting
olive trees near Burin Village were attacked with stones
and metal rods by people from the Yitzhar settlement.
On 22 October the Yitzhar area was declared a closed
military zone, and forces were deployed in it. An
80-year-old rabbi and four foreign volunteers were also
injured. One of the alleged perpetrators ofthose attacks
was arrested. In Qaryut, south of Nablus, Palestinians
were also prevented from accessing their lands for the
olive harvest.

During the reporting period, despite attempts to
reach an agreement between the Israeli authorities and
residents of the Al-Issawiya district, tensions remain
high in East Jerusalem.

On 26 September, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians (AHLC) held its biannual meeting in New
York. The United Nations highlighted the critical need
to support the Palestinian people and the Palestinian
Authority (PA) and to advance the two-State solution
as the only viable option for a peaceful resolution
to the conflict. Moreover, at the meeting members
noted that every effort must be made to avoid further
deterioration in the security situations in both Gaza and
the West Bank.

The United Nations also reported on progress in the
implementation of the package of urgent humanitarian
and economic interventions for Gaza, endorsed by the
AHLC in September 2018. The interventions have had
an important impact across many sectors. The average
daily availability of electricity in Gaza has doubled
from 5.5 hours in the first half of 2018 to nearly 12 to
15 hours in the first half of 2019. This has increased
water and wastewater treatment, reduced the need for
expensive fuel to run hospitals and lowered costs for
private businesses and families.

Almost 450,000 people in Gaza have benefited
from emergency health care, and nearly 400,000 have
benefited from the delivery of drugs and medical
supplies. As of October, United Nations temporary job-
creation programmes have produced more than 16,000
jobs, with another 1,000 jobs expected in the coming
weeks. I thank those Member States that have supported
the implementation of the AHLC projects so far and
urge others to contribute to these critical initiatives.
Despite these vital efforts, the humanitarian
situation in Gaza remains dire. As of the end of
September, almost half of essential medications and
about a third of essential medical disposables are still
missing. Health providers continue to struggle to treat
those injured during the weekly demonstrations. Severe
movement and access restrictions continue, including
for those requiring treatment outside Gaza and national
staff from United Nations agencies and international
non-governmental organizations working in Gaza.

While addressing the humanitarian crisis must
remain our priority, I reiterate once again that the core
of the crisis in Gaza is political. It is not possible to
genuinely and sustainably improve the socioeconomic
situation in Gaza without significantly easing
restrictions on the movement and access of goods
and people, with the goal of ultimately lifting them,
in line with Security Council resolution 1860 (2009),
and reuniting Gaza and the West Bank under a single,
legitimate Palestinian national authority.

In this regard, I once again call on all Palestinian
factions to engage with Egypt on reconciliation efforts.

I am encouraged by the agreement reached on
3 October between Israel and the Palestinian Authority,
which resulted in the transfer of some $425 million
of clearance revenues to the PA. Despite the relative
normalization of the fiscal situation of the Palestinian
Authority, both sides must engage in a constructive
manner with the goal of restoring the revenue
transfers in full, in line with the Paris Protocol on
Economic Relations.

On another positive note, I welcome the Palestinian
Cabinet's decision on 21 October to advance
amendments to the Palestinian civil-status law in favour
of women. These include increasing the minimum age of
marriage and granting women the right to manage their
children's bank accounts. In recent months, Palestinian
women have been actively voicing their demands for
recognition of their political, social and economic
rights and protection against gender-based violence.

I am concerned, however, about the 17 October
decision by the Ramallah Magistrate Court that ordered
the blocking ofsome 50 Palestinian and Arabic websites
and Facebook pages deemed critical of the Palestinian
Authority and its officials. The fundamental right of
freedom of opinion and expression and its associated
freedom to receive information are important and must
be protected. Following criticism from the Journalist
Syndicate and a petition from the National Human
Rights Institution, the interpretation of the cybercrime
presidential decree, which was used as the legal basis
for the decision, was referred to the Constitutional
Court on 24 October.

Turning to developments in the region, popular
protests continue to take place in several countries,
from Jordan to Iraq to Lebanon, with people demanding
improvements to theirdaily lives and an endto corruption.
In Lebanon, an estimated 1.5 million Lebanese have
engaged in largely peaceful demonstrations against
the deteriorating economic situation and corruption.
In response, on 21 October the Council of Ministers
adopted a series of reform measures and finalized the
2020 State budget, with a 0.6 per cent public deficit
target. The protests, however, continue, with calls for
the resignation of the Government.

In Iraq, from 1 to 9 October anti-Government
protests took place across the country, notably in
Baghdad and in the southern governorates, and turned
violent, resulting in scores of fatalities. The report of
a governmental investigation, released on 22 October,
put the total number of fatalities at 157, citing a lack
of control at the local level by senior officials, in
addition to the unauthorized use of force, including
live ammunition, by security forces. The Government
in Baghdad has announced measures to address
the legitimate demands of the protesters, including
employment opportunities for young Iraqis and housing
subsidies for the poor.

A second round of large-scale demonstrations
started in the late evening of 24 October in Baghdad
and other locations in the south and continues to
date. Intense clashes have been reported, along with
the destruction of public and private property and
the presence of armed spoilers. As of 27 October, the
Independent High Commission of Human Rights had
registered 74 deaths and 3,654 injured - most of whom
were treated and have left the hospital - as well as 90
buildings burned.

In Syria, in almost nine years of conflict we have
witnessed the devastating toll on civilians, including
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law, alleged war crimes and crimes
against humanity, systematic detention and torture,
attacks on medical facilities, schools and camps for
internally displaced persons and the erosion of norms
prohibiting the use of chemical weapons. A whole
generation of Syrian children has grown up in war.
Hundreds of thousands of people have been killed and
half the country's population has been displaced.
The Secretary-General and the Security Council
have made it clear that a sustainable solution can be
reached only through a United Nations-facilitated,
credible political process, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015). It is hoped that the launch of the
Constitutional Committee in Geneva will be the first
step in a broader political process that will meet the
legitimate aspirations of all Syrians.

Meanwhile, in the occupied Golan, the situation
has remained calm. The ceasefire between Israel and
Syria continues to be maintained in an environment that
remains volatile. Violations of the 1974 Disengagement
of Forces Agreement, including breaches of the
ceasefire line, continue to occur.

As we work to address the threats to international
peace and security in the Middle East, we must never
forget that preventive diplomacy is one of the most
important tools that we can use in order to defuse
tensions before they turn into confrontation. The
people of the Middle East have seen enough violence
and injustice. The region cannot afford another war and
we must continue our efforts to de-escalate tensions
and create openings for political solutions in the
interest of peace. In that context, I would like to return
to the Israeli-Palestinian question and remind everyone
that despite our collective efforts to prevent war in
Gaza, those efforts cannot be sustained on a purely
humanitarian basis. They need a political perspective
that illuminates a path forward to intra-Palestinian
unity and, ultimately, a two-State solution. We can
no longer continue to address Gaza's critical needs
on a month-to-month basis while failing to confront
the broader political reality, including the stiffening
closures, Violence and lack of unity.

Similarly, we can no longer disregard the cracks
emerging in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
Settlement construction and expansion continue, the
PA financial crisis is not resolved and the economy
continues to stagnate. Therefore, we must reassert that
to advance the goal of lasting peace between Israelis
and Palestinians, the only way forward is to return to
the negotiations with the goal of two States, living side
by side in peace, security and mutual recognition, based
on relevant United Nations resolutions, international
law and prior agreements.

As in Israel and Palestine, so in the rest of the
Middle East, our collective efforts must be guided by
the Charter of the United Nations. In each conflict in
the region, preventive diplomacy and de-escalation
are critical elements of our engagement. Long-term
sustainable peace, however, can be based only on
justice, human rights and international law.

