Mr. Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank
Ambassador Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta, in his capacity
as Chair ofthe Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), for leading the
preparation and delivery of our joint statement.

On behalf of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), I would
like to say that we fully endorse the views expressed in
the joint statement. From my Committee's perspective,
our concern is with preventing the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, their delivery means
and related materials to non-State actors, including
terrorists. While the mandates of the three Committees
differ, there are important areas of complementarity.
Cooperation between the three Committees and their
supporting experts is important to promoting the
effective implementation by States of their obligations
under our respective Security Council resolutions.

As far as the 1540 Committee is concerned, that is
recognized in our five-year comprehensive review of the
implementation of the resolution and in the subsequent
resolution 2325 (2016), of 15 December 2016. In that
resolution, the Council reiterated the need to enhance
cooperation among the three Committees, among other
means, while enhancing the sharing of information
and the coordination of visits to States and technical
assistance. We should continuously seek ways, as
appropriate to our respective mandates, to improve the
cooperation between the three Committees.

From the 1540 Committee's perspective, we value
the joint visits to States with the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED), as referred to in the
joint statement. We hope that, within the limits of the
available resources, such visits will continue. In many
States an important number of stakeholders responsible
for national implementation of the resolutions
concerned are the same officials. Where appropriate,
engaging in visits collaboratively is very much in the
interests of both the Committees, and in particular of
the States concerned.

In resolution 2325 (2016) the Council decided that
the Committee should continue to intensify its efforts
to promote the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). Furthermore, it noted in particular the need to
pay more attention, inter alia, to enforcement measures
relating to nuclear, biological and chemical weapons
and the proliferation offinancing measures, as well as to
accountability for, and the ensuring, related materials;
as well as national export and transhipment controls.

We welcome the kind of cooperation between our
experts referred to in the joint statement on the risks
of illicit trafficking and terrorism through the use of
online public trading platforms. This certainly helps
the 1540 Committee to respond to the Council's request
for us to take note in its work, where it is relevant, ofthe
continually evolving nature of the risks of proliferation,
including the use by non-State actors of rapid advances
in science, technology and international commerce for
proliferation purposes. This kind of exchange puts the
Committee and its experts in a good position to support
States, as appropriate, in their efforts to take account of
such developments in discharging their responsibilities
for implementation under the resolutions concerned.

The requirements of resolution 2325 (2016) and
the 2017 programme of work of the 1540 Committee
place demands on our limited human and financial
resources and make it even more important to exploit
opportunities for collaboration while taking account
the respective mandates of the Committees.

As we continue with our outreach activities to help
those States that need it to implement their obligations,
I am glad to take this opportunity to thank those States
that have contributed to the Trust Fund for Global and
Regional Disarmament Activities, some of which are
represented at this table, with assistance specifically
in support of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). The Committee could not fulfil its programme
of work successfully without such support. The
Committee also welcomes the support of those States
that make contributions in kind - for example, by
hosting resolution 1540 (2004) events. An example is the
regional seminar on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) hosted by Pakistan in April this year.
The Committee looks forward to the hosting by other
Member States of other events scheduled for later this
year. These are important contributions to promoting
the effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

The leading edge of the cooperation between the
three Committees should be our respective experts. We
encourage them to continue with their interactions in
the common areas of interest within their respective
areas of responsibility. From the perspective of
resolution 1540 (2004), since we are in the business
of preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors, it is important to have
a good connection at the expert level between us and
the counter-terrorism community. At the same time,
we should take into account the differences in the
various Committees' goals, as well as their means
of implementation.

