Mr. Mutaboba: Thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the most
recent developments in Guinea-Bissau.

Following the 12 April military coup, which was
unanimously condemned by the international
community, including the Secretary-General and the
Security Council, on 13 April some members of the
armed forces claiming to be a military command took
responsibility for the coup and provided, as justified
reasons, the alleged existence of a secret agreement
between the Government and Angola to legitimize,
through a mandate of the African Union Peace and
Security Council, an intervention by the Angolan
2

armed forces. The military command stressed it did not
want power and had been forced to act in self-defence
by attempts by the Government to annihilate the armed
forces. A document was later circulated by opposition
parties on 18 April purporting to be a copy of a letter
from the Prime Minister to the Secretary-General,
requesting an extraordinary meeting of the Security
Council to discuss the internal situation following the
non-acceptance of the election results, and the
deployment of a peacekeeping force.

The military command, on 13 April, also outlined
its immediate goals as, first, removing obstacles to
security sector reform; secondly, fighting drug
trafficking and consumption so as to restore the
internal and external image of the country, and
consequently attract foreign investment; thirdly,
tackling the culture of impunity; and finally, ensuring
continuity of the process of building a democratic State
based on respect for basic human rights and freedom of
speech.

Responsibility for the coup, although claimed by
a military command, has been endorsed by the armed
forces general staff and its positions exclusively
conveyed by the spokesperson of the armed forces and
chef de cabinet of the chief of general staff, Lieutenant
Colonel Daba Na Walna.

On 13 April, the military command invited the
political parties to consultations on restoring
constitutional normality. Twenty-three political parties
accepted the invitation, including the Party for Social
Renewal and extra-parliamentary parties. The ruling
African Party for the Independence of Guinea and
Cape Verde (PAIGC) has not attended any of the
meetings. Two propositions were put forward, first, a
constitutional transition envisaging restoring
constitutional order through appointing the current
interim president of the National Assembly as interim
President and asking the majority parliamentary party,
the PAIGC, to nominate a Prime Minister and form a
Government inclusive of other parties; and secondly, a
non-constitutional transition involving the dissolution
of Parliament and the creation of a national transitional
council, the appointment of a transitional President and
a national unity Government under a transitional Prime
Minister. On 15 April, 16 of the 23 parties opted for the
non-constitutional proposition and some abandoned the
table. A major point of discord was the period of the
transition, with some arguing for a two-year transition,
12-30011
while others wanted it to last until November 2012,
when legislative elections were planned.

The PAIGC issued a statement on 14 April
condemning the coup and calling for the unconditional
release of its leaders and their reinstatement. On
16 April, the five presidential candidates contesting the
electoral process also issued a statement condemning
the coup.

There have been some attempts by the population
and civil society to protest, but marches by youth and
women have been met with a harsh reaction from the
military, which has restricted freedom of assembly and
expression by forbidding public marches and closing
down private radio stations. A march on 15 April was
violently dispersed, with at least one demonstrator
seriously injured when a military officer slashed his
legs with a bayonet. Freedom of speech - through the
radio - and freedom of assembly have been restricted.
On 15 April, the two trade union confederations, the
National Workers' Union of Guinea-Bissau and the
General Confederation of Independent Trade Unions,
condemned the coup and called on all workers to stay
away from work until constitutional order had been
restored.

Overall, while Bissau and the rest of the country
appear calm, with life apparently returning to normal,
the environment remains tense and volatile, leading to
a reportedly unusual exodus of people from Bissau to
the countryside. While shops on the whole remain
open, the banks have been closed since the coup, but
may reopen soon. It is unclear how the military
authorities hope to pay civil service salaries in a few
days' time, although the military command has
announced that banks will reopen on Monday. A
continued crisis would fatally impact the cashew-
trading season, which is crucial to the economy and the
livelihood of the population. A humanitarian crisis is a
distinct possibility.

There have been strong voices of condemnation
of the coup d'etat from multilateral and bilateral
partners of Guinea-Bissau. The Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), the African
Union (AU), the European Union (EU) and the
International Organization of la Francophonie have
joined the Secretary-General in condemning the
unconstitutional coup in Guinea-Bissau. They are all
unanimous in calling for the restoration of the
12-30011

constitutional order and the release of the detained
leaders. Many have also called for the conclusion of
the interrupted electoral process.

The CPLP and the African Union have further
suggested that targeted individual sanctions be applied
to the military and political leaders associated with the
coup. The AU and the International Organization of la
Francophonie have suspended Guinea-Bissau from
participation in their organizations until constitutional
order has been restored, while the African
Development Bank and the World Bank have
announced the suspension of their development
programmes in Guinea-Bissau.

At the bilateral level, a number of countries have
also issued strong statements condemning the coup.
The ECOWAS position was further reiterated by a
mission visiting Bissau on 16 April. The mission, led
by the President of the ECOWAS Commission, met
with the military command, the five candidates
contesting the election process, and a PAIGC
delegation. The mission said that it had transmitted a
clear message that ECOWAS stood by its zero-
tolerance policy towards the unconstitutional takeover
of power. ECOWAS also clarified that Guinea-Bissau
would be suspended from the organization should it
fail to restore constitutional order.

The President of the ECOWAS Commission said
that the military had undertaken to comply with the
requests and that ECOWAS stood ready to assist them
with the modalities. A few hours after the departure of
the ECOWAS mission, the armed forces spokesperson
ruled out the return of Carlos Gomes Junior to power
and said that there would be no presidential run-off.

On 18 April, an agreement between the armed
forces and the political parties was signed for a two-
year transition, the dissolution of Parliament, the
destitution of the Government and of the interim
President, and the maintenance of the military
leadership.

With regard to the Angola military technical
assistance mission, whose withdrawal was announced,
I have learned that consultations between the military
command and the Government of Angola on
withdrawal are ongoing. The Government of Angola,
through its embassy in Bissau, promised to notify
international partners when the mission departs. On
that note, I would like to pay tribute to Angola for a
successful mission, which, unfortunately, became a
3
casualty of the deep-rooted political and military
conflicts in Guinea-Bissau. Angola has not only
contributed to the maintenance of stability in Guinea-
Bissau over the past year, but it has also provided
infrastructural support for the armed forces as part of
its contribution to implementing the security sector
reform road map.

This is clearly a political-military coup.
Irrespective of the motives of the perpetrators, this act
will go into the history books as one more coup that
took place under the eyes of the United Nations and
hence those of the whole international community. It
will also be described as an act of military
insubordination to the democratically elected civilian
authorities almost two years after the ECOWAS/CPLP
road map was adopted. We could have done more, and
I believe that we can do more.

I also hope that all Bissau Guinean partners will
learn from this latest setback that time is critical in
whatever we intend to do in Guinea-Bissau. Had we
moved quicker in providing the necessary resources for
security sector reform, which would have allowed for
the demobilization and retirement programmes to take
off, we might not be discussing this matter this
evening.

Finally, I would like to note that one of the
problems of the Bissau Guinean polity is exclusionary
solutions. The negotiations that are under way today
are again based on the exclusion of an important actor
in the political life of Guinea-Bissau, the current
parliamentary majority PAIGC party. Other political
forces, though minor, have not subscribed to the
negotiations or their outcome. I believe that the
parliamentary parties should be closely involved in any
solution based on commitment to the restoration of
constitutional order and addressing the question of
inclusion.

It is therefore extremely important that the
international community not be seen to be endorsing
solutions that exclude part of the population or
important national stakeholders. I call attention to the
fact that any solution that excludes the PAIGC and
other parliamentary parties would be a recipe for a
future crisis and a negation of the will of the people as
expressed through elections in 2008.

