Mr. Pressman (United States ofAmerica): In 1945,
at the conclusion of the United Nations Conference in
San Francisco, United States President Harry Truman
reflected on the just-completed Charter of the United
Nations and called it

"a declaration of great faith by the nations on this
Earth 4 faith that war is not inevitable, faith that
peace can be maintained".

It was a feat unparalleled in history for the
representatives of 50 nations to be able to come
together after the world's most devastating conflict and
imagine a new international order rooted in peaceful
cooperation and respect for human rights. In the 70
years that followed, we have worked to uphold this
declaration of faith, welcoming 143 new Member States
into the United Nations, avoiding a third world war and
expanding the promise of freedom and democracy to
millions. And yet, we have not fully transformed our
faith into a world without tyranny, a world without
strife and a world without poverty the responsibility
that our predecessors in San Francisco passed to us.

 

Some seem to suggest that the solution is one of
retrenchment in which we would all play a more hands-
off role in responding to drivers of conflict, and in
which we dismiss respect for the dignity and human
rights of individuals as a matter of purely domestic
concern. The purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, however, impel us to do the
opposite. Animating the United Nations Charter is
a concern for the dignity of every person, regardless
of nationality. Respect for political independence
and sovereignty cannot mean turning a blind eye to
oppression, intimidation and abuse. Sovereignty is
an important aspect of States, of course, but as the
Secretary-General has emphasized today and as he has
said in the past,

"the less sovereignty is viewed as a wall or a shield,
the better our prospects will be for protecting
people and solving our shared problems".

It is the United Nations Charter that leads us to
recognize the nexus between human rights and the
maintenance of international peace and security. It
is the United Nations Charter that leads us to act
decisively using all of the tools at our disposal to
respond to threats to international peace and security,
and it is the United Nations Charter that calls on us
to ensure that the Council keeps pace with emerging
threats. We must recommit to, not retreat from, those
principles today. That means demanding that Russia
end its illegal occupation of Crimea and cease support
for separatists intent on seizing even more of Ukraine,
in clear violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
It also means recognizing that, in carrying out our
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security, that responsibility includes promoting respect
for human rights and those institutions necessary to
safeguard freedom.

As we have seen on far too many occasions,
widespread human rights violations and abuses can
themselves pose a threat to international peace and
security, and regimes that flagrantly violate the
universally recognized human rights of their own
people often show similar contempt for the universal
principles that help maintain our shared security. Take
North Korea, for example, where the Government
imprisons and tortures citizens for the so-called crime
of owning foreign films, and where 80,000 to 120,000
political prisoners are starved and beaten to death in
detention camps. Just as North Korea treats its citizens
with disdain, the regime also flouts the resolutions
of the Security Council on its nuclear and ballistic
missile activities while threatening its neighbours with
annihilation. In Syria, the Al-Assad regime's brutal
response to peaceful political protest has devolved
into horrific attacks against civilians and civilian
infrastructure, forced displacement and starvation. The
Syrian Government's inability and unwillingness to
protect its citizens - indeed, its predilection to do the
opposite - has given armed extremist groups the space
to operate with impunity.

The very first Article, Article 1, of the Charter of
the United Nations, makes clear that the central purpose
of the United Nations is "promoting and encouraging
respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms
for all". In this clause, those drafting the Charter
recognized that repressive Governments that seek to
choke off freedom of expression, stifle the media and
prevent citizens from determining their own political
future undermine an international system based on
peaceful cooperation among the world's peoples.
Governments in which people can hold their leaders
accountable through elections and an active civil
society and Governments in which an independent
judiciary can serve as a check on executive authority
are Governments that can help prevent, rather than
create threats to international peace and security.

It is by supporting strong democratic institutions
that we help prevent the horrors of genocide or the
emergence of ungoverned spaces where terrorist
organizations may thrive. The pursuit of these values
is not in tension with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations; it is precisely these values that
animate the United Nations. Despite these purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter, in the real world we
are witnessing the opposite trend - a sustained and
seemingly contagious effort to silence, crack down and
shut down space for civil society around the world,
rather than embracing the idea that empowered citizens
can work together to make sure the Governments work
for people.

Too many Governments are passing legislation and
taking administrative actions designed to keep people
scared and silent, and to keep them from speaking
out against abuses of power or from undertaking any
political activity whatsoever, including by keeping
leaders of the peaceful political opposition imprisoned
for exercising fundamental freedoms. They inundate
civil society organizations with frivolous prosecutions
and try to block what little funding exists to sustain
these groups. They accuse human rights defenders
and civil society organizations and those who support
them of carrying out nefarious foreign agendas or even
committing treason.

When regimes crack down on the enjoyment of
fundamental freedoms, these steps can be an indicator,
and too often a harbinger, of worse violations to come.
We cannot and should not wait to speak out until
Governments escalate to the point of slaughtering their
own people, as we saw in Rwanda, or to the point that a
regime employs medieval siege tactics to starve its own
people, as we see today in Syria. Borders cannot blind
us to our responsibilities as a Council, or as people with
conscience. We must respect sovereignty, but so too
must we recognize the relationship among democratic
processes, freedom, civil society, systematic violations
of human rights and threats to international peace and
security.

Many of the items on the Council's agenda began
when Governments started to denigrate the dignity
of and erode the enjoyment of rights for their people.
These Governments all too often argue that the Charter
exempts them from criticism and that we must blind
ourselves to internal oppression, even where systematic
repression can be directly connected to broader regional
and international security. To do so would ignore the
lessons that led us to adopt the Charter of the United
Nations in the first place.

While we must be guided by the principle of the
sovereign equality of States enshrined in the Charter,
we cannot let ourselves become so afraid of encroaching
on State prerogatives as to prevent us from acting to
respond to the world's real and emerging threats, even
if they look different than the threats the founders of
the Organization confronted 70 years ago. Indeed, we
must continue to update our understanding of threats to
keep pace with the world around us, and we have made
important strides in doing so, from addressing public
health crises like Ebola to countering the movement of
foreign terrorist fighters to new entities like the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. The Security Council must
be prepared to recognize these kinds ofnew threats, and
when the Security Council determines the existence of
a threat to international peace and security, we must
use the tools at our disposal to act decisively.

At times, the Council has appropriately relied
upon swift mediation, under the good offices of the
Secretary-General, or upon cooperation with regional
organizations, consistent with Chapter VIII, to forestall
conflicts. Yet we have also seen the value that comes
from the Council acting to impose sanctions, create
tribunals and deploy peacekeeping missions. Beginning
in 2006, the Council responded to increasing concerns
about Iran's nuclear programme by adopting a robust
sanctions regime. The willingness of Member States to
work together to carry out their obligation to implement
and to enforce those resolutions created an opportunity
to bring them around to the negotiating table to address
the international community's concerns. Those efforts
resulted in the conclusion of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, the provisions of which, through full
and complete implementation, will continue to ensure
that Iran does not develop a nuclear weapon. That
diplomatic breakthrough would not have been possible
had the Council had not taken strong and decisive
action to address Iran's nuclear activity.

I want to conclude with another prescient remark
that President Truman made in his address to delegates
in San Francisco. He noted that

"Nations, like individuals, must know the truth if
they would be free - must read and hear the truth,
learn and teach the truth."

We in the Security Council, guided by the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, should
take that lesson to heart. When we see Governments
whose actions contribute to global instability, or we
observe new threats to international peace and security,
we, as Council members, must speak the truth. We must
see the truth that is concealed by arguments that seek
to distort and manipulate the purposes and principles of
the Charter in an attempt to prevent the United Nations
and the Council from tackling the global challenges
that it was meant to confront. Those who had the
foresight to create the United Nations would demand
nothing less, as do the citizens of the world who bear
the consequences when we fail to live up to that moral
ambition.

