Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): We
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency for this month and we pay tribute to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Spain.

Israel, the occupying Power, persists in
committing war crimes and acts of State terrorism
against the Palestinian people in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. In the
last six days alone, Israeli occupation forces have
killed 83 Palestinians, including 20 children under the
age of 18, and have injured over 350 others. Israel has
caused widespread destruction, including the
demolition of homes and the destruction of farmland,
economic installations and infrastructure such as roads,
water and electricity networks. The bulk of these losses
occurred when the Israeli occupation forces swept
through the northern part of the Gaza Strip, including
the Jabaliya refugee camp, rushing more than 2,000
soldiers, more than 100 tanks and 100 armoured
vehicles and bulldozers to the area, in addition to its
massive use of helicopter gunships. The Israeli
occupation forces have used this massive military
might indiscriminately, even using cluster bombs
against human Palestinian targets.

These forces have deliberately destroyed just
about everything in their way, including day nurseries
and schools. Hundreds of Palestinians are now without
shelter as a result of the total or partial demolition of
their homes. Tens of thousands are without water or
electricity and are suffering from severe shortages of
food and medicine. This has precipitated a genuine
humanitarian tragedy, the repercussions of which will
require vast resources and much time to redress. In
addition to that, many ranking Israeli officials have
expressed their intention to pursue their aggression for
an extended period of time as well as their intention to
set up a buffer zone.

My delegation has informed the Security Council,
the Secretary-General and the President of the General
Assembly of all these horrific developments in three
letters (S/2004/729, S/2004/76l and S/2004/776), in
the last of which we requested immediate intervention
by the Security Council and stressed the need to take
proper measures in this regard. The Arab Group has
also done this. We appreciate your prompt response,
Mr. President, in convening this open meeting, and we
hope that the Security Council will be able to consider
the draft resolution that has been submitted to it and to
vote on it as soon as possible.

Israel, the occupying Power, claims that it has
swept through the northern part of the Gaza Strip and
committed all those acts in response to the launching of

rockets from that area on an Israeli town that is close to
the border between Israel and the Palestinian territory,
specifically, the launching of a rocket last Wednesday
that resulted in the killing of two Israeli children. Here,
we express our sorrow at the loss of the two children,
and at the loss of any civilian life on both sides.
Moreover, the Palestinian Authority has repeatedly
demanded that Palestinian groups engaged in this
practice stop it completely and give precedence to the
Palestinian national interest over any other
consideration.

This has nothing to do with the legitimate right of
our people to resist the occupation. At the same time, it
is important that the context be very clear. We are
talking here about a rudimentary weapon that is put
together locally and that has caused, over the past
several years, the loss of three Israeli civilian lives,
including those of the two children. We are not talking
about weapons of deterrence or about rockets in the
traditional sense of the word. That is the reality on the
ground, despite the fact that we have reiterated our
position that this practice must cease altogether. There
is absolutely no justification, under any circumstances,
for this Israeli hysteria, this widespread killing and this
deliberate destruction. There is no justification for the
war crimes, State terrorism and violations of
international humanitarian law which preceded recent
events such as the continuation of extrajudicial
killings; the killing and injuring of civilians, including
women and children; the continued use of
indiscriminate excessive force; the ongoing demolition
of homes, economic installations and farmland; the
policy of closures that prevents the movement of
people and goods. Israel continues the colonization of
our territory and the construction of its separation wall,
which will destroy the present and the future of our
people, as well as any prospects for peace between the
two sides and the possibility of establishing two States.

Once again, my Mission has kept the Council
informed, in a series of 203 letters that document all
those crimes and violations. This raises the following
serious question: Why has the Council failed so far to
put an end to all this? Even before, why did the
Council fail to halt the colonization of the Palestinian
territory and the attempts to change the legal status of
Jerusalem? Irrespective of the reason, which is known
to all of us, perhaps the time has come for the Council
to take a firm position to put an end to this constantly
unfolding tragedy. What we need now is for the
Council to take a step by calling on Israel to cease its
aggression and promptly halt its military operations,
withdraw from the northern Gaza Strip and not repeat
such actions in the future.

Perhaps what is taking place now in Gaza is
related in some way to the so-called unilateral Sharon
disengagement plan, which is aimed at dismantling the
settlements and military installations in the Gaza Strip,
as well as four settlement outposts in the northern West
Bank, while laying siege to the Gaza Strip and
maintaining control over its land, airspace and water.
The plan also aims at continuing the construction of the
separation wall and the building of settlements in the
West Bank. In brief, it aims at a long-term movement
to surround the Gaza Strip while maintaining the
colonization of the West Bank. We cannot accept that.

That Sharon plan and the Israeli-American
exchange of letters of 14 April 2004 are in violation of
international law and completely contravene the road
map. Suffice it to mention here that the plan is
unilateral and aims at undermining the territorial
integrity of the Palestinian territory. Any withdrawal
from Gaza must indeed be a genuine part of the road
map. This means that it must be parallel to similar
steps taken in the West Bank, primarily halting the
construction of the separation wall and stopping the
building of settlements. And all of that must take place
in coordination with the Palestinian Authority.

Naturally, the withdrawal must be complete, so
that the Gaza Strip will not be transformed into a huge
prison. We call upon the international community to
adhere strictly to the road map and to support the
Palestinian position in that regard. Our understanding
of the position of the Quartet, despite some ambiguity,
is that the Quartet has taken the same approach; that
approach is acceptable, and we hope it will develop in
the right direction. While we reiterate our acceptance
of the road map and our support for the Quartet action,
we call on the Quartet to impose respect for the road
map and not to depart from it. We also call on the
Security Council to become engaged in the political
process, thus giving it momentum and further force.

The International Court of Justice has issued an

advisory opinion regarding the wall built by Israel, the
occupying Power, in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem and the surrounding area. The
Court has set forth the legal obligations incumbent
upon Israel, the occupying Power, under the norms of
international law and the other legal obligations of all
Member States, and has requested the United Nations,
especially the General Assembly and Security Council,
to take additional measures to bring an end to the
illegal situation resulting from the construction of the
wall.

The General Assembly has responded favourably
and has taken the first step, which is set out in its
resolution ES-lO/lS. The Security Council has not yet
responded, and we intend to put this extremely
important question before the Council. This will have
immense implications for the question of Palestine and
the settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict - and
indeed, for the whole body of international law and the
entire international order. It is our fervent hope that the
Council will respond in the right way.

Our steadfast Palestinian people will not
surrender. It will continue to cling to its national rights.
While we feel a profound sense of bitterness at the lack
of justice and legality, and at the application of double
standards, we have not lost hope. Once again we
express our hope that the Council will today be able to
take the necessary measures, specifically regarding the
current situation in northern Gaza Strip.

