Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): I thank you,
Sir, for facilitating the strategic discussions on
strengthening the approach of the United Nations to
security sector reform (SSR). I also express my warm
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his insightful
report (S/2013/480) and recommendations on the way
forward.

As a member of the Group of Friends of SSR,
Kazakhstan fully supports all efforts to enhance peace
and security, which in turn lead to stable and enduring
sustainable development.

SSR is gaining increasing importance for addressing
war-torn areas and for countries emerging from conflict
in Africa. It is therefore critical to understand the newer
forms, patterns and manifestations of conflicts and
insecurities. Immediate and medium- and long-term
plans can be based only on understanding the root causes
of conflicts - the accelerators, the triggers and their
impacts. Hence, planning for SSR must be based on the
current shift from State-centred security to citizen- or
people-oriented security; the shift from purely military
security to non-military centred security, such as food,
environment and socioeconomic security; and the shift
from State to non-State actors, with a larger number of
stakeholders.

Recent political developments, which are taking
a most tragic toll of human life, compel us to rethink
how secure environments can be achieved as essential
prerequisites for the protection of civilians, the rule
of law, justice and respect for human rights. Our task
becomes all the more challenging when United Nations
peacekeeping operations and missions withdraw.
Thus, far-sighted and comprehensive reform is headed,
providing the vital framework for peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development, which are closely
linked to the processes of demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration. In addition, all national security
policies and mechanisms must also be grounded in
regional frameworks due to the transnational nature of
security challenges.

No reform can take place without providing
adequate, modern training in the new concepts of
security and upgrading institutions of the military
and, especially, the police so that human rights, rule of
law and good governance can guide their operations.
Recruitment policies should incorporate regional
quotas, ethnic/tribal balance and appropriate gender
mix, involving women and local communities. There
must also be a reorientation of correctional services,
customs and the judiciary, which are important
components of the security system.

These overall efforts call for strengthening the
capacity and political will of national authorities and
institutions, through political dialogue, with context-
specific policies, while also mobilizing the multiplicity
of actors. Special consideration must be given to
non-State actors, at the regional and international
levels alike, interacting with governmental authorities.
It is then obvious that new partnerships should be
explored, requiring collaboration and commitment
at all levels - from regional to international. At
the same time, there has to be national ownership of
security sector reform, which must be democratic and
representative, as this increases confidence in and the
legitimacy of security institutions, striking a balance
between national security concerns and local needs.
SSR must include research, lessons learned, monitoring,
oversight and accountability mechanisms, benchmarks
and indicators for thorough assessment.

In conclusion, Kazakhstan is determined to assist
and support United Nations efforts to evolve SSR as a
timely and effective to counteract numerous challenges,
and we support the draft resolution before the Council.
