Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): Of
course we might have spared the members of the
Council this additional intervention, but naturally I
have to answer some of the points that were raised.

Allow me to start by informing the Council about
some incidents that took place today. I am quoting
from a news agency in English.

(spoke in English)

"A 20-year-old Palestinian was shot dead by a
bullet to his chest in the West Bank town of Beit
Jala near Bethlehem. The director of the Beit Jala
hospital said that at least one of the wounded
admitted to the hospital had been struck by a
dumdum bullet designed to explode inside the
body. Witnesses said that another Palestinian man
was shot dead as he tried to rip down an Israeli
flag from the military post at the junction of
Netzarim."

(spoke in Arabic)

Netzarim is a colony situated in the heart of Gaza,
believe it or not. It is almost vacant, but its main
purpose is to make the life of the Palestinians in Gaza
almost impossible.

Today's events occurred despite the efforts
deployed yesterday in Paris and today in Sharm el-
Sheikh - and many of those who addressed the
Council expressed their hopes and prayers that those
efforts would be successful. Those efforts, regrettably
enough, have not yet led to any specific positive
results. During the meeting in Paris no agreement was
reached, and this was basically because Israel rejected
the idea of an international commission of inquiry.

What is more regrettable is that Mr. Barak did not
go to Sharm el-Sheikh. He did not go there, although
President Yasser Arafat and Mrs. Madeleine Albright
were there. The four-party meeting was not held. It
seems to me that this provides even more evidence of
Israeli intentions.

Regarding the visit by Ariel Sharon, whose
record is well-known, and the reference to Israeli
democracy in this context, it is not my intention to go
into a discussion of the nature of this democracy and
its modus operandi, at least when it relates to the
Israeli Arabs. This is not an issue for the Council to
discuss for today. But suffice it to say that we are
talking about occupied territories. We are talking about
occupied East Jerusalem, the subject of 24 resolutions
by the Council affirming that the Fourth Geneva
Convention applies to it. After 24 resolutions from the
Security Council the representative of Israel comes to
claim that Israel is dealing with this part of the territory
in consonance with Israeli democracy, instead of acting
in consonance with international humanitarian law, the
Fourth Geneva Convention and the obligations of Israel
as the occupying force. Al-Haram Al-Sharif, which is
the third holy place, is part of East Jerusalem, which is
part of the occupied Palestinian land. It belongs to the
Muslims and must be under Palestinian-Arab-Muslim
sovereignty, and we shall at no time, now or in the
future, accept any claims of Israeli sovereignty over
that part. At the same time, we have expressed our
readiness to accept the control of Israel over the
Wailing Wall, despite the fact that it is in the eastern,
occupied section of Jerusalem. We accepted that out of
respect for the religious beliefs of the other party,
irrespective of what we feel or believe. But, Israel is
now claiming rights over Al-Haram Al-Sharif, which
can only be interpreted as a desire to change the status
quo, perhaps desecrating existing holy places in the
future. We do not think that this has any relation to any
sincere religious sentiments.

The representative of Israel, Ambassador Lancry,
said how much he and other Israelis were deeply
moved by the death of the child, Mohammed Jamal Al-
Durra. I do not deny that such personal feelings and
emotions do exist. This is welcome, but what is the
difference between the murder of Mohammed Jamal
Al-Durra and the killing of other children? What is the
difference between Mohammed, Ahmed, or Ali or any
other name? The main difference here is that the
camera of Antenne 2 (of Canal France) captured that
brutal Israeli act in this specific case. The camera, and
not the truth, is then what roused Israeli emotions. This
is deeply regrettable and goes to show that Israel is
bent on refusing to assume responsibility for the crime
that took place.

We were hoping that we would hear Israel
accepting responsibility, not only for Mohammed Jamal
Al-Durra, not only because of the camera that captured
that scene, but for all the other killings. We hoped that
we would hear an apology from Israel to the families of
the victims. This did not happen. This confirms that the
international community must assume its
responsibilities and put an end to this crime, impose
the convening of an international commission of
inquiry to find the truth and to punish those who are
responsible and to make sure that such crimes are not
repeated in the future.

I would like to refer to the Israeli allegation with
regard to what they call the "incitement", or Palestinian
violence or what they call the organization etc.

In our address to the Council, we said that only
those who are incapable of seeing, or only a racist can
make such an allegation. Now, we should add stupidity
to those who have the courage to make such an
allegation. Why? Because now there are many cameras,
not only the one that captured the murder of
Mohammed Jamal Al-Durra. Those cameras have
exposed the truth of what has been happening to the
whole world.

Other ugly scenes took place inside Israel itself.
Did the Palestinian Authority plan or orchestrate what
happened inside Israel itself? Did it incite the Israeli
Arabs to do that? If not, why then are there 11 dead and
more than 100 wounded among the Israeli Arab? Israel
has immediately to stop making such shameless
allegations. This could be a genuine step towards
admitting the truth and recognizing the humanity of the
other party. Similarly, it could be the beginning of
Israel's assuming and admitting its responsibilities.
Without doing this, Israel cannot claim that it wants to
make peace with the Palestinian people. It would not
be possible to claim that they are willing to make
peace.

There are some serious attempts to enable the
Council to adopt a clear, constructive and useful
position in consonance with the obligations of the
Council and in defence of justice and the cause of
peace in the region. In this respect, it is incumbent
upon us to thank the members of the Non-Aligned
Movement who are members in the Council and have
tabled the draft resolution. We express our deep
appreciation for the consultations that have taken place
on this subject. We do hope that the Council will be
able to take action and call for an urgent international
inquiry into the incidents of the past few days.

Finally, we express our deep gratitude to all
members of the Council and to all other States Members
of the United Nations and others that participated in the
debate over the past three days. They all spoke in
defence of the meaning and the symbols of humanity,
and in support ofjustice worldwide.

