Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): France
associates itself in advance with the statement to be
made later in our debate on behalf of the European
Union by the Ambassador of Sweden, the current
President of the European Union.

On behalf of France, I would like to thank Jean-
Marie Guehenno and Dr. Piot for their statements and
for their actions. France is among the delegations that
recognize and welcome the progress achieved. We have
also just heard about new progress made, and we
express our gratitude to them for it. Everyone agrees
that more progress is needed, but let us welcome what
has already been achieved.

We are faced with what is probably the most
serious epidemic threat to afflict humanity since the
Middle Ages. Apart from its effects on the health of
entire populations, that threat has also served to roll
back development and to imperil the stability and
security of entire countries, and even of whole regions.
Despite the slow progress achieved in the areas of
research and drug development, it has nevertheless
been possible to thwart somewhat the advance of the
epidemic, particularly in the countries of the North.

The main problem confronting us today is as
follows. The tens of millions of persons ill from
HIV/AIDS live mostly in the South, while the drugs
currently available to save millions of lives are
generally in the North. There is something morally
unacceptable in this dichotomy. It is the duty of the
international community to find a response to this
current situation of the sick being in the South while
the medicines are in the North. How do we do that?

During the first debate on this major issue, held a
year ago on the initiative of Ambassador Holbrooke,
France proposed to hold an international meeting
devoted to the subject of access to treatment. That
meeting will bring together donors, recipients, the
pharmaceutical industry and, of course, patients'
groups. Its goal will be to find lasting solutions to the
problem of comprehensively reaching sick persons in
the developing world through concrete projects and
specific partnerships designed to benefit those millions
of sick people who today have absolutely nothing to
help them to survive.

France believes that such an international meeting
should be among the operational outcomes of the
upcoming special session of the General Assembly on
AIDS. The international meeting proposed by France
will be held from 30 November to 1 December 2001.
The second meeting of the steering committee to make
preparations for the meeting will be held from 24
January at Geneva.

Allow me to thank the Executive Director of the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS and
Director-General Brundtland of the World Health
Organization for their ongoing assistance in preparing
for that meeting. It is my hope that this, the first year
of the new millennium, will at long last be marked by a
translation of our words into actions so that we can
save the millions upon millions of lives that are today
at stake in developing countries. France will spare no
effort to pursue that goal.

I would like to introduce a point of order at this
stage of our debate. You, Mr. President, have admirably
found the words to express the gratitude all of us feel
for Ambassador Richard Holbrooke. Those who have
spoken before me have had their own words to say, all
with a great deal of emotion and friendship, in
expressing our gratitude to a truly exceptional
ambassador.

We are here in a body that has a tradition of
adopting resolutions. It seems to me that, given the
importance of this event and the urgency imposed by
the calendar by virtue of the fact that today is the last
meeting at which our friend Richard Holbrooke will
participate, I would like to ask the indulgence of the
Council and of the President to propose for immediate
adoption by the Council - for once putting aside the
sacrosanct 24-hour rule - of a draft resolution, which
I would now like to read out in English. Members of
the Council have been made somewhat aware of it, and
I appeal to Ambassador Holbrooke that, for once, he
not use his veto power. The draft resolution reads as
follows:

(spoke in English)

"The Security Council,
"Recognizing the exceptional contribution
that Ambassador Richard Holbrooke made to the
United Nations and to the improvement of
relations between the United States of America
and the United Nations Organization in only 17
months,

"Emphasizing the crucial importance of this
relationship for both parties,

"Would warmly welcome a decision to
maintain Ambassador Richard Holbrooke in his
current capacity for the next four years."

(spoke in French)

I submit the draft resolution to our Council, and I
yield the floor.

