The President (spoke in French): I wish to warmly
welcome the Secretary-General, the Ministers and
other representatives present in today's meeting. Their
participation is an affirmation of the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, Botswana,
Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Canada, the Central
African Republic, Chad, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cete
d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Djibouti, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Georgia, Germany, Guatemala, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Mexico, Montenegro, Morocco, Nepal, the
Netherlands, the Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Paraguay,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania,
Rwanda, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand
and Turkey to participate in this meeting.

On behalf ofthe Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera, President of the
Central African Republic, and thank him for attending
this important meeting in person. I request the Protocol
Officer to escort him to his seat at the Council table.

Mr. Faustin Archange Toaadera, President of the
Central African Republic, was escorted to a seat at
the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the
International Committee ofthe Red Cross, to participate
in this meeting.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Maurer,
who isjoining today's meeting Via Video-teleconference
from Geneva.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following to
participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Ioannis
Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, and His Excellency
Mr. Tete Antenio, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations, to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/447, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

Iwish to also draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/503, which contains a letter dated
27 May 2016 from the Permanent Representative
of France to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, whom I warmly thank
for all his efforts as Secretary-General. I have met with
him frequently, and I know that he spares no effort in
travelling wherever the work of the Organization takes
him, with the exclusive aim of keeping the peace and
protecting civilians.


