Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Today,
we meet once more for the monthly briefing of the
Security Council on the situation in the Middle East
and primarily the question of Palestine. The most
significant aspect of our meeting today is that the
Council, after a long absence, acted to adopt resolution
1850 (2008) two days ago, which the Council has
sought as a new framework for the negotiation track
that started in Annapolis. The resolution was adopted
despite its shortcomings, in the hope that it will
provide the proper momentum.

It is important to note that the resolution
mentions and reminds us of the main terms of
reference for the establishment of a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, in particular
the United Nations resolutions, the principles of the
1991 Madrid Conference and the Arab Peace Initiative,
but, most importantly, it reactivates the role of the
United Nations, and specifically the Security Council,
in order to achieve the desired peace, a just and
comprehensive peace. While we welcome the planned
Moscow conference, we must also note that the
resolution lacks a specific timeline for the achievement
of peace and also lacks a clear call to put an end to
Israeli occupation and a clear denunciation of Israeli
practices against Palestinian civilians.

While the international community and the Group
of Arab States, based on the Arab Peace Initiative, are
seeking a political process that restores the land to its
rightful owners and guarantees peace for everyone,
Israel continues in the opposite direction. The situation
on the ground provides ample evidence of that.
Israel allows continued construction and
expansion of settlements. The number of new housing
units in the settlements this year alone has grown by
3,000 units. Also, Israel continues its policy of
confiscation of land and water resources in the West
Bank. Israel continues its construction of the separation
wall, in contravention of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice, and continues to
dismantle and divide the West Bank through hundreds
of checkpoints and barriers.

Even more dangerous is the increased violence of
settlers, as occurred, for example, in the bloody events
in Hebron, where settlers burned houses and fired
weapons at Palestinian civilians. All these practices are
not only grave violations of international law, but also,
and more specifically, of Israeli commitments under
the Road Map.

In this context, we heard the recent statement by
the Israeli Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tzipi Livni,
where she brought to mind something similar to the
policy of transfer. I would also mention the decision of
the Israeli authorities to detain for 30 hours
Mr. Richard Falk, the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967 and to remove him forcibly and
prevent him from carrying out his mission as mandated
by the United Nations itself. That is in addition to the
continued blockade of Gaza and the subjection of its
residents to the policy of collective punishment, which
has been denounced internationally. The least that can
be said of all of those practices is that they have
escalated an already dangerous situation.

Israel continues to head in the opposite direction
to peace, not only through its practices in Palestine and
the continued occupation of the Golan, but also in my
country. Despite the passage of more than two years
since the adoption of resolution 1701 (2006), which
ended the systematic destruction of Lebanese villages,
infrastructure and civilian facilities in the summer of
2006, Israel continues its stubborn refusal to fulfil all
its obligations under that resolution. It continues to
violate the sovereignty of Lebanon. The total number
of violations by Israel of Lebanese airspace over the
last four months was more than 1,100 violations.

The Secretary-General of the United Nations has
denounced those actions in paragraph 8 of his most
recent report (S/2008/715) on the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) and called them a violation of
Lebanese sovereignty and of that resolution. We call
for an immediate cessation of those violations. After
the Lebanese Government had approved and accepted
the proposal of the United Nations concerning the
Israeli withdrawal from the northern part of al-Ghajar
village, which gave Israel three months to respond, the
response was to continue to violate Lebanese
sovereignty and the contents of resolution 1701 (2006).

Also, the Shaba'a farms and the Kfar Shouba
Hills are still under Israeli occupation. It is time for the
United Nations, based on the provisional demarcation
line determined by its own expert, to launch a new
diplomatic initiative that allows the restoration of the
land to its rightful owners and puts an end to the
occupation. Additionally, Israel still refuses to provide
maps showing the locations of millions of cluster
bombs that they dropped in South Lebanon, bombs that
daily cause suffering and claim hundreds of victims,
including children.

Israeli officials continue to issue various threats
against my country, including the statement of the
Israeli Prime Minister, in which he threatened to
destroy Lebanon, as well as statements by the Minister
of Defence and military officials, which were the
subject of a letter from my Government to the
Secretary-General denouncing such statements as
challenges to the international community and the
work of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) in the area south of the Litani River.

The Council is well aware of Lebanon's
commitment to and fulfilment of its international
obligations, especially those emanating from resolution
1701 (2006). The Lebanese army deployed forces in
the south and cooperates fully with UNIFIL, and we
have welcomed the recommendations of the
independent group for the evaluation of conditions
along the borders. We continue with technical
cooperation to strengthen monitoring mechanisms in
order to control the borders.

We have abided by the choice of a comprehensive
and just peace based on the Arab Peace Initiative. We
therefore choose to see the glass as half full, in the
form of the Security Council adoption of resolution
1850 (2008). The Council now has the opportunity to
assume the role that we wish for it - the role actually
required by the Charter of the Organization.

In the name of the peace that the people of our
region have longed for since the establishment of the
United Nations itself and in order for the Organization
to rise to the level of the legitimate expectations we all
have of the United Nations, we appeal to the Council
not to allow this new opportunity to become another
lost opportunity.

