Mr. Da Gama (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French): Allow me, first of all, to express my sincere
thanks for the honour that you grant me, Mr. President,
by giving me the floor before Council members, whom
we would like to thank for their commitment to and
understanding of the situation in our country. We
would also like to commend Mr. Joseph Mutaboba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), and Mrs. Viotti
for their remarkable work towards the peacebuilding
and development of Guinea-Bissau.

This statement comes at a time when my country,
Guinea-Bissau, is in the middle of an electoral period
brought about by the passing on 9 January of President
Malam Bacai Sanha, who strove for dialogue, peace
and development in Guinea-Bissau. As stipulated in the
Constitution, after the death of the President of the
Republic, early presidential elections should have
taken place within 60 days following a series of
internal political consultations so as to respect the will
expressed by the country's various political parties.
The Acting President of the Republic set the date of
18 March for the holding of the early presidential
elections, thus upholding the Republic's Constitution.

However, the actual organization of those
elections was not easy owing to the serious issue of
their financing, in particular because of the very short
two-month period for their organization and the
country's financial difficulties. But, fortunately, thanks
to the resolve of the national authorities and the
international community's tireless commitment to help
Guinea-Bissau to pursue the path of strengthening its
young democracy and respecting the constitutional
order, my country was able to gain the necessary
financial and logistical assistance to hold those
elections. They took place on 18 March, as planned,
preceded by an exemplary electoral and incident-free
campaign. As a result, I would like to take the
opportunity to reiterate my Government's gratitude to
all countries and organizations that kindly once again
stood alongside us during that electoral period.

Following the voting, international observers, in
particular from the African Union, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, the Economic
Community of West African States, the West African
Economic and Monetary Union, a group of
10 parliamentarians from the United Kingdom and
some from the European Union and South Africa,
commended the peaceful climate in which the elections
took place. They all described them as free, fair and
transparent.

On 21 March, the National Electoral Commission
(NEC) announced the provisional official results of the
vote, which placed the former Prime Minister,
Mr. Carlos Gomes Junior, in the lead, with more than
48 per cent of the vote, followed by the former
President of the Republic, Mr. Kumba Yala, with more
than 23 per cent of the vote. Given that neither of those
two candidates gained more than 50 per cent of the
required votes, it is provided for that they go to a
second round, which, in principle, will be held towards
the end of April.

Speaking even before the publication of the
provisional results by the NEC, a group of five
candidates, including the contender with the second-
highest number of votes, made it known that it would
not accept the results of the elections, citing
irregularities and fraud, and requested that the elections
be annulled. Once the provisional results were
published, the five candidates lodged an appeal with the
NEC on the basis of the same arguments, underscoring,
furthermore, the lack of updated electoral registries that
included new voters who had reached 18 years of age.
At the same time, Mr. Kumba Yala, as the candidate
with the second-highest number of votes, announced
that he would not participate in the second round of the
election.

In that regard, it should be underscored that the
NEC issued its decision yesterday, on 27 March,
stating that those allegations were ill founded and that
that group of candidates had a final recourse to the
Supreme Court of Justice, in accordance with the law
in force.

Despite the slightly tense atmosphere owing to
the refusal of Mr. Kumba Yala, supported by the four
other candidates, to participate in the second round, we
hope that decisions issued by the competent electoral

bodies, namely, the NEC and the Supreme Court of
Justice, will be respected and that, in the interests of
the country, the people's will and good sense will
prevail and that the second round of elections will
indeed take place.

Despite the current election challenge, the
Government of Guinea-Bissau remains convinced that
reform of the defence and security sector is crucial to
peacebuilding in the country, and it is its foremost
priority. We therefore hope that conditions will be
rapidly met so as to move to implementing that reform
through the upcoming launch of the special pension
fund, which will enable the demobilization process of
elements of the armed forces and security forces to
start.

In that regard, we hope to receive as soon as
possible the release of funds pledged by our partners.
We also hope that other actors will join us in that step.
Nevertheless, I would recall that the Government of
Guinea-Bissau, under His Excellency Mr. Carlos
Gomes Junior, with the support of our bilateral and
multilateral partners, had to agree to tremendous
sacrifices that, to date, have enabled us to see very
positive results in terms of the recovery of the national
economy and public funds administration, as well as in
the areas of infrastructure and combating drug
trafficking, among others.

National dialogue remains one of Guinea-
Bissau's priorities. In that regard, the National
Conference on Reconciliation, which is to bring
together political actors, civil society, elements of the
defence and security forces, religious leaders and
others, set up by President Bacai Sanha, will indeed
take place with the election of the Republic's new
President. That will enable the people of Guinea-
Bissau to freely express their opinion and to find a
lasting path of understanding on issues affecting our
country.

I would therefore like to conclude by reiterating
my Government's gratitude to the international
community for its tireless support to Guinea-Bissau to
date. We ask it to continue to provide its valuable
assistance to us in the context of peacebuilding and
development in our country.

