Mr. Kawamura (Japan): First, I thank Mr. Zenenga
and Ambassador Madeira for their informative updates
on the situation in Somalia.

Japan highly commends the Governments of the
United Kingdom and Somalia, as well as the United
Nations, for hosting the London Conference on 11 May
to chart a new course for peace and stability in Somalia.
Japan was represented there by Mr. Shunsuke Takei,
Parliamentary Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs.

As articulated at the Conference, while Somalia
has made steady progress towards peace and prosperity,
many challenges lie ahead. With the sustained assistance
of the international community, the Government must
urgently address famine and food insecurity, develop
a representative Somali national army and police
force, review the Constitution and facilitate universal
suffrage in 2020. In this regard, we are particularly
encouraged by President Farmajo's robust commitment
at the London Conference on Somalia to leading the
Government in addressing these challenges.

While the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) remains critical to the security of
Somalia, in the longer term Somali institutions must
be capable of providing security in all corners of the
country. Japan therefore looks forward to the steady
implementation of the national security architecture
by the Federal Government and federal member states.
The newly created national security council will have
an important role to play in an integrated approach
to security. Additionally, international partners must
depart from individualistic approaches and closely
coordinate efforts to assist Somalia in developing a
representative national army and police force.

Successful and lasting State-building for Somalia
will also hinge on its economic development and
the well-being of its citizens. To that end, Japan has
contributed $442 million to provide basic social
services, strengthen the capacity of the Somali police
forces and invigorate the national economy, including
the empowerment of young people, who play a role in
the national development plan. Our assistance includes
the recent disbursement of $8.5 million to urgently
address the famine crisis. We believe that the concerted
action of the international community to prevent
famine is crucial at this critical juncture. We have also
supported the Somali people in capacity-building by
providing training to more than 150 people in the areas
of health, infrastructure, agriculture, fisheries and
counter-terrorism.

Japan also looks forward to an inclusive and
thorough constitutional review to build a federal State,
including on resource and revenue-sharing mechanisms
between the Federal Government and the states.

Lastly, the recent increase in hijacking of
commercial vessels off the coast of Somalia is a matter
of serious concern and highlights the need for sustained
international counter-piracy efforts in the region. Japan
will continue its warning and surveillance activities
and escort operations, while also supporting social
services and economic development in the coastal
areas. Through these activities, Japan will continue to
cooperate with the international community to achieve
a free and open Indo-Pacific Ocean.

