Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I wish to associate my
delegation fully with the statement to be made shortly
by the Permanent Representative of Sweden on behalf
of the European Union.

Ireland has long desired a just and lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We believe
this can only be brought about on the basis of an
agreement that respects Israel's right to peace and
security and, at the same time, secures the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people. It is greatly regretted
that the hard work to achieve a final status agreement
solution during the lifetime of the previous Israeli
Government did not bear fruit and that once again the
Palestinian territories have been engulfed in violence.

There are deep differences regarding the causes
of, and responsibility for, the violence. It is clear,
however, that the current phase of violence arises
primarily out of the frustration to which long years of
occupation have given rise. The Foreign Ministers of
the European Union, in their ministerial declaration of
15 November last, pointed out that the lack of progress
achieved in the peace process, including on the
problem of the settlements, lies at the heart of the
Palestinian people's frustration and of the violence.

My authorities were concerned and horrified at
the widespread use of lethal force against Palestinians
and at the failure to use non-lethal methods that are so
readily available, especially in the early stages of the
current disturbances. Last October, the Council quite
properly condemned the excessive use of force, in
resolution 1322 (2000). The European Union warned at
that time that the disproportionate use of force would
only aggravate the situation further. This warning was
not heeded and was, unfortunately, vindicated by the
tragic events which followed.

I wish to stress that we also condemn in the
strongest terms the ongoing attacks on Israeli people.
They are utterly wrong in themselves and they will do
nothing to bring about the justice desired and deserved
by the Palestinian people.

The current situation has given rise to a
particularly vicious nexus of problems that have very
serious political, economic, social and moral
ramifications. There is the mounting violence, the
failure on both sides to live up to the commitments
made at Sharm el-Sheik, the collective punishments,
the closures and restrictions on movement, the resultant
devastating impact on the Palestinian people and on the
Palestinian economy, the disastrous financial situation
of the Palestinian Authority, the increasing terrorism,
the extrajudicial killings, and the receding prospect for
Israel of secure and recognized borders and acceptance
in its region. I have enumerated these matters not with
the purpose of holding either of the parties up to
obloquy, but rather to emphasize the dimensions of the
problem, its international character, and the
responsibility of the Security Council in relation to it.

There is a clear and urgent need for a committed
return to the negotiating process. This requires positive
action. It requires engagement, not disengagement. It
requires the full support of all around this table and of
all Members of the United Nations. The message that
goes out from this debate must not be one of negativity
or barren recrimination. Reprehensible actions must be
condemned by the Council: that is no more than our
duty. But beyond that, there is a need to be forward-
looking and to offer understanding, encouragement and
support.

Yesterday we heard from Deputy Prime Minister
Peres of the Israeli Government's decision to ease the
closures and blockades and to enable the restoration of
some normality to the lives of the Palestinian people.
We welcome this positive decision, and we will watch
developments in this regard carefully. We heard, too,
that the Israeli Government would now cooperate with
the fact-finding mission. This is also important and
positive, and we look forward to the follow-through.
We will also follow this process, carefully.

More is needed. The revenues due to the
Palestinian Authority must be restored to it. It is simply
not in the interests of peace, and it cannot be in the
interest of Israel itself, for the financial and
institutional situation of its interlocutor to be
undermined and possibly destroyed.

There is a need to re-establish continuity in the
peace process. No partner should be asked to accept a
situation where it is obliged every so often to restart
negotiations from a different position. It is self-evident
that this cannot make for a viable and stable process.

The Security Council a long time ago established
the basis for a solution in the form of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973). For a long time - since the
establishment of the Madrid principles and especially
since the Oslo Agreement - the Council has stood
aside and left it to the parties, with the assistance of
mediators, to advance the peace process and to achieve
a final settlement on a basis that meets the essential
interests of all sides.

The peace process has been in difficulties before.
This time, however, the difficulties are so grievous and
the international ramifications so potentially grave that
my Government are convinced that the Council must
again look closely at all elements of the situation and
work to help the parties to resolve the conflict.

The proposal for an international observer
mission, which has been raised by a number of
delegations, has the potential to help the parties in the
current situation. I would appeal to the Israeli
delegation and the Israeli authorities not to characterise
this proposal as something it is not, and was never
intended to be. There is no suggestion that this
observer mission could prevent individual acts of
terrorism. There is no question of it interposing itself
between opposing forces or being able to stop a riot.
Neither can it reasonably be regarded as an incitement
to violence. The fear has been expressed that the
presence of observers would induce Palestinians to
stage violent events with the aim of provoking
repressive action. On the contrary, unlike television
cameras, experienced international military and police
observers would readily detect riots, stone-throwing or
other forms of violence that are mounted with the
object of inducing repression and would report
accordingly to all sides concerned.

The Ambassador of Singapore perhaps put it best
at yesterday's private meeting when he said that a
monitoring mission could act as a catalyst in breaking
down the psychological barriers to a resumption of the
peace process. Deputy Prime Minister Peres in fact
referred in stark terms to these psychological barriers
yesterday. It goes without saying that it is very
important that any such measure is formulated so as to
receive the widest possible support in the Council.

I was very pleased to hear this morning the
welcome expressed by the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the meeting yesterday between Deputy
Prime Minister Peres and the Security Council. I agree
with Ambassador Al-Kidwa that this was good and that
Mr. Peres is indeed a veteran politician. Israel's
engagement with the Council was a most welcome
development. We hope and believe that this should lead
to an ongoing framework for engagement and
cooperative dialogue with Minister Peres and his
Government. It is of the highest importance that it
should do so. In this regard, we look forward very
much to Prime Minister Sharon's forthcoming meeting
with the Secretary-General.

I very much hope that Mr. Peres yesterday, and
Israeli people in general today, will take from the tenor
of our discussions the message that the United Nations
and the Security Council seek only to promote peace
between Israel and its neighbours. If we have pointed
to some hard facts, it is solely with the objective of
promoting necessary careful reassessment of certain
practices that, in our considered judgement, are
obstacles to peace. We suggest that it is in Israel's own
overall national interest to do so. We suggest careful
assessment of our comments and advice on that basis.

Ireland, for its part, will seek to encourage and
support action by the Council that will make a real
contribution to ending the tragic conflict between the
Israeli and Palestinian peoples, which has disfigured
the entire region for far too long.

