Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French):
Canada is very pleased that the Security Council is
considering the present draft resolution on the situation in

 

Haiti. We are gratified to see that all the members of the
Council continue to support the efforts of the freely elected
Government and the people of Haiti to strengthen
democracy and rebuild their country.

From the outset, Canada has had a particular interest
in the United Nations efforts to promote democracy and
stability in Haiti. Haiti is a neighbour with which we have
had close relations for decades and with which we share a
common francophone heritage. Many Haitians have found
refuge in Canada during periods of dictatorship and
oppression. In Canada, we are proud of our strong and
thriving Haitian community.

Stability in Haiti is a key to the continuing security of
the Caribbean region and to the development of democracy
in our hemisphere. That is why Canada played a leading
role within the United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH)
and now within the United Nations Support Mission in
Haiti (UNSMIH).

We consider that the United Nations presence in Haiti
has been successful in fulfilling its very ambitious mandate.
UNMIH provided the underlying stability required for the
consolidation of democracy and the increase in the respect
for human rights in Haiti. It created conditions conducive
to the effective recruitment, training and deployment of the
Haitian National Police. Further, it established a stable
climate that enabled democratic elections for Parliament
and local governments to take place, and which allowed for
a democratic transition of power from President Aristide to
President Preval last February.

Finally, the United Nations Mission in Haiti enabled
the Haitian Government to reach agreement with the
international financial institutions on a structural adjustment
programme that will provide the basis for the future
economic development of the country. I should like, on
behalf of Canada, to congratulate the Government of Haiti
for the determination it has shown in making the difficult
decisions that will establish a firm foundation for the future
economic and social development of Haiti.

(spoke in English)

Canada is pleased that the Security Council is
considering extending the mandate of UNSMIH for a
period of six months, renewable for a further period of two
months. This essentially meets President Preval's request
for a continuing presence over the next eight months,
should that be necessary. We believe it will provide the
Mission with the opportunity to continue to make a

 

valuable contribution to the establishment of an effective
and independent Haitian National Police. With respect to
troop levels, we want to underline the fact that to
accomplish its mandate, the Mission will continue to
require a minimum of 1,300 personnel. This figure was
arrived at after a very careful evaluation of the tasks to be
performed and the risks that they entail. Developments
over the first five months of UNSMIH's mandate have, in
retrospect, convinced us that this number remains
appropriate.

We will continue, therefore, to make a voluntary
contribution to the Mission of significant proportions, as
we have no choice but to ensure that UNSMIH has the
resources it needs to accomplish its mandate. Canada will
maintain its current commitment to UNSMIH over the
course of the renewed mandate, which includes 100 police
officers who are part of the United Nations civilian
police, and 750 military personnel deployed in
Port-au-Prince. As we have been doing since March 1996,
we will be providing part of our contingent as a voluntary
contribution, as a sign of the strength of our commitment
to the people of Haiti and, indeed, as further evidence of
our belief in effective United Nations peacekeeping. As
a result of this contribution and of that made by the
United States, Haiti is benefiting from a full peacekeeping
mission at a very small cost to United Nations Member
States.

We also note that the draft resolution mentions that
the upcoming mandate renewal will constitute UNSMIH's
last. We believe that it is vitally important that we all
recognize the import of this decision and of the fact that
we will, as a result, be entering a transition period in
Haiti. The need for a peacekeeping mission is coming to
an end. At the same time, it is clear that the need for
peace-building activities continues.

We believe that peace-building is becoming ever
more important as a tool of international crisis
management. It is essential that there be a civilian
equivalent to the military response that peacekeeping
provides. Once peacekeeping has stabilized a situation, as
is now occurring in Haiti, activities that strengthen
democracy and civil society become vitally important as
the conditions for economic development and long-term
stability are put in place and nurtured. The Secretary-
General's recommendations on the nature of a subsequent
international presence in Haiti, which will build on the
achievements of UNMIH and UNSMIH, will be
particularly important in this regard.

 

A large part of Canada's bilateral assistance in Haiti
is dedicated to peace-building activities and includes the
provision of specialized training to the Haitian National
Police, the reform of the justice system, electoral assistance,
cooperation with the Haitian Parliament, and projects to
strengthen Haitian civil society and promote human rights.
We are convinced that through such programmes, we are
complementing the efforts of the United Nations system to
build the foundations of a stable, democratic Haiti.

The next eight-month period will be crucial for the
United Nations involvement in Haiti. We believe we must
take full advantage of this time to complete UNSMIH's
work and to prepare a smooth transition to a different kind
of international engagement in Haiti, while we continue to
seek to buttress public security. To ensure that this
objective is achieved, we urge other countries, agencies and
institutions to join us in providing generous and timely
assistance to the Government of Haiti.

