Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
organizingthisimportantdebateandtheUnder-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, for his particularly enlightening briefing, as
well as Ms. Blakemore for her valuable testimony.

Peacekeeping reform is a central issue for the
future of the United Nations. The Blue Helmets are the
most visible face of the Organization. Every day, under
difficult conditions, they contribute to safeguarding
ceasefires, protecting civilian populations from abuses
and maintaining a fragile peace that, without their
presence, would very quickly collapse. Therefore, not
only must we pay tribute to them, but we also owe it to
them to do everything possible to enable them to work
effectively in the service of peace.

Much has been accomplished in recent years, but
more remains to be done. That is why France fully
supports the Secretary-General in his undertaking
to reform the peace and security pillar of the
United Nations. For their part, more than 50 States,
including France, have already endorsed the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative that we will adopt at the
summit on 25 September. It is an important success for
the Secretary-General, the United Nations and all of us.
Among the elements of that reform, the question of the
performance of peacekeeping operations is essential
to the credibility of the action of peacekeeping forces.
The report authored by retired Lieutenant General
Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled Improving
security of United Nations peacekeepers, which was
commissioned by the Secretary-General, proposed
many improvements that the Secretariat has begun
to energetically implement. That is a good thing, and
France encourages the Secretariat to continue on
that path.

To contribute to improving the performance of
those operations, there are three key components that I
would like to underscore.

First, I will address training both before and during
missions, which includes of course basic military
operational training and linguistic training. As everyone
knows, France is working in both of those areas. The
Blue Helmets deployed in the field must benefit from
that training so as to deliver their best performance,
particularly in the event of a change in mandate. To that
end, triangular cooperation offers many advantages
and benefits both for troop-contributing countries
and for third countries. France plays a leading role in
such cooperation by supporting the training of nearly
30,000 French-speaking African soldiers each year,
and intends to continue its efforts in that regard.

Secondly, it is necessary to improve force generation.
Better mobilization of the armed forces and police,
improving their projection capabilities and mobility
and increasing the ratio of women within contingents
are key elements of peacekeeping performance. There
is still work to be done there, but we are confident that
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative will make great
strides in that regard.

Thirdly, it is essential that a proper performance
assessment be put in place and that cases of
underperformance be addressed. A frank and open
exchange must take place between the Secretariat and
the troop- and police-contributing countries in the event
of proven underperformance in order to better identify
the various pitfalls that have led to those situations
and to rectify them, even if, in the event of failure
and especially in the case of abuses, we will need to
consider repatriating the troops concerned. That is
crucial to the effectiveness of missions, the security of
other contingents and the successful implementation of
mandates, particularly with respect to the protection
of civilians. In the same vein, it is important that the
quality of the work of the most efficient contingents be
recognized and acknowledged.

But the performance of peacekeeping operations
is not limited to the military and police aspects of the
operations concerned. The performance of civilian
elements and the quality of mission organization must
also be assessed. Some structural flaws can have very
concrete consequences. To cite but one example, France
is very concerned about the lack of real progress on
the coherence and responsiveness of the health-care
chain of command, the shortcomings of which could
endanger the lives of the Blue Helmets on the ground.

Finally, there must be zero tolerance towards
peacekeepers and civilian personnel who are guilty of
sexual assault. It is not possible to overemphasize the
crucial importance for the Blue Helmets and civilian
peacekeepers to exhibit exemplary and responsible
behaviour, especially at a time when the actions I
have referred to can undermine the credibility of our
work and the trust of the civilian population in the
United Nations.

Our goal is to create a real culture of performance
backed by clear, accountability and incentive
mechanisms. That is the best way for us to collectively
respond to professional United Nations bashers, who
will always find themselves repudiated by France.
Performance cannot be judged out of context, however.
Blue Helmets and civilian members of missions work
within the specific framework of their mandate. I take
this opportunity to reiterate the urgent need for those
operations to have a clear, sequenced and prioritized
mandate in the service of well-defined and transparent
political objectives. That imperative must guide our
daily work. To that end, France is working on all the
mandates for which we are responsible in our capacity
as penholder.

It is also key to ensure that operations have
the necessary resources. Indeed, without funding
commensurate with mandates, the entire functioning
of a mission is weakened, along with the safety and
security of United Nations personnel. That essential
point also falls under our collective responsibility.

I cannot conclude without reiterating the importance
ofproper coordination and cooperation ofpeacekeeping
operations with the various local and regional actors
on the ground. In that regard, I fully share the opinion
expressed by my colleague and friend from Cote
d'Ivoire on behalf of the three African countries on the
Council. Regional organizations play an increasingly
important role in the promotion of peace and security.
That is the case with the European Union, but also
and above all of the African Union and the continent's
subregional organizations. Their operations add
irreplaceable value and are in full complement of those
conducted under the auspices of the United Nations.
That is why strengthening the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union is a top priority
of our work, and why we must effectuate United
Nations support for African peace operations as soon
as possible, which is one of France's strategic priorities.

