Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the holding of this briefing and express our
gratitude to Mr. Michael Keating, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM), for his comprehensive briefing. We also
appreciate the briefing by the Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose Madeira.

Peru supports the goal of achieving sustainable
peace in Somalia and vigorously condemns the terrorist
barbarism of Al-Shabaab. We also express our concern
about the serious human rights violations seen in the
country, especially the rights ofboys and girls, many of
whom are Victims of recruiting.

We also we want to recognize the progress made
by Somalia and the efforts of the new Government,
specifically in the process of building a federal State,
including the outline of a national security strategy,
despite the difficult circumstances and the fact that
much remains to be done in Somalia. We commend
the dialogue between the Federal Government and the
federal member states on, inter alia, agreeing on the
principles that should form the basis of that strategy.
We also welcome the establishment of the National
Security Council. We believe it is critical that there be
a gradual and orderly transition of responsibilities in
the area of security from the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) to Somali authorities, while
ensuring that they be properly prepared to respond
adequately to existing threats.

Along the same lines, we commend the steps taken
towards the building ofa Somali police service and the
Somali National Army. My delegation is convinced that,
in addition to those institutions, joint and coordinated
action is necessary at all levels of Government. It is
key to continue building trust between the Federal
Government and the federal member states, as well
as to provide them with stability and predictability in
distributing roles and responsibilities among them. In
that regard, we believe an overhaul of the Constitution
is critical to resolve key issues of the conflict. We
welcome the adoption of a road map, and we stress
the need to agree on a division of powers and a model
for managing and controlling natural resources and
distributing income.

The political divisions that have existed in Somalia
are perhaps the biggest obstacle to the reforms the country
needs. National reconciliation should be understood as
a grassroots-driven process that is initiated by society
from the local level to the federal level. We believe it
is appropriate to evaluate the possibility of beginning
parallel preparations for universal elections in 2020 and
2021. We believe that encouraging greater participation
by women and young people in the elections could have
a substantial impact on consolidating a national agenda
focused on sustainable development in the country.
Those efforts must go hand in hand with affirmative
policies in the areas of human rights and international
humanitarian law for the entire population.

We recognize the significant contributions of
AMISOM, UNSOM. and the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia (UNSOS) and their partners in
bringing about peace and stability in the country. We
believe that it is important to provide predictable and
sustainable financing for AMISOM. in order to avert
risks related to a premature or sudden drawdown, as it
is quite possible that that would reverse the substantial
political progress made over the past decade. It is
also important to maintain coordinated efforts among
AMISOM, UNSOM. and UNSOS and the countries
that contribute to the peace process. In that regard, it
is worrying that differences among some countries in
the Middle East may be accentuating the differences
between the central Government and the federal
member states.

Moreover, we would like to commend the initiative
to complement the response to the humanitarian
crisis in Somalia with a preventive perspective.
The drought needs assessment will help the Federal
Government understand the factors that contribute to
the vulnerability of the country.

Lastly, given this situation, it is important to
bear in mind that more than half of the working-
age population, most of whom are young people, are
currently unemployed - a situation exacerbated by
the return of 400,000 refugees. We therefore commend
the fact that the Government has launched a national
development plan aimed at promoting the recovery
of the Somali economy and tackling the deep-seated
causes of the conflict, and we hope it will receive the
support of the international community.

