Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): The Polish delegation
expresses its grave concern that, instead of adhering to
the decisions of the Security Council contained in its
resolutions 1115 (1997) and 1134 (1997), the Government
of Iraq has chosen to impose conditions on its cooperation
with the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM),
thus posing a challenge to the United Nations and the
authority of its Security Council.

Having ignored the 29 October 1997 statement by
the President of the Security Council, Iraq has further
aggravated the current crisis. Due to the intransigent
position of the Iraqi authorities, the Special Commission
has been prevented from discharging its responsibility
under Security Council resolutions.

Along with others, the Polish delegation remains
extremely concerned at the successive incidents involving
Iraqi discrimination against some of the United Nations
personnel on the grounds of their nationality. We are
equally concerned at the instances of Iraqi interference in
the effective operation of the monitoring system,
including the removal of dual-use equipment from the
view of UNSCOM. surveillance cameras, as well as at the
Iraqi demand that the aircraft operating on behalf of the
Special Commission be withdrawn from use, with the
accompanying implicit threat to its safety.

Numerous appeals made by Member States to
reverse the course taken by the Government of Iraq have
remained unheeded.

In view of the seriousness of the situation and the
potential escalation of the crisis, we supported the
initiative of the Secretary-General to send his high-level
mission to Baghdad to convey to the Iraqi authorities the
clear and unambiguous message that Iraq must return
immediately to full compliance with all relevant Security
Council resolutions. Regrettably, that mission did not
reach its intended and much desired objective.

In its resolutions 1115 (1997) and 1134 (1997), the
Council expressed and reaffirmed its firm intention to
adopt additional measures, in case of Iraqi failure to fully
cooperate with UNSCOM, to ensure unconditional
compliance by Iraq with its obligations in this regard.

Today, faced with the unchanging position of Iraq,
the Council cannot but follow unanimously and decisively
the logic of its earlier decisions.

 

The draft resolution before us reiterates the Council's
demands concerning the full and unconditional cooperation
of Iraq with the Special Commission. It reflects the
determination of the Council to ensure that the Special
Commission continues its progress towards the elimination
of Iraqi programmes of weapons of mass destruction, as
well as the Council's commitment to see the completion of
the UNSCOM. mandate.

We express our earnest hope that the present draft
resolution will yet again remind the Government of Iraq
that its full cooperation with UNSCOM. is one of the basic
conditions which must be fulfilled for the process of the
lifting of sanctions to begin. Poland, for its part, would
certainly welcome the attainment of such an outcome as
quickly as possible.
That is why Poland supports the draft resolution before
the Council.

