Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): We wish to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Mr. Kalomoh for
introducing the interim report of the multidisciplinary
mission to the Central African subregion.

Pakistan supports the United Nations efforts
aimed at developing a comprehensive and integrated
subregional approach to the issues of peace, security
and development in Central Africa. We have repeatedly
stated this in the context of the Great Lakes region and
the region of West Africa.

While Central Africa is potentially one of the
richest subregions in Africa, it is at the same time
mired in armed conflicts, instability, underdevelopment
and poverty. The solutions to some of these cross-
cutting and transborder issues need to be found through
a comprehensive and holistic approach, as stated in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2003/1077). In taking
such an approach, the root causes of conflict and
instability, as well as their symptoms and effects, have
to be addressed.

The report identifies some of the most important
priority needs and challenges facing the Central
African subregion and makes pertinent observations.
We would welcome follow-up recommendations and
action by the Secretariat on how to address some of the
key areas identified in the report.

I would like to take this opportunity to make a
few comments on the report and the observations
therein.

First, we believe that the international community
has as much of a responsibility and interest in the
restoration and consolidation of lasting peace in
Central Africa as do the Governments and peoples of
the subregion.

Secondly, the issue of poverty and
underdevelopment, which is the root cause of conflict
and instability in that subregion, needs to be addressed
on a priority basis. We support the need for a more
proactive approach to this issue, but the solutions
should be global, not local.

Thirdly, humanitarian relief and reconstruction
assistance must be stepped up in the region. This is the
necessary first step in the recovery and rehabilitation of
the countries and peoples affected by conflict and
instability.

Fourthly, addressing health issues and pandemics
affecting the region, especially HIV/AIDS, should also
be accorded high priority. This problem, unless
addressed, poses as much, if not greater a threat to the
countries and peoples of the subregion.

Fifthly, in supporting good governance in the
countries of the subregion, strengthening institutional
capacities and the justice systems must be accorded
high priority.

Sixthly, in addressing peace and security
challenges in the subregion, we need, inter alia, to
address the issue of the financing of the illegal
exploitation of natural resources and drugs in the
countries of the region, which may be in part financing
arms flows and mercenary and militia activities, as
well as perpetuating the conflict. Last week, in the
debate on the Great Lakes region, our delegation called
for the establishment of a monitoring mechanism to
check the illegal exploitation of natural resources and
arms flows in the region. The monitoring mechanism,
once established for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, can be gradually extended to the entire region
to cover the issue of drugs as well as mercenaries.

Finally, the work of the multidisciplinary
approach of the Secretariat must be supported and
complemented by an integrated and joint response from
the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council. Here again I would refer the Council to our
proposal to establish ad hoc composite committees of
the three principal organs of the United Nations to
address these cross-cutting issues in a comprehensive
manner.

