Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by expressing my thanks to Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe and the Permanent
Representative of the United States for today's
briefings. I also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Iraq, who is here with us today.

The delegation of Panama is aware of the extent
of the challenge before United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the Government of
Iraq, and also of the very difficult conditions in which
they are carrying out their work. Despite the
difficulties, the value of their endeavours is very
apparent in the results achieved. We recognize the
progress that has been achieved in the political
assistance efforts made by UNAMI in cooperation with
the Government of Iraq, in particular, constitutional
support activities, the deployment of national liaison
officers to the provinces, and efforts to establish an
inclusive electoral system.

The delegation of Panama also notes the recent
endeavours for regional dialogue, in particular the
diplomatic rapprochement between the Governments of
Iraq and Turkey and the interest expressed by some
Arab countries regarding the reestablishment of
diplomatic missions in Iraq. It is important that such
regional dialogue continue, particularly with
neighbouring countries, regarding the situation of
refugees and the subject of border security.

We also take note of the major efforts being made
by the Government of Iraq to rebuild its electoral
institutions. However, we are concerned at the lack of
progress regarding political dialogue and national
reconciliation. We are concerned also about the impact
on the civilian population of the resultant political
stalemate and sectarian violence.

We echo the appeal made in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2008/266) to the various political
protagonists to set aside narrow interests and work in a
constructive manner to pursue the national interest of
Iraq. The Government of Iraq should also strengthen its
response to meet the needs of the most vulnerable
sectors of the population, both within and outside its
borders. We are pleased that high United Nations
officials have visited UNAMI's facilities, in particular
Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs. The humanitarian situation in
Iraq deserves the fullest attention by the United
Nations. We urge the various United Nations bodies
and programmes to continue to coordinate efforts to
ensure that the Iraqi people have access to basic
services.

Finally, with regard to the subject of human
rights, we take note of UNAMI's report dated
15 March on that topic. We also thank the Under-
Secretary-General for informing us today that the
Government of Iraq has taken measures to improve
conditions and to process detainee files. In particular,
we take note of UNAMI's visits to a number of prisons
at the invitation of the relevant authorities. We hope
that such visits will be made to other detention
facilities.

