Mr. Okamura (Japan): Let me first express
my gratitude to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his
comprehensive and insightful briefing. I also welcome
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Daeie, and Ambassador
Vlora Citaku to the Security Council.

Immediately after the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) was
established in June 1999, I personally served the
Mission in Pristina. My office was next to that of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Bernard Kouchner - perhaps Mr. Tanin is now using
the same office in Pristina. It was a very difficult time,
and we were almost at a loss in the face of numerous
challenges. Moreover, at the time UNMIK did not
have a clear prospective on Kosovo's future. The major
concerns were, first, whether democracy would be
restored in Kosovo and, second, whether reconciliation
among the Kosovar people could be achieved.

In October 2000, after many challenges had been
overcome, the first local election in Kosovo was
conducted with the assistance of the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. I was so encouraged to see people waiting over
half a day in the rain - due to the poor organization
of the election - to cast their votes. I was very much
struck by the strength of the Kosovo people's aspiration
to democracy. They wore traditional clothing in
celebration of the democratic process.

Sixteen years have passed since then, and I am
glad that democracy has been taking root in Kosovo.
I congratulate Mr. Hashim Thaci on being elected
President. However, the proceedings of the Kosovo
Assembly have recently been subject to a series ofviolent
disruptions by opposition parties. The fact that tear
gas was sprayed inside the Assembly chamber during
the presidential election is a cause of grave concern.
My delegation urges those responsible to refrain from
using violence. They should realize that any violence
runs counter to the Kosovar people's determination
to achieve democracy. We have strong hopes that the
Assembly will be normalized expeditiously.

Reconciliation between the two major ethnic groups
in Kosovo is critical to its future as well as that of the
Western Balkans region. In that regard, I welcome the

continued dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade.
We welcome the most recent meeting between Prime
Ministers Isa Mustafa and Aleksandar Vucie. That
meeting, facilitated by the European Union, took place
on 7 February. When I served in Kosovo, there was no
such dialogue. At that time, it was almost impossible to
travel between Belgrade and Pristina by car. I hear that
people now cross the border freely.

I encourage both the Serbian and Kosovar authorities
to redouble their efforts to sort out their differences and
normalize their relations through continued dialogue.
I recall being on the bridge in Mitrovica crossing the
Ibar River on New Year's Eve in 1999. UNMIK was
organizing the millennium ceremony on the bridge, and
representatives of the different ethnic groups - Kosovar
Albanians, Kosovar Serbs - were all together. In that
ceremony, everybody promised that they would walk
together for the future of Kosovo. I earnestly invite all
political leaders in Kosovo to remember that speech. I
have faith in the people of Kosovo, their readiness and
strong determination for democracy, and their belief in
a better future.

