Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): You honour us,
Mr. President, with your presence in the Council today.
I congratulate your delegation for convening this
debate and express our appreciation for the useful
concept note on security sector reform (SSR)
(S/2011/627, annex). I am grateful to Under-Secretary-
General Ladsous for his briefing.

I wish to acknowledge the presence among us
today of a high-level delegation of members of the
Brazilian Congress.

Brazil has supported security sector reform in
countries in many different regions, such as Haiti,
Guinea-Bissau and Timor-Leste, both bilaterally and
through organizations such as the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries. Those experiences
have made clear that for security sector reform to be
successful, it must be nationally owned and tailored to
the specific circumstances of each country. Focusing
on the technical aspects of security sector reform is not
enough. It requires nurturing political will for SSR in
the Government, in civil society and in the security
forces.

Ensuring that security sector reform is an integral
part of broader peacekeeping efforts is also crucial,
especially bearing in mind the importance of
reintegrating former combatants into civilian life.

Brazil believes that security sector reform must
be firmly integrated into the wider rule of law
framework. We must focus on improving the
coordination and integration of system-wide efforts on
rule of law, both on the ground and at Headquarters.
We welcome the steps taken to strengthen support for
SSR by United Nations field missions. With regard to
the roster of SSR experts, we reiterate the importance
of its adequately representing the capacities existent in
all regions.

Given the focus of today's debate on SSR in
Africa, I would like to briefly discuss the case of
Guinea-Bissau, in which Brazil is involved as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, through the Community of Portuguese-
speaking Countries (CPLP) and bilateral cooperation.
Security sector reform has received particular attention
from the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission. It is one of the priority
areas of the strategic framework for peacebuilding in
Guinea-Bissau. Support to security sector reform in
Guinea-Bissau has galvanized a number of bilateral
and regional partners. Cape Verde and Guinea-Bissau,
for instance, supported by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and CPLP, held an
SSR roundtable in Praia in April 2009. More recently,
the ECOWAS/CPLP road map on SSR has provided a
platform to support governmental efforts within a
wider cooperation framework.

The Government of Guinea-Bissau has
consistently underlined that reforming the security
sector is one its highest priorities, given its potential
contribution to sustainable peace and development in
that country. It has demonstrated its concrete
commitment to SSR by depositing an initial
contribution to the pension fund for the armed forces
and security forces personnel to be demobilized and by
taking administrative measures to make the fund
operational.

The immediate implementation of the fund,
which now depends on the disbursement of resources
pledged by the international partners, could boost the
efforts to transform the security sector in Guinea-
Bissau and turn it into a professional institution,
supportive of the consolidation of peace and long-term
stability of the country. Guinea-Bissau and the
international community must seize this opportunity.
Losing momentum could delay the entire SSR effort.

In Guinea-Bissau, we are working to ensure that
national ownership, international cooperation and
United Nations assistance can come together to support
security sector reform. Political will, adequate and
predictable funding, and the integration of security and
development efforts are indispensable to moving the
process forward. In Guinea-Bissau, as in many other
countries, we hope that these elements will allow for
the emergence of effective and accountable security
sectors dedicated to safeguarding peace, development
and human rights.
