Mr. Chergui (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank you, Madam President, for the
opportunity to speak today to the Security Council and
to congratulate you, on behalf of the African Union,
on the way in which the sisterly Republic of Equatorial
Guinea is presiding over the work of the Council
this month.

As I am speaking after my brother, Mr. Parfait

Onanga-Anyanga, I am not going to rehash a number of
the relevant elements and analyses that he has already
shared with the Council. However, I would like to begin
by stressing the importance of the result achieved in
Bangui on 6 February. It is the perfect expression of
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union and should, we believe, be extended to
all the crises on the continent. Indeed, alongside my
friend Jean-Pierre Lacroix, we have undertaken to
make this year the year of peace and stability in the
Central African Republic.

We wanted the first act of the new year to visit
Bangui and hold interviews there, from 8 to 11 January.
Those interviews allowed us to establish that there is
fertile ground for bringing together all the protagonists
in the crisis. We were also pleased by the Sudan's
offer to host those negotiations. The negotiations were
conducted by the African Union and I was honoured to
be the mediator, with the active support of Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Parfait Onanga-Anyanga and the entire United
Nations team. I pay them sustained and heartfelt tribute
for their work during that exercise, which, as I am sure
the Council is aware, was not an easy one.

We met in Khartoum from 24 January to 5 February.
For the first time, the Government was able to meet
the 14 armed groups face to face and address the deep-
rooted causes ofthe crisis in a calm and responsible way.
The Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic reflects that approach
in so far that we did not set aside any issue that we felt
might be at the root of the very serious situation in the
Central African Republic - be it a question ofjustice,
fair distribution of national wealth, inclusivity in all
State institutions or even the claim of some that they
were compelled to drink the water set aside for animals
in some regions of the country. What more powerful
message could we hear from those suffered and sought
to explain how they had arrived at the situation in which
they found themselves?

We therefore felt the weight of responsibility in
trying to lead the country towards a different situation.
That was why we took the approach we did in relation to
previous agreements. We decided to address all of these
different aspects not only in a responsible way, but also
in a way that was clearly established in the agreement.
We also decided to establish a solid follow-up process
on three levels so that the protagonists would be able
to fulfil the commitments they had taken on. From the
beginning of the negotiations until now, we have been
pleased to see the cessation of hostilities respected by
everybody. I think that is a very positive signal that
should encourage us to move forward.

The Council will see that we also have security
provisions in the agreement. We have tried to be
innovative in order to transform those who bear
weapons today into people who will serve the security
of the country's institutions. In that regard, there are
provisions which we would like to see included in
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), which has done a remarkable
job so far. I thank and congratulate once again the Head
of the Mission, who is in attendance at this meeting, for
the work that has been done and the sacrifices that have
been made. I also associate myself with the tribute to
those who have paid the highest price for the stability
and security of the country.

We will therefore require the support of the Council
to adopt the MINUSCA mandate, as I would not like to
see analogous situations arise on the ground tomorrow.
We want the work of the Mission's specialized units to
fall under the authority of the Government, as well as
under the direct and daily control of MINUSCA so as to
avoid any unnecessary incident on the ground. In that
regard, I thank President Touadera for the measures
that he has just taken in signing executive orders and
implementing certain provisions of the agreement. I
believe that his commitment is to be welcomed. We are
in almost daily contact with the Government, as well
as with all the armed groups, so as to ensure not only
that the ceasefire is respected, but also that the parties
honour the agreement.

Once again, I thank and welcome the commitment
of the countries of the region. It is an additional aspect
that makes this agreement different from those of
the past. If, for example, we seek to implement the
provisions related to transhumance and all the ensuing
problems in the area of security, I believe that we cannot
do so without the countries of the region. I therefore
commend the commitment of each Head of State who,
in Addis Ababa, officially and solemnly provided their
signatures to support the agreement and express their
readiness to re-establish the respective bilateral mixed
commissions of their countries with the Central African
Republic. I believe that such very important elements
will help us move forward to implement the Agreement.

We are under no illusions. Clearly, the entire
approach will remain insufficient if the friends and
partners of the brotherly country of the Central African
Republic fail to pool their efforts in response to what I
believe to be most important, as the real work will begin
now that the agreement has been signed. The question

is how to respond to the needs of those in certain parts
of the country that, as I said earlier, are unfamiliar with
civilization, including roads, health care or hospitals.

To that end, I solemnly call on the Security Council
and all regional friends of the Central African Republic
to help us, starting tomorrow. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and
myself took the initiative to gather all the partners of
the Central African Republic here in New York so as
to open the way towards facilitating the means to act
immediately - I repeat, immediately - to implement
the agreement and, above all, to provide hope. Given the
level of suffering and the very difficult humanitarian
situation in the country, I believe that hope is the
word of the day. We must give hope and demonstrate
our solidarity with the brotherly people of the Central
African Republic.

I will not expand further because, as I said earlier,
my brother Parfait Onanga-Anyanga has already
expounded upon the guiding principles of agreement,
chief among which is the need to respect the territorial
integrity and the unity of the country and to shield
it from all ethnic, religious or other clashes so that it
can move forward in solidarity and confront its major
enemy, which is poverty and the lack of development.

It is important for the Council to stress the need for
the comprehensive and genuine implementation of the
agreement, but I would like to conclude by underscoring
that, in a way, the peace agreement is the successful
result of multilateralism and the renewed resolve of the
United Nations and African Union leadership to weigh
in together and in solidarity to silence the guns and
foster dialogue and reconciliation. To that end, we need
the support of the Security Council now more than ever.

