Mr. Lee (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like to commend your decision to
allow interested non-members of the Council to express
their views on the situation in Timor, one of the most
important agenda items before the Security Council and
one that requires urgent action. It is our firm belief that
hearing the views of Member States in an open forum not
only promotes the transparency of the work of the
Council in general but also helps make the decision-
making process of the Council on operations requiring
Member States' involvement and contributions - the
United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) in
particular - more democratic and legitimate.

The Republic of Korea, as a peace-loving Asian
country, has long attached great importance to the
peaceful settlement of the East Timor question. We
believe that a smooth implementation of the UNAMET
mandate is crucial for the future of East Timor as well as
for the stability of the whole region. It will also serve as
a good example to follow for other operations organized
under the auspices of the United Nations.

On the basis of these considerations, the Republic of
Korea decided to make a financial contribution to the
United Nations trust fund for East Timor, and the
Republic of Korea has made its civilian police personnel
available. We will try to continue to make the appropriate
contributions within the bounds of our capacity.

We appreciate the speedy planning and preparations
for the popular consultation undertaken by the Secretariat
thus far despite the tight schedule and under difficult
circumstances. Today's adoption of the draft resolution
before the Council will mark another important step in
making the transition to the second phase after the
popular consultation on 30 August. Now it is incumbent
upon all the parties directly concerned to ensure that the
transition process will take place in an uninterrupted and
efficient manner.

Two and half months have passed since the creation
of UNAMET. During this period, a significant amount of
groundwork has been laid by the Secretariat, in close
cooperation with members of the Council, Indonesian
authorities and donor countries, so as to move the
consultation process forward as smoothly as possible. In
particular, the successful completion of the registration -
including registering East Timorese who are overseas -
is highly commendable. But the tasks lying ahead of us
are still many and daunting.

 

Close coordination will remain the key to
accomplishing these tasks.

In this regard, we commend the coordinating role
played by the Personal Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ambassador Marker, at the political level and by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Martin, in the field. My delegation would also like to
reiterate its firm commitment to continue to work with the
Secretariat and other interested delegations.

We are encouraged to note the strong commitment by
all parties concerned to maintaining an environment that is
stable and free from fear, both in the run-up to the conduct
of the popular consultation and beyond. In particular, we
have full confidence in the commitment and capability of
the Indonesian Government and people - particularly
reaffirmed this morning by Ambassador Wibisono - to
discharge effectively their primary responsibility for the
maintenance of law and order in East Timor. My delegation
would like to echo previous speakers in emphasizing the
importance of maintaining law and order throughout the
process of popular consultation and beyond.

I would like to conclude on a positive note about the
long-term future of East Timor, given the determination that
exists throughout the United Nations system, backed by the
positive cooperation of all parties concerned and the
widespread voluntary contributions of the international
community. My delegation also hopes that the Security
Council will make it a general rule to hold open debates on
operational issues that involve, financially and otherwise,
many Member States that are non-members of the Council
at earlier stages of its deliberations, and preferably before
the decision-making stage rather than towards the end of
the proceedings.

