Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the pleasure to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

Allow me to start by expressing the Movement's
appreciation to the Nigerian presidency for organizing
this important debate, and to you, Mr. Minister, for
chairing the meeting personally, to focus on the issue
of security sector reform (SSR), which is of major
importance to all countries emerging from conflicts,
particularly in Africa. The Movement believes that
today's debate comes at a very timely moment, as it
provides a valuable addition to our debate in the
General Assembly yesterday on the causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa (see A/66/PVs.32 and 33). The
Movement also expresses its appreciation to Mr. Herve
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his briefing today.

Today's debate constitutes an integral part of a
broader discussion about the interlinkages among
peace, security and development as mutually
reinforcing factors, as well as the complementarity
between conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities, and their respective roles at
the different stages of conflict resolution in helping to
build institutional capacities in States emerging from
conflict as well as those in transition.

Overall, the members of the Non-Aligned
Movement contribute more than 80 per cent of the
personnel working in United Nations peacekeeping
operations - the majority of which currently contain
SSR mandates. Members are proponents of every effort
by the United Nations that can contribute to enhancing
peace and security in the flashpoints across the globe,
including activities related to security sector reform
and promotion of the rule of law.

The leaders of the Non-Aligned Movement
underlined in the outcome document of their summit in
Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt, the importance of security
sector reform in the context of United Nations
peacekeeping and in post-conflict situations. They
stressed that security sector reform should be
integrated into the broad framework of United Nations
rule of law activities in order to ensure that SSR
activities and structures are not duplicating the work
carried out in the rule of law area.

As for the development of a United Nations
approach to SSR, the Non-Aligned Movement believes
that such development must take place in the General
Assembly to ensure that the formulation of strategies
for SSR, including its scope and mandate, is carried out
through the intergovernmental process, taking into
account the primary responsibility and the sovereign
right of the country concerned in determining its
national priorities in this regard.

The Non-Aligned Movement concurs with the
Secretary-General that national ownership should be
the cornerstone of the United Nations SSR approach.
National ownership and adaptability of SSR tools in
particular country contexts must be the key principles
that guide the role of the United Nations in supporting
security sector reform.

From a national perspective, Egypt believes that
security sector reform is not a goal to be pursued in
isolation from addressing other societal challenges to
peace and security in countries emerging from
conflicts. These include youth unemployment,
organized crime, extreme poverty and the lack of
adequate education and health services.

According to the World Development Report of
the World Bank, no low-income, fragile or conflict-
affected country has achieved a single Millennium
Development Goal. Therefore, Egypt underlines that
international support to security sector reform must be
anchored in broader capacity-building efforts, aiming
to contribute to addressing the social and economic
causes of conflicts and the complex security
environment in countries emerging from conflict and to
respond to their particular needs and conditions.

Accordingly, we believe that the formulation of a
United Nations approach to security sector reform
requires thorough discussion in the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council, in order to allow
for full participation of the United Nations membership
at large in such an important debate. We also believe
that the Peacebuilding Commission is in a better
position to coordinate the activities of the different

organs and agencies of the United Nations in this
regard, particularly in light of the experience that the
Commission has gained through its engagement with
the countries on its agenda.

Furthermore, in order to ensure leadership and
ownership on the part of the recipient country of the
reform process, the recipient country must be fully in
charge of formulating the reform strategy, identifying
gaps, needs and areas of priority as well as
coordinating the international support to avoid
duplication of efforts.

