Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We deeply regret that the Security Council
has once again been dragged into this exhibition of
political adventurism.

Draft resolution S/2019/186, submitted by the
delegation of the United States, was written to instigate
regime change on a pretext of caring about people.
We have seen all of this before in Libya, Iraq, Syria
and Afghanistan. We adopted one resolution on Libya,
resolution 1973 (2011), that was used unscrupulously
to enable bombings and brutal regime change. We all
know what that led to. Where is Libya now? What has
become of it? And what has become of the African
countries to which international terrorism has spread
from Libya? Washington and London have once again
robbed an entire nation ofbillions of dollars and forcibly
imposed handouts to establish the circumstances for
regime change. First they create colossal humanitarian
problems and then they call on the world to solve them.
We were obliged to exercise our right of veto because
the United States draft resolution was not aimed at
resolving the crisis in Venezuela. We therefore proposed
draft resolution S/2019/l90, an alternative that could
have helped Venezuelans solve their own problems
themselves, without intervention from outside.
Many delegations have been saying today that
Venezuela should hold elections as soon as possible.
The decision to hold elections is one for Venezuelans
themselves. We do not need to decide it for them. The
most important thing is dialogue, but our colleagues
are burning bridges both literally and figuratively. Our
draft resolution included support for the Montevideo
Mechanism. But dialogue and mediation are clearly not
what Washington and the delegations that support it
were aiming for. Today we heard the same old line from
the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom,
which is that the Russian text failed to receive enough
votes while the United States text was vetoed. That is
exactly why this whole scheme was concocted, so that
tomorrow the media will proclaim it, without a word
about how our draft resolution was shot down. This has
all happened before, as we all know and remember. It
was done on purpose. It is why they deliberately set
out to destroy the Council's unity, as has been said
here today, not for the first time. Seven members of the
Security Council linked to that bloc to one degree or
another and in one group or another voted against our
draft resolution. And yet the number of supporters not
even so much of Venezuela but of international law itself
is much larger, at least 60 international delegations,
as the recent meeting we held on Venezuela showed.
Seriously, there are far more of them, and most are
sitting here in this Chamber now.

Today's vote is a glaring example ofwhy the veto is
necessary. It is needed to defend peace and the right of
peoples to decide their own destiny. It was clear today
that, had that right not been conscientiously exercised,
the Council itself would have risked transforming itself
into a threat to peace and security. It is a good thing that
did not happen.

