Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I am
grateful to Special Representative Koenigs and to
Executive Director Costa for their briefings, and to the
Secretary-General for his detailed and comprehensive
report (S/2007/ 152). I align myself with the statement
to be made later by Ambassador Matussek on behalf of
the European Union.

Let me at the outset commend the excellent work
being done by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in Kabul and in the
provinces, often in very difficult circumstances. That
work is central to everything that we are seeking to
achieve in Afghanistan, and UNAMA is the sum of the
men and women who work for that Mission.

The past year has been a challenging one. We
faced a major threat from the Taliban, whose attempts
to take Kandahar were defeated thanks to the efforts of
the Afghan and ISAF forces involved. In southern and
eastern Afghanistan, we still face a vicious and capable
insurgency. But by using intelligence and targeted
military operations, the ISAF and Afghan security
forces are already taking the initiative.

Military action is necessary - indeed, it is an
essential pillar - but there are other key areas which
must be advanced at the same time. That requires a
comprehensive approach, linking and coordinating
security, the development of political institutions,
economic progress and counter-narcotics activities.
This means ensuring cooperation among the members of
the international community and coordination between
international and Afghan efforts, as well as better
information to explain to Afghans what is being done.

UNAMA and the Special Representative are
uniquely placed to play a leading role in this regard, in
particular as co-Chairs of the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board (JCMB). The Berlin JCMB
reaffirmed that this is, and will continue to be, the
primary mechanism for the coordination of
international and Afghan efforts to implement the

Compact commitments. It is incumbent upon all
involved in the JCMB process, including NATO, to
ensure that it delivers against that objective,
particularly through more active engagement in the
working groups looking at the detailed sectoral issues.

UNAMA's presence in the provinces is also a
huge asset, enabling them to coordinate with
international and Afghan stakeholders outside Kabul.
We strongly support the proposal to increase the
number of UNAMA's provincial offices from 7 to 11.
But we also have to recognize the constraints of
security and - as the special Representative said - to
address the real problems that confront staff in the
regions.

Tackling the challenges facing Afghanistan,
including the insurgency, is a long-term project. The
threat from drugs, which ranks alongside the threat
from the Taliban, is no exception. As we have heard,
the recent winter assessment survey by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime suggests that
Afghanistan may be facing another year of high poppy
cultivation, and that has to be very worrying. But the
survey also appears to show that, like last year, there
continue to be cultivation reductions in those areas
where there is better security, governance and
development. So we need increased and sustained
assistance for Afghan efforts to tackle opium
production and trafficking, including through donations
to the Counter Narcotics Trust Fund, which supports
the efforts of the Afghan Government to deliver its
own counter-narcotics strategy.

As the Secretary-General's report makes clear,
regional cooperation across a range of issues is vital
for the stability of Afghanistan and for the stability of
the region as a whole. This applies to the counter-
narcotics and counter-insurgency efforts, but it also
applies to economic issues. I have already referred to
the need for a comprehensive approach. Increasing
prosperity through regional cooperation is part of that
picture. So we look forward to the next regional
economic cooperation conference, to be held in
Islamabad later this year.

Just as the challenges facing Afghanistan are long-
term, so the international community's commitment to
Afghanistan must be long-term. The United Kingdom
has made that commitment; so has the United Nations.
We look forward to continuing to work closely with
UNAMA for the common objectives set out.

