Mrs. Arce de Jeannet (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to express Mexico's appreciation to you, Mr.
President, for having kept up, through the holding of
this public meeting, the Security Council's practice,
begun in December 2002, of allowing non-permanent
members whose mandate ends in December an
opportunity to share their experiences at the head of a
subsidiary body.

In the case of Mexico, the chairmanship of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1132 (1997), concerning Sierra Leone - a
position we have held since January 2002 - presented
us with very interesting challenges. First, we had to put
our full effort behind fulfilling the mandate entrusted
to the sanctions Committee, guiding the deliberations
and proposing ways of ensuring the full
implementation of the Security Council's resolutions.

Secondly - and this is perhaps the part from
which we benefited the most as a country and as a
delegation - we had an opportunity to discover and
delve into a geographic problem that was initially
foreign to us. However, the dynamism of the members
of the Committee and the state of the political process
in Sierra Leone motivated us to learn and,
subsequently, to manage more smoothly the various
elements that are part of the reality of that country,
including the regional dimension.

In the Committee we were able from the
beginning to adopt the guidelines that set the course for
our work. The commitment of some members of the
Committee during the past two years, in addition to the
invaluable cooperation of the Government of Sierra
Leone, have been key to carrying out our work. We
followed to the letter one of the pieces of advice also
received by other sanctions committee Chairmen,
namely, to make working visits to a country and its
neighbours involved in a sanctions regime. The
Chairman of the Committee, Ambassador Adolfo
Aguilar Zinser, headed the mission that in late June and
early July 2002 travelled to Sierra Leone, Guinea,
Liberia, Belgium, France and Austria. I wish once
again to convey Mexico's appreciation to the United
Nations Department of Political Affairs for its support
during the mission.

Exchanges of views with various governmental
and non-governmental actors and regional and
international organizations were key to our progress on
the issues of compliance with the arms and diamond
embargoes and the use of the travel-ban list. During the
mission, we also addressed obstacles to the practical
implementation of Security Council sanctions, as well
as criteria for lifting those sanctions.

One side effect of our first-hand experience of the
prevailing situation in the West African countries
visited during the mission was Mexico's decision to
promote the constructive involvement of the Security
Council on Liberia and the issuance of a statement of
the President of the Council in December 2002.

Of satisfaction to the Mexican chairmanship of
the 1132 (1997) Committee was the lifting in June
2003 of the diamond embargo in Sierra Leone,
following a detailed consideration by members of the
Committee of the actions taken by the Government of
that country to establish a certification of origin system
for diamonds and additional administrative measures to
exercise control over diamond-mining areas and to
regulate that sector.

With respect to arms embargoes, the Committee
took into account the views of the Government of
Sierra Leone on maintaining the embargo as a measure
to consolidate the peace process and regional security.
Similarly, the travel-ban list was updated by removing
the names of individuals who had died and by adjusting
the data in the database accordingly.

One innovative aspect of the work of the
sanctions Committee was Mexico's initiative to hold
informal tripartite meetings among the 1132 (1997)
Committee on Sierra Leone, the 1343 (2001)
Committee on Liberia and the 864 (1993) Committee
on sanctions against UNITA in Angola, coordinated by
Mexico, so that we might have an exchange of views
on questions related to the diamonds embargoes, the
arms embargoes and the travel-ban list within the
respective mandates of those Committees.

In addition to reviewing various questions related
to those issues, we, the members of the three
Committees, had the opportunity to receive a visit from
a diamonds expert, who gave us his opinion on the best
way to make diamonds embargoes more effective.

We hope that this experience can be used by the
Chairmen of the Sierra Leone and Liberia sanctions
Committees in 2004, given the regional approach that
is required to address the illicit traffic in small arms
and light weapons, the use of mercenaries, and the
similarities in the management of the travel-ban lists.

I wish to point out that the members of the 1132
(1997) Committee will also need to include, as one of
the pending tasks for 2004, the consideration and
definition of the new legal basis for the sanctions
regime in Sierra Leone, given the changes that have
taken place in Liberia, the transformation of the
Revolutionary United Front into a political party in
Sierra Leone, the stable situation and the gradual
withdrawal of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone. This exercise has already been carried out by
the Security Council in relation to the sanctions regime
in Liberia.

We hope that Mexico's contribution in the
leadership of the 1132 (1997) Committee can be
furthered and broadened by the member of the Security
Council that will assume those functions in January
2004. In conclusion, the delegation of Mexico thanks
the Vice-Chairmen and all the members of the
Committee; our colleagues in the Security Council
Affairs Division; Joseph Stephanides, Steven Avedon,
Loraine Rickard-Martin, James Sutterlin, Vicky
Aquino and Armie Decepida for their constant support
over the past two years for the work of the Committee.

