Mr. Costa: I thank the Security Council for the
invitation to attend this meeting.

As members may recall, my Office had the
distinction - if you can call it that - of ringing the
alarm bells five years ago to warn the world about the
destabilizing impact of cocaine trafficking from Latin
America to Europe Via West Africa, especially through
Guinea-Bissau. After a couple of years of hesitation -
wasted time that turned out to be quite costly, by the
way - the international community started to move,
prodded by the Council, and I thank all members for
that.

Actions taken by the Security Council and actions
promoted by the regional action plan of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
inspired by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), as well as generous bilateral support,
are paying off. That is good news. Over the past 18
months, we have noted a significant drop in the number
of drug seizures in West Africa, corroborated by a
similarly strong decline in the number of European
drug seizures, with West Africa indicated as the
suspected source. As members may be aware, trends in
the area of seizures are a good indicator of what is
happening in terms of drug flows. Therefore, we
conclude that drug trafficking through the region has
declined. Yet, that trend must be interpreted cautiously.
Europe's craving for cocaine persists, and international
efforts may have merely displaced trafficking routes
further south along the West African coast.

Furthermore, the threat to Guinea-Bissau,
although less obvious than in the past, remains very
serious. There have been reports of smuggling through
many privately owned islands in the Bissau
archipelago. The Government needs greater assistance
in order to gain control over those islands, which
provide safe havens for light aircraft and fast boats
coming from across the Atlantic. I therefore urge the
Council not to be complacent.

In addition, there are three new disturbing
elements. First, a growing amount of the drugs coming
into West Africa is being consumed locally. This is
new, but perhaps not surprising. The low prices and
ready availability of cocaine, particularly in Guinea-
Bissau, cause havoc among young people, who are
already distraught as a result of so many problems
related to poverty, illiteracy and unemployment. And
let us not forget that the foot soldiers of organized
crime - local young people - and petty traffickers
are being paid in kind with coke and crack, which are
then sold domestically.

Secondly, there are reports that drug use is
affecting the military. That not only threatens security
sector reform; as developments in neighbouring
Conakry have shown, soldiers' behaviour can easily get
out of control. This is not a problem unique to Bissau
or Conakry; the disastrous consequences of addiction
among the military have also been experienced in other
parts of the world, including in rich countries. The
difference is that in Guinea-Bissau, there is only one
national drug treatment centre - in Quinhamel, 30
kilometres from Bissau * run by a pastor who can
only offer discipline and spiritual guidance. That is
hardly an alternative.

My third point is the most serious, and I would
like the Council to consider it very seriously. Since
July, UNODC and INTERPOL have been investigating
numerous West African sites, where we have found
large amounts of chemicals used in drug processing to
convert pasta basica into high-grade cocaine, as well as
chemical precursors for the manufacture of ecstasy.
That was a shocking surprise for us, and it may be for
the Council too.

While that shocking information is being
processed, I want to ring a new set of alarm bells. West
Africa is now on the verge of becoming a source of
drugs, not just a transit area. Indeed, organized crime is
growing and developing indigenous roots. Right now,
those developments are taking place not in Guinea-
Bissau, but across its borders. Yet, something similar is
likely to happen in Bissau, where drug traffickers have
acquired a significant real estate presence. The country
is very vulnerable because of its poor judicial system,
its obviously uncontrolled sea and airspace and its
open land borders.

At UNODC, we are doing our utmost to help. As
part of the West Africa Coast Initiative, and in
partnership with the Department of Political Affairs,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
and INTERPOL, we are establishing a Transnational
Crime Unit in Guinea-Bissau. We are, of course,
supporting criminal justice reform as part of the
peacebuilding process, by seconding our staff to the
Ministry of Justice. We are working with DPKO on
security sector reform and, starting in January next
year, we shall have a new United Nations integrated

peacebuilding office in Bissau, including a law
enforcement expert in the Office of the Special
Representative.

With our assistance, a team of police experts
from Brazil visited Bissau in September and is now
planning to establish a national police academy. Three
dozen officers will undergo training in Brazil by year-
end. Training programmes have been conducted for
magistrates dealing with organized crime and for
criminal justice experts to improve their anti-money-
laundering capabilities and financial intelligence skills.

Last year, I saw first-hand the desperate state of
Bissau's prisons, if one can call them that. I am
therefore happy to inform the Council that, following
an evaluation - again by Brazilian experts - a new
prison will be built in the capital, while two others, in
Bafata and Mansoa, are to be refurbished with money
from the Peacebuilding Fund. The impunity of drug
traffickers - a fact of life in Guinea-Bissau until
recently - will soon come to an end.

The efforts of the Security Council have been
bearing fruit. Yet, the threat to Guinea-Bissau posed by
drugs has not diminished; it has evolved, as I have
explained, into patterns whose breadth and depth are
hard to assess, but whose negative impact will surely be
felt in the years ahead. I urge the Council to follow up
on the international support pledged at the ECOWAS
ministerial meeting, held at Praia in February this year,
and at the Guinea-Bissau conference held in Lisbon late
last year. It may be news to members that the ECOWAS
Commission is planning to hold a new funding round
table in Vienna on 3 December. I urge them to attend
and to confirm their commitment to help. Guinea-
Bissau needs their support, as well as their funding.

