Mr. A] Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
the South African presidency of the Security Council
for convening today's open debate. We sincerely value
South Africa's principled positions and laudable efforts
in the Council.

I also align myself with the statement to be made
by the representative of the United Arab Emirates on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and
the statement delivered earlier by the representative
of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

To date, the Security Council has adopted almost
2,500 resolutions, some 365 of which are related partly
or entirely to the Palestinian question. Many of them
are exclusively focused on the question of Palestine and
were adopted pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations. However, none of them have been
implemented. Rather, the Israeli regime has continued
to pursue its illegal policies and brutal practices in total
impunity, including by systematically committing all
four core international crimes. For instance, it has waged
more than 15 wars, invaded all of its neighbours without
exception and attacked other countries from the Middle
East to Africa. Israel still occupies territories belonging
to Palestine, Lebanon and Syria and conducts invasions
and aggressions against countries of the region, of
which the latest example is its periodic violation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon
and Syria. It also continues to pursue expansionist
policies by building additional settlements. The most
recent example of that is its Prime Minister's declared
intention to illegally annex the Jordan Valley. It has
also continued to develop every kind ofweapon ofmass
destruction and refused to join the relevant treaties. It
has brazenly threatened a country of the region with
nuclear annihilation.

Moreover, Israeli forces continue to brutally kill
innocent Palestinians. In 2018 alone, according to the
World Health Organization, they killed 299 Palestinian
civilians and wounded more than 31,000 others, mostly
during the Great March of Return in Gaza. Another of
Israel's heartless practices is its illegal and inhumane
blockade of Gaza, which has lasted for more than a
decade. The long dark list of Israel's brutalities goes on
and on, leaving no doubt that by any measure, it is an
outlaw regime in the most extreme sense.

Unfortunately, the Council has failed to fulfil its
duties with regard to Israel for a reason that is crystal
clear - the unwavering, systematic shielding of Israel
by the United States. The United States recently moved
its embassy to Al-Quds Al-Sharif and recognized
Israel's sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan.
Both are material breaches of international law. The
United States' latest gambit - the so-called deal of
the century - is founded on the illusion that it can
buy all causes, aspirations, honour, dignity, property
and territory as well as the inalienable rights of entire
nations. The serious, severe and systematic violation
of international law by the Israeli regime continues to
have serious adverse ramifications for international
instruments and institutions. It gravely erodes the
credibility ofthe Security Council and the Organization
itself, and the world's trust and confidence in them. The
other effects of these trends are as devastating as an all-
out war, if not worse.
In order to preserve international peace and
security, no nation must be left unheard, unnoticed,
unattended, frustrated and in despair. That can result
only in a complete lack of trust and confidence in
international instruments and institutions, thus leading
our world down a path of international disorder. The
Council must be vigilant about the alarming dangerous
trend and live up to its responsibilities to prevent the
crimes and threats of the Israeli regime.

The representative of the League of Arab
States made certain allegations against my country.
Unfortunately, he used the agenda of the Council's
open debate on Palestine to accuse my country of
intervention. All his claims are a fabrication and are
thus rejected. I therefore do not wish to dignify them
with an answer. However, I would remind him that the
real name of the body of water between Iran and the
Arabian peninsula is the Persian Gulf.

