Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I
would like to express our gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for organizing and presiding over this
open debate on the role of regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

Kazakhstan fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Kyrgyz Republic
on behalf of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization.

Kazakhstan considers this important issue to be
one of the main priorities of the Organization and the
Security Council. In particular, the Security Council
should encourage cooperation between the United
Nations and regional arrangements to promote
international peace and security, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

Resolution 1631 (2005) underlines the Security
Council's commitment to taking appropriate steps to
the further development of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations and recognizes the growing contribution
by regional arrangements to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

We note with satisfaction that over the years,
many efforts have been made to promote such
objectives. There have been debates in the Security
Council on conflict management and post-conflict
stabilization processes and the role of regional
organizations in peace and security. In previous
presidential statements, closer cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations on peace and
security issues was supported, including the brokering
of peace agreements in conflict situations.

We welcome the growing role of the United

Nations in the maintenance of international peace and

security and an enhanced international cooperation,

while supporting the principle of multilateralism in
addressing burning international issues.

It is now obvious that in recent years, the
international community has seen a rapid surge in
peacekeeping missions, and this trend is likely to
continue. The United Nations Department of
Peacekeeping Operations currently directs 18 such
operations across the world, comprising more than
130,000 troops, police and civilian personnel.

We believe that peacekeeping operations under
the aegis of the United Nations remain the most
effective tool for preventing and settling various crises
and for ensuring global and regional stability. In light
of this, our country firmly supports United Nations
peacekeeping efforts and the continued strengthening
ofits capacity in this area.

In a situation of escalating humanitarian crises
and armed conflicts, as clearly demonstrated by the
developments in Darfur, the United Nations and the
Security Council should pay special attention to the
possibility of broader participation by authoritative
regional and subregional organizations in peacekeeping
operations. That would allow a response to emerging
threats in a more effective and timely manner.

We believe it to be of great importance to
establish closer cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations possessing real
capacity to prevent conflicts and maintain peace. From
this point of view, we encourage the Security Council
to formulate coherent, common operational strategies
and early, integrated mission planning in close
cooperation with regional partners of the Organization.

Regional and subregional entities are in a
position to better understand local and regional
conditions and have influence on the prevention or
resolution of conflicts, and they contribute to the
maintenance of peace and stability in various parts of
the world. In this context we are pleased that the
United Nations engagement with regional
organizations is growing. In particular, a number of
regional organizations have already received observer
status at the General Assembly, including the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization. On behalf of 18 Member States,
Kazakhstan has requested the General Assembly to

grant observer status to the Conference on Interaction
and Confidence-Building in Asia (CICA). We hope that
the Assembly will support this proposal.

I would like to note that CICA is an
intergovernmental forum for dialogue, consultations,
consensus-based decision-making and implementation
involving issues of security in Asia. On the Asian
continent, CICA is seen as a unique structure uniting
the countries of the region in the task of strengthening
mutual cooperation in order to stabilize and safeguard
the region.

At present, 18 countries of Asia and Europe
participate in CICA as member States, with the United
Nations as an observer organization. We strongly
believe that the CICA platform for dialogue will
continue to play an effective role as a collective
mechanism for regional stability and security in Asia.

My delegation considers it very useful to carry on
our work to further enhance the role of regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security within the United
Nations Security Council and General Assembly. We
hope that the broad views expressed by Member States
today will serve to strengthen cooperation between the
United Nations and regional arrangements.

