The President: I thank Mr. Al-Qirbi for his
statement.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Foreign Minister of Australia.

I thank Foreign Minister Al-Qirbi and Gulf
Cooperation Council Secretary General Al Zayani for
their briefings. Both are making important contributions
to Yemen's political future. I also acknowledge the
contribution of United Nations Special Advisor
Benomar and thank him for his briefing today.

This meeting takes place at a crucial moment in
Yemen's history. Yemen has embarked on a peaceful
political transition process and must be commended
for doing so. Under Interim President Hadi Mansour's
leadership, Yemen has made progress with political
dialogue and has undertaken important reforms in the
security sector. It is important that the current spirit of
inclusiveness and participation continue as a foundation
for Yemen's democratic future.

We do not underestimate the challenge of
identifying a new basis for national governance in the
face of serious security, economic and humanitarian
challenges. Continued participation in the National
Dialogue by southerners who are able to speak with
authority and are prepared to contribute constructively
to the transition process is essential to the shaping
of the nation. Outreach to and engagement with all
Yemenis will be vital to ensure broad support for that
future Yemen.

While significant progress has been made in the
National Dialogue, we note the delay to its conclusion.
Any slippage in the political transition timetable
must be minimized and managed effectively to avoid
disengagement by any party from the transition process.
There remain spoilers, both inside and outside Yemen,
who wish to undermine the political process and derail
Yemen's political transition. Their actions risk Yemen's
stability and security and that of the region. It is vital
that no further actions be taken to undermine the
Government of National Unity or the transition.

Yemen's security risks must not be underestimated.
Sectarian and tribal clashes and the activities of
terrorists, including kidnapping for ransom, continue
to destabilize and undermine the security of Yemen
and the Arabian Peninsula. We deplore the cowardly
attacks this past week that took the lives of more than
40 members of Yemen's armed forces. Such attacks
underline the importance of firm resolve by Yemenis to
see through a successful transition.

As chair of the Council's Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee, Australia will continue to work with
others, including Yemen, to address the terrorist threat.
A unified and integrated armed force is also important
to Yemen's future security.

Yemen's political insecurity challenges are
compounded by a dire humanitarian situation. Over
13 million people are without access to safe water
and sanitation, more than 6 million are without
access to health care, and more than 300,000 are
internally displaced. An estimated 3 million children
are malnourished. Yemen's regional partners have
an important role in helping Yemen to address the
considerable political, economic and humanitarian
challenges it faces. Regional support is also essential
for Yemen's successful political transition. The
Gulf Cooperation Council has played an important
leadership role in brokering Yemen's political transition
agreement. Long-term constructive engagement by
Gulf Cooperation Council member States will remain
crucial. The Friends of Yemen group plays a valuable
role in fostering international coordination and
information-sharing to support the Yemeni-led process
of political transition and national development.

It is crucial that the Security Council continues
to engage actively and constructively to support
the Yemeni-led political transition. We stand by the
Council's readiness to consider further measures,
possibly including sanctions, against those who seek
to interfere in the transition process. The Council's
engagement in Yemen has already demonstrated
the value it can bring through preventive diplomacy
measures. It is essential that success be translated
into continued support for a democratic, stable and
prosperous Yemen.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I will now give the floor to members ofthe Security
Council.

