Mr. Seixas da Costa (Portugal): I have the
honour of taking the floor in my capacity as
representative of the Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE).

The fight against terrorism is an extremely
important element of the agenda of our organization.
At the last meeting of the OSCE Ministerial Council,
held in Bucharest on 3 and 4 December, the member
States of our organization resolutely reiterated their
condemnation of all "terrorist acts in all forms and
manifestations, committed no matter when, where or
by whom" and considered that these acts are a "threat
to international and regional peace, security and
stability".

OSCE considers that there must be no safe haven
for those perpetrating, financing, harbouring or
otherwise supporting those responsible for such
criminal acts. Terrorism, whatever its motivation or
origin, has no justification.

OSCE is determined to contribute to the
fulfilment of international obligations as enshrined,
inter alia, in resolution 1373 (2001) of this Council and
will act in conformity with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. All OSCE
participating States have pledged to become parties to
all 12 United Nations conventions and protocols related
to terrorism as soon as possible.

The OSCE member States have also, in the spirit
prevailing in the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
offered to provide support, including technical
assistance, to Central Asian partners at their request, in
countering external threats related to terrorism. I
believe it is appropriate for me to reiterate this offer
here today.

The adoption by OSCE of a detailed plan of
action for combating terrorism must be seen as an
effort to complement other actions being taken by other
international institutions. In fact, we intend to focus on
areas where we can offer some added value in
preventive, as well as crisis-management, tasks, such
as police-training, border controls and the adoption of
appropriate legislation, as well as judicial reform.

The plan of action covers a wide range of issues
with the aim of establishing a framework for
comprehensive OSCE action to be taken by
participating States, and the Organization as a whole,
in combating terrorism, while maintaining full respect
for international law, including the international law of
human rights. The plan of action seeks to expand
existing activities that contribute to combating
terrorism, facilitate interaction between States and,
where appropriate, identify new instruments for action.

I should also note that it is the intention of the
Chairman-in-Office of OSCE to nominate a personal
representative to coordinate with other international
organizations the political aspects of the fight against
terrorism.

It is also the intention of the Chairman-in-Office
to work towards the adoption of an OSCE charter
against terrorism, a goal that we hope can be attained
soon.

Finally, Portugal intends to organize in Lisbon in
June 2002 a meeting of the secretaries-general of all
the principal international organizations to consider the
joint efforts to combat terrorism. We believe that such
an initiative may contribute to better coordination of
international efforts and may guarantee global
coherence in the work of those organizations.

We are convinced that the steps being taken by
OSCE in its counter-terrorism efforts will assist the
whole international community in ensuring that the
threat posed by terrorists to international peace and
security will be thwarted.

We are certain that the excellent cooperation that
has characterized the relationship between our two
organizations - our activities have grown
progressively closer and become more complementary,
as attested in the resolution adopted by the General
Assembly on 21 December 2001 - will become even
more interlinked in the fight against terrorism.

