The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of the members to
photocopies of a letter dated 22 February 2006 from
the representative of the United States addressed to the
President of the Security Council, transmitting the
Statement by the Witnesses to the Algiers Agreement
on 22 February 2006. This letter will be issued as a
document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/2006/126.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
successful convening of the meeting of the
Witnesses to the Algiers Agreements
('Witnesses') on 22 February 2006 in New York
and their efforts to resolve the current impasse
between Eritrea and Ethiopia, in order to promote
stability between the parties and lay the
foundation for sustainable peace in the region.

"The Security Council calls on both parties
to show maximum restraint and refrain from any
threat or use of force against the other.

"The Security Council emphasizes that both
parties bear the primary responsibility for the full,
unconditional and expeditious implementation of
the Algiers Agreements.

"The Security Council recalls that under the
Algiers Agreements, both Eritrea and Ethiopia
have agreed to accept the delimitation and
demarcation decisions of the Eritrea-Ethiopia
Boundary Commission (EEBC) as final and
binding.

"In this regard, the Security Council calls
on both sides to cooperate with the EEBC to
implement its decisions without further delay.

"The Security Council urges the EEBC to
convene a meeting with the parties to prepare to
resume demarcation and strongly urges the two
parties to attend the EEBC meeting and to
cooperate with and abide by the requirements
specified by the EEBC, in order to successfully
conclude the demarcation process.

"The Security Council commends the role
of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea (UNMEE) and expresses once again its
deep appreciation for the contribution and
dedication of the troop-contributing countries to
the work of UNMEE.

"The Security Council demands that the
parties permit UNMEE to perform its duties
without restrictions and provide UNMEE with the
necessary access, assistance, support and
protection required for the performance of these
duties, including its mandated task to assist the
EEBC in the expeditious and orderly
implementation of the Delimitation Decision, in
accordance with Security Council resolutions
1430 (2002) and 1466 (2003).

"The Security Council calls on Member
States to provide continued support for UNMEE
and contributions to the Trust Fund, established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1177
(1998) and referred to in article 4 (17) of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement signed by the
Governments of Ethiopia and Eritrea on
12 December 2000, in order to support the
demarcation process."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2006/ 10.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.
