Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the presidency of the United Kingdom for
organizing today's open debate on the important topic
of mediation and the settlement of disputes.

Challenges to peace and security facing the world
today call for strengthening the international legal
order and redoubled efforts at all levels towards both
the prevention and resolution of conflicts and crises. It
is critical that mediation frameworks not be used as a
tool for entrenching situations that have resulted from
the unlawful use of force, war crimes, crimes against
humanity, acts of genocide and ethnic cleansing. In
the same vein, it is important that the international
community consistently oppose and reject any attempt
to cover up and consolidate acts of aggression and other
illegal acts through misinterpreting international legal
norms and principles. The established principle of the
inadmissibility of the use of force for the acquisition of
territory and the ensuing obligation of non-recognition
of situations resulting from serious violations of
international law must be applied and enforced
universally and unconditionally.

Those obligations are part of the common rules-
based international order. They are universally binding
and apply to all situations and conflicts, whatever their
distinct root causes or nature. Equally important is
to ensure the implementation of resolutions adopted
by the principal organs of the United Nations. It is
unacceptable that armed aggression against sovereign
States and resultant military occupation of their
territories continue despite the relevant Security
Council resolutions. As is known, through resolutions
822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993), all of
which were unanimously adopted, the Security Council
condemned the use of force against my country,
Azerbaijan, the occupation of its territories, attacks
on civilians and bombardments of inhabited areas in
my country, and reaffirmed respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Azerbaijan, the inviolability
of international borders and the inadmissibility of
the use of force for the acquisition of territory. In
response to territorial claims and forceful actions,
the Security Council reconfirmed in those resolutions
that the Nagorno Karabakh region is an integral part
of the Republic of Azerbaijan and demanded the
immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal of
the occupying forces from all occupied territories.

However, unfortunately, key Security Council
demands have yet to be implemented, and mediation
efforts, which have been conducted for 26 years
within the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, have yet to yield results. On the contrary,
despite earlier warnings, demands and condemnation
by the international community against the background
of ongoing efforts towards the political settlement of
the conflict, deliberate actions are being carried out
in the occupied territories with a view to securing
their colonization and annexation in clear violation
of international law. Such actions include, inter alia,
the implantation of settlers, the destruction and the
appropriation of historical and cultural heritage, and the
exploitation and pillaging of and illicit trade in assets,
natural resources and other resources in the seized
territories. As a country suffering from the occupation
of its territories and the forced displacement of
hundreds of thousands of its citizens, Azerbaijan is the
party with the greatest interest in the earliest possible
political settlement of the conflict and reversal of its
consequences. At the same time, no settlement to the
conflict can be reached that Violates the Constitution
of the Republic of Azerbaijan and is inconsistent with
international law.

The primary objective of the ongoing peace
process, the mandate of which is based on the Security
Council resolutions I just mentioned, is to ensure the
immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal of
the occupying forces from all the occupied territories
of Republic of Azerbaijan and the return of forcibly
displaced persons to their homes and property.
Achieving that objective is imperative and can in
no way be presented as a compromise or used as a
bargaining chip in the conflict settlement process. The
military occupation and ethnic cleansing of Azerbaijan
territories do not represent a solution and will never
bring about peace, reconciliation or stability.

