Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): At the outset, I
would like to thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for
his quarterly briefing on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). I would
also like to commend the Panel of Experts for their
meticulous work.

Lithuania has long called for a comprehensive,
negotiated and long-term solution that would
strengthen international confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme, in full
compliance with its international obligations and the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Lithuania notes
the progress achieved thus far in the implementation
of the 24 November 2013 Joint Plan of Action agreed
by the E3+3 and Iran. We reiterate our call on Iran to
demonstrate transparency, determination and political
will and to engage constructively with the E3+3 in
resolving all outstanding issues, including those related
to the possible undisclosed military dimension of Iran's
nuclear programme.

We are closely following the continuing dialogue
and cooperation between Iran and the International
Atomic Energy Agency under the Framework for
Cooperation. The provision of all pertinent information
by the Islamic Republic of Iran and unimpeded access
to various facilities are key to achieving transparency
and enabling the Agency to have a clear understanding
of Iran's nuclear programme.

Pending a comprehensive agreement, however, all
Security Council sanctions imposed on Iran remain in
effect. The Islamic Republic of Iran, Member States
and their nationals and entities are obliged to fully
implement the relevant Security Council measures. The
work of both the Committee and the Panel of Experts
in verifying compliance should remain unaffected. We
reiterate our appreciation for the final report of the Panel
(S/2014/394, annex) and underline the importance of
implementing its recommendations without any delay.

We are very concerned about the pattern of
conventional arms embargo violations, with persistent
reports of arms transfers from Iran to Syria and
elsewhere. The latest case involved the attempted
transfer from Iran of containers with concealed rockets,
mortars and related material on the Klos C vessel. It was
another clear violation of Iran's obligations pursuant to
the relevant Security Council resolutions. Appropriate
and timely response by the Committee in addressing
such violations is critical.

Finally, let me reaffirm Lithuania's support for
intensive diplomatic efforts by the E3+3 and Iran,
under the leadership of Catherine Ashton, to achieve a
comprehensive and final solution to Iran's nuclear issue
and build a strong basis for mutual trust. We reiterate
our hope that Iran's engagement in the E3+3 talks will
translate into cooperation with the 1737 Committee.

