The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Cote d'Ivoire, Indonesia, Israel,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Uzbekistan, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Mr. Alexander Konuzin,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Ambassador Konuzin to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/541, which contains the text of a
letter dated 1 July 2004 from the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism,
transmitting the Committee's work programme for its
twelfth 90-day period, covering July to September
2004.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Alexander Konuzin, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism. I
now give him the floor.


