On the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), this year marks a significant milestone towards realizing global commitments on gender equality and the women and peace and security agenda. It is heartening to note that in recent years, this agenda has become an integral part of the work of the Council. Meaningful progress on the ground has also been achieved so as to lighten women's hardship and promote their increasingly active participation in all walks of life, including in conflict prevention and resolution and sustaining peace. In order to maintain and push forward momentum, the message on the importance of this agenda in the work of the Council should continually be reinforced, reaffirmed and strengthened. With that in mind, Viet Nam supports the efforts of the international community, Member States and international partners to promote the agenda. Viet Nam therefore today voted in favour of the draft resolution on women and peace and security, as contained in document S/2020/1054. At the same time, we reaffirm our strong, consistent and unwavering commitments to the framework and achievements that the international community has strenuously built up over the years, including those elaborated in previous relevant resolutions of the Security Council, including resolutions 1889 (2009), 2122 (2013), 2242 (2015), 2467 (2019) and 2493 (2019), just to name but a few. It is regrettable that no outcome was adopted on this important anniversary. It is therefore important that all the parties, including members of the Security Council, strive further for mutual understanding and joint efforts in pursuing the women and peace and security agenda in a consistent, constructive and forward-looking manner. In this regard, Viet Nam reiterates its commitment to joining the efforts of the global partnership to continue to ensure that the voices of women are heard, their concerns and needs are addressed, and their roles and contributions to peace and security are enhanced and recognized.
