Mr. Heusgen (Germany): For Germany, Mali is
very important. We have been deeply involved in the
peace process and supporting it and the country since
the crisis erupted in 2012. Today, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) includes the biggest deployment
of German soldiers in terms of United Nations troops,
which shows our dedication to the country.

We also fully recognize the international
engagement of other countries. I want to commend
especially our French friends, as well as what France
and Operation Barkhane are doing for the sake of the
Country's security and development. I also would like to
welcome Assistant Secretary-General Keita and totally
support what she said, namely, that MINUSMA plays an
essential role in the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. MINUSMA is
therefore a key actor for achieving stabilization in Mali,
together with other civilian and military actors there,
such as the European Union training mission, which
Germany is currently is commanding.

With regard to the political process, as with
any peacekeeping mission anywhere in the world,
MINUSMA itself cannot supply substitutes for
national political solutions but can only support
their implementation. I also want to underline the
positive developments that Ms. Keita enumerated in
her briefing, such as in the accelerated disarmament
process. However, still more progress must be made
in the areas of decentralization and constitutional and
security-sector reform.

I would also like to commend the positive steps that
have been taken to involve women in the peace process.
However, as my British colleague just said, more must
be done. In that context, I would like to warmly welcome
the very dedicated and passionate Foreign Minister of
Mali to the Council. It is wonderful to have her here,
and I would like to commend her and her Government
for the efforts they have been undertaking.

It is important that State capacity be strengthened,
particularly in the centre of the country. I know that
the Malian Government has already done a lot there
but, as Assistant Secretary-General Keita said in her
briefing, the security situation in the central regions
remains serious. There is a great deal to do, but as
others here have said, we also need a leap forward
to restore trust between the population and the
Government authorities. Here I want to repeat what I
have said on other occasions regarding the challenge
that terrorism poses to countries. I always point to the
United Nations Development Programme's 2017 study
Journey to Extremism in Africa: Drivers, Incentives
and the Tipping Point for Recruitment, which clearly
states that the reasons that drive young people to join
extremist terrorist groups include bad governance,
lack of education, poverty and unemployment, which
are all drivers on the journey to extremism, and Mali
still has to deal with all of that. But to repeat myself
once again, we recognize what the Prime Minister and
the Government are undertaking, and we of course
understand the difficulties inherent in implementing
all of it.

With regard to MINUSMA, we would first like to
welcome the progress that has been made in increasing
peacekeepers' safety and reducing casualties. We
acknowledge what the Secretariat has done to
implement Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos
Santos Cruz's report on Improving security of United
Nations peacekeepers. A lot has been done in that
respect, and Germany supports the implementation
of the Cruz report on a bilateral level. MINUSMA
remains a key security umbrella for the humanitarian
development and stabilization efforts that are needed in
the north. When we discuss the renewal of its mandate,
we must focus on ensuring that it is realistic, achievable
and capable of securing the gains that we have made in
the north. We believe we should also do a better job of
capitalizing on MINUSMA's civilian-military nature
and better connecting it to civilian peacebuilding. That
holds true for all missions.

With regard to any peace effort in Mali and the
Sahel we have to look at all risk factors. The Council
has probably been expecting this, but I must reiterate
that the security-related effects of climate change
in Mali are obvious, with herders and farmers there
clashing in the wake of droughts and climate change.
More conflict is being driven by climate change, and
that is unfortunately also the case in Mali.

