Mr. Abu-Nimah (J ordan)(interpretation from Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to extend to you, Sir, my
warmest congratulations on your outstanding presidency. I
would also like to thank your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Kenya, for having presided over the
Council's endeavours with his usual wisdom.

I also wish to express my condolences on the untimely
passing of Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General who died in the
exercise of his functions.

I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
holding this meeting to discuss a most important matter: the
decision of the Israeli Government to expand the city of
Jerusalem towards the occupied Arab territories to the
north, west and south. This is an illegal decision in
contravention of various resolutions of the General
Assembly and of this Council, in particular those
resolutions that reject Israel's decision to annex the Arab
part of Jerusalem. That decision also contravenes the 1993
agreements that deferred the question of the status of
Jerusalem to the final stage of the negotiations, and in
accordance with those agreements, the status of Jerusalem
was to remain unchanged until agreement was reached at
the final stage of the negotiations.

That decision also runs counter to the 1949 Geneva
Convention and all international laws that guarantee

 

protection for persons under occupation and their
property. We call upon the Council to reaffirm its refusal
to accept these changes, to reaffirm its early resolutions
in connection with Jerusalem and to demand that Israel
respect and implement them, as it does of other States.
We are pleased that preceding speakers have confirmed
this position.

The Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan has firmly opposed and condemned Israel's
decision. Our Minister for Foreign Affairs stated on 22
June 1998, that Jordan categorically rejects this decision
and considers it null and void. He added that any attempts
to whitewash the decision taken by Mr. Netanyahu are
unacceptable and would fail to convince anyone.

The Deputy Prime Minister of Jordan has also called
on all international Powers to convince Israel that its
action are null and void and that it is destructive to the
peace process and all that was achieved by other leaders
who made the ultimate sacrifice for peace and for the
well-being of future generations.

In this regard, the Jordanian House of
Representatives adopted a decision on 23 June
condemning the Israeli decision on Jerusalem and
describing it as one more link in the chain of flagrant
violations of resolutions on Jerusalem and the policy of
annexing Arab territory. This reflects Israel's defiance of
resolutions of international legitimacy and the harm it
does to hundreds of millions of Arabs and Muslims.

Furthermore, our Government repeated its
condemnation of and indignation at all Israeli attempts to
alter the Arab character of Jerusalem, particularly the plan
to expand the city. The Islamic and Arab Ummah was
also called on to oppose this desecration of their sacred
rights. All international organizations and peace- and
justice-loving countries have been called on to oppose this
decision by all means, because the Israeli decision will
have the most harmful consequences for the peace process
now and in the future.

This Israeli decision links the chain of illegal
measures adopted by Israel and brought to the attention of
the Council, particularly the opening of the tunnel near a
number of sacred Islamic sites, which led to bloody and
tragic events, and the building in Jebel Abu Ghneim of
Israeli settlements, a decision that was opposed by the
entire international community and all Arab States and
that brought the peace process to a halt.

 

The Israeli decision was also condemned by the
General Assembly. We warned against the dangers of
Israeli policies that destroy the foundations of peace. We
said that the destruction of homes, the expulsion of
inhabitants from Burj al-Laqlaq, the confiscation of the
identity cards of the original settlers of Jerusalem, the
confiscation of Arab land, the sealing off of the city of
Jerusalem to prevent Arabs from going there for medical
treatment, study or religious services, the ongoing isolation
of Palestinian cities, the thwarting of freedom of movement
and the expansion of settlement colonies are all inherently
dangerous acts. They widen the gap of acrimony, deepen
the feelings of despair and frustration and therefore
constitute a threat to security.
It is clear that Israel, in its decision to expand the city
of Jerusalem, aims at creating an opportunity to Judaize the
city and strengthen its hold on it. In fact, the Prime
Minister of Israel candidly declared that the objective of
that plan was to keep the Arab population under 30 per
cent. It is also clear that Israel plans to expand its
settlement projects in Arab territories at the expense of the
legitimate inhabitants, and to create new facts on the
ground prior to the final stage of negotiations. This is a
path strewn with dangers.

Though we continuously reiterate our rejection of
violence as a means of settling disputes, we believe that the
measures adopted by the Israeli Government are a means
par excellence of sowing the seeds of violence and
terrorism. Therefore, from this rostrum, we call upon the
Israeli Government to reconsider policies which consolidate
the gains of force and war, to undertake the implementation
of agreements and to accept the bases we have all agreed
to as foundations for peace. It was that peace which we
began together at Madrid, in a blessed initiative, through
which major progress has been achieved.

However, Israel has opted for closing this path, and
has refused counsel even from its closest friends and allies.
We in the Middle East are confronting major dangers. We
must close ranks in order to avoid the negative
consequences of such acts. The continuation of these illegal
acts of aggression against the simplest yet the most sacred
of people's rights, against their properties, their hopes and
their future, we will not allow us to expect anything but the
abyss of violence, conflict and hatred. In Jordan, this is not
the option we chose, and it will never be.

