Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): It gives me great pleasure
indeed to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of May.
We are confident that the Council will successfully
discharge its duties during your stewardship of its business
this month. I also wish to pay a special tribute to
Ambassador Kovanda of the Czech Republic for the
excellent manner in which he conducted the work of the
Council during the busy month of April. He is the best
slave-driver we have in the Council.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/1995/342) on the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia.
Unfortunately, what emerges from the report is not
encouraging. It is disappointing to learn that more than
300,000 men, women and children are still languishing in
the refugee camps waiting anxiously and in anguish to
return to their homes. It is most unfortunate, to say the
least, that all these innocent people had to flee their homes
in fear of their lives for no other reason but that they
happened to belong to an ethnic group wrongly considered
to be inimical to the interests of the ethnic separatists and
purists of Abkhazia. We are witnessing here a consciously
crafted policy of "ethnic cleansing", so rightly characterized
as such by the Budapest summit of the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE).

It is sad indeed that ethnic intolerance has uprooted a
whole people from the comfort of their homes and
subjected them to live in cramped and squalid conditions in
refugee camps. These are people who remain away from
their birthplaces against their will, and so they shall remain
for as long as the Abkhaz authorities maintain their present
separatist, ethnocentric policies.

The few people of Georgian origin who have been
brave enough to return have been tortured and murdered in
cold blood. The harsh and inhuman treatment meted out to
the few returnees is meant to frighten the refugees into
leaving Abkhazia permanently.

This state of affairs cannot go on indefinitely. History
teaches that no people can be for ever deprived of their
national birthright or forced into eternal submission. It
would not come as a surprise if in the next few weeks or
months these people decided to march en masse back to
their homes, and the consequences of such a move, given
the present mood of the Abkhaz authorities, are too ghastly
to contemplate. There is no doubt that any attempt by the
refugees to return to their homes in large numbers would
cause panic in Sukhumi and this could result in the mass
murder of the returnees by the Abkhaz militia. Yet we are
told that, in their frustration, this is what the refugees
intend to do. The international community should do
everything possible to avert this potential disaster. The
poor and deteriorating security situation in the Gali region
does not augur well for the return and resettlement of
refugees. It must be improved as a matter of urgency, and
pressure must be brought to bear on the Abkhaz
authorities to allow the return of refugees in conditions of
safety and security.

My delegation is also disappointed by the lack of
progress in the political talks. Over a year has passed
since the Council adopted resolution 881 (1993) but the
parties' positions remain polarized. There is however a
ray of hope. The cease-fire is still holding for one thing,
and the parties have started talking again, for another.
Unfortunately, the parties continue to take two
fundamentally different approaches to the nature of the
new Constitution and the form the State should take.

The draft resolution we are about to adopt reaffirms
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Georgia with Abkhazia as an integral part thereof. It is
our hope that the talks currently taking place between the
two parties in Moscow will usher in an era of peace and
national reconciliation in a fully integrated Georgia.

My delegation supports an extension of the mandate
of UNOMIG for an additional period of eight months. We
have taken note of the Secretary-General's concern that
an untimely withdrawal could lead to the resumption of
hostilities. At the same time, we hope that the parties to
the conflict will guarantee that this extension is used
profitably to further a peaceful settlement of the conflict,
and not to maintain or entrench the status quo. Lastly, we
are at least encouraged that there is a satisfactory level of
respect for the United Nations and its forces in Georgia,
unlike in other parts of the world where the authority of
the United Nations and its peace-keeping personnel is
defied with reckless abandon. Let me end by paying
homage to the brave men and women of UNOMIG and
the CIS peace-keeping forces for the sacrifices they are
making in Georgia to help the people of that troubled
country make peace with one another.

