Judge Jorda (spoke in French): I would first like
to thank the representatives, who, I believe, as they did
last year and for several years before, make a
contribution and always try to be very close to the
developments in our work to help us with their
considerations and proposals. Since it is late, I will not
take long in order to leave time for Judge Pillay and the
Chief Prosecutor to respond more specifically to some
of the questions. I have one or two general comments
and some more detailed comments on certain issues.

Forgive me if I do not respond to everyone. It
seems to me that there is general or near-general
agreement on certain points stemming from the
interventions and contributions of Judge Pillay and the
Chief Prosecutor. It seemed to me that all the
representatives, at least those who spoke, were in
agreement - I am thinking particularly of what the
representatives of China and the Russian Federation
said - that an ad hoc tribunal is not a definitive or
permanent tribunal and that delayed justice is in itself
not good. As was often said when the Tribunal was
created and in the 1993 report of the Secretary-
General, and as the Council stated again very clearly in
resolution 1329 (2000), it is those with high-level
responsibility, who planned the ethnic cleansing
policies, who should be the first to be prosecuted by
the Tribunals, which obviously cannot put on trial the
thousands of responsible individuals with blood
directly on their hands.

The Council has also said and approved that the
local jurisdictions can perhaps now assume
responsibility in carrying out international justice. I
think that would be good, especially when we can see
the future criminal court taking shape.
The Council has also said - echoing our own
comments - that the truth and reconciliation
commissions have a role to play in the process of
national reconciliation.

So because this agreement seems to be general,
- perhaps I am overstepping my authority - perhaps
it could be the method for organizing this agreement
and helping us in the most concrete manner possible. I
had suggested in my statement - and perhaps I should
apologize once again for going beyond my
role - I had suggested, as the Council did last year,
that perhaps a working group set up by the Council,
which after all created us, could deal with all these
questions pertaining to the reform of the ad litem
judges. Why? Because on this specific item - the role
given to local jurisdictions and particularly the creation
of a special court - I think this is a very interesting
suggestion - I think that the Council and we ourselves
should know what precisely the status is of the
reconstitution of local jurisdiction, particularly in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Let us not forget that
Ambassador Klein and Ambassador Petritsch are there
and can enlighten us on the exact status of the
reconstitution of the legal system of this country.

I hope that I have responded to the concerns
expressed particularly those of the representative of
Tunisia. There, of course, is specific, concrete
information on the establishment of the jurisdictions,
beyond which - and I agree with Ms. Del Ponte's
advice - a special jurisdiction could be established in
a form to be decided. Having finished with the
methods, I can now respond to certain questions.

First, on the outreach programme, I was happy
and gratified to see that many of the Council members,
particularly the representative of Norway, were
interested in this programme. It is true that is extremely
important to inform the populations of the States of the
former Yugoslavia on the Tribunal's work. I found a
certain contradiction in the proposals of the
representative of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and in the proposals concerning the same subject by
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I found that the proposals of
the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina
responded precisely to the proposals and questions
made by the representative of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.

Yes, yes, the outreach programme is an extremely
complete programme that works through the media,
particularly through regular television programmes, to
inform the population of Bosnia and Herzegovina of
the Tribunal's work. While this has not been done for
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, I would respond
that it is simply because thus far cooperation with
Belgrade has been almost non-existent. But, of course,
I still find encouraging the questioning by the
representative of this country, which newly admitted to
the international community.

Regarding a concern expressed by the
representative of Singapore, I believe that we should
remember every time that we speak of establishing a
process of international justice not to say, "We will do
as we did for Yugoslavia" or "We will do as we did for
Rwanda". On the contrary, we should say, "We should
hesitate before getting involved in the establishment of
a new tribunal". We should think about that, and avoid
clumsy expressions, particularly now when the creation
of the international criminal court is being discussed.

Finally, I wish to say a couple of words on the
Truth and Reconciliation Commissions. They are part
of the overall picture. At the beginning, the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission was an idea that was not
very clear. The Tribunal itself, I would state, witnessed
the emergence of these Commissions as a type of
competition. Well, I would say to the Council that there
is competition regarding national reconciliation. I
myself went to Sarajevo last year to encourage the
establishment of a Truth and Reconciliation
Commission. I must point out that currently a bill is
being drafted; in fact, it has been elaborated now for
several months. We have had the opportunity to make
comments, and we simply said: "Yes to the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission", particularly in Bosnia,
which is the country where this Commission has made
the most progress, on the condition that the
competencies of the Tribunal not be violated and that
there not be an amnesty plan.

I turn back to the outreach programme, in
completing my proposal. I must say that what currently
impedes the development of mass media programmes
is the fact that we did not include it in the permanent
budget, and consequently we are dependent on
voluntary contributions from countries.

I wish to thank all who have supported us this
morning concerning the Tribunal over which I have the
honour of presiding.

