Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank you, Sir,
for presiding over this meeting of the Security Council.
We welcome Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Sandra Honore and thank her for her insightful
briefing. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2013/493), which gives
concrete recommendations for the way forward.

Peace and progress in Haiti are shared objectives
of the Haitian people, the Security Council and the
international community. There has been an impressive
turnaround. The brave and resilient people of Haiti
have made important strides towards stability, growth
and development. The devastating earthquake in 2010
and Hurricane Sandy reversed the gains achieved over
many years. But today we see a new Haiti emerging
from those tragedies. Challenges persist, but the resolve
of the Haitian people to build their country is stronger.

Haiti has reached important milestones. It is on the
road to political stability and economic progress. The
consolidation plan seems to be on track, by and large.
President Martelly's outreach for foreign investment in
support ofjob creation and socioeconomic development
has led to new economic partnerships and opportunities.
The implementation of projects for the construction
of roads, schools, clinics, agricultural production and
reforestation will give a much needed boost to the
economy.

There is progress in other areas, too. The
Government's focus on national solidarity and
institution-building, especially the establishment of the
transitional Electoral Council, are positive signals for
the Haitian people and the Council. The performance
of the National Police has improved. There has been
a decrease in civil unrest and major crimes. The
resettlement of people displaced by the 2010 earthquake
has been moving apace. President Martelly's assumption
of the Chair of the Caribbean Community gives Haiti a
new stature in the region.

As pointed out by the Secretary-General, some
remaining serious problems could imperil the progress
made so far. The differences between the executive
and the Parliament should be resolved expeditiously to
reach consensus to hold partial senatorial, municipal
and local elections. Delay in those elections will
have a negative impact on the next set of elections
in 2014, undermine the ongoing democratic process
and adversely affect economic goals. The Haitian
Government and the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) should continue to
work together to achieve stabilization benchmarks. The
Haitian Government needs to allocate more funds to
the Electoral Council and National Police to ensure that
they stand on their feet and that their performance is
optimal. At the same time, the Haitian Government's
requirements to overcome capacity impediments
and the management of the electoral process must be
recognized and met by international assistance.

Haiti needs a strong security sector. Steps
taken by Haitian authorities to reinvigorate police
recruitment and training are encouraging. Objectives
and benchmarks in development plans for the Haitian
National Police presented by MINUSTAH and the
Haitian National Police itself must be met to support a
professional, reliable and accountable police force.

With regard to rule-of-law institutions, two issues
are most important. Haiti's international partners
should do all they can to build the capacities of those
institutions. For its part, the Haitian Government
should guarantee the independence of the National
Police, the Superior Council of the Judiciary and the
Anti-Corruption Unit. The goals of eradication of
cholera, food security and preparedness for natural
disasters must continue to be pursued vigorously. We
urge greater coordination and cohesion among different
actors engaged in humanitarian work. Donor fatigue can
result from protracted crises like the one in Haiti. It is
therefore imperative for the international community to
continue to provide funds and expertise to the country
for humanitarian purposes.

All indicators suggest that Haiti is moving towards
political stability and economic development. The
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti is a
success story. The reconfiguration of MINUSTAH is
under way. That process must continue. We hope that,
through consultations, the Council will be able to find
a plan for contributing to Haiti's stability as it presses
ahead with its plans to scale down United Nations
assistance by 2016.

A word of caution, however - since 2004,
MINUSTAH has done a commendable job in the
stabilization of Haiti. The reconfiguration or drawdown
of MINUSTAH must therefore be carefully planned.
It should not lead to the reversal of gains made in the
country; there should be a gradual and orderly transfer
of responsibilities.

Pakistan has been a participant in United Nations
peacekeeping missions in Haiti since 1993. Presently,
one formed police unit from Pakistan comprising 140
personnel is serving in the country. Pakistan supports
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Haiti. We remain a sincere partner
of the people of the country in their quest for peace,
security, stability and progress.

