Mr. Kastrup (Germany): I strongly associate myself
with the statement made by my Finnish colleague on
behalf of the European Union.

Germany has always been a traditional and long-
standing friend of Indonesia and its people. We are all the
more deeply shocked by the developments in East Timor
after the ballot on 30 August 1999 and, all the more, we
feel compelled to speak up. The terrible details of the
situation on the ground have already been described by
many speakers. Therefore, I do not need to repeat them.

But one thing is very clear. Political and military
leaders in Indonesia have failed to provide the necessary
security after the people of East Timor exercised their
right of self-determination. The grave violations of human
rights must be brought to justice. It is evident that parts
of the Indonesian military forces are aiding and
supporting the militia Violence, either by direct
collaboration or by tolerating the atrocities. Action has to
be taken now. The militias must be disarmed. The use of
force and violence must be stopped immediately.

In the last few days Germany, like others, has
pressed the Indonesian authorities to act as quickly as
possible to stop the unacceptable chaos in East Timor
and, should this not be possible, to accept international
assistance. Up to now, Indonesia has not accepted this
international offer. Federal Chancellor Schroder has had
direct contact with President Habibie, as has Foreign
Minister Fischer with his Indonesian colleague Mr.

 

Alatas. The German Government has also been in constant
close contact with other Governments to increase the
common pressure on the Indonesian Government.

We are not willing to tolerate any longer the atrocities
in East Timor. The killings and the suffering of the East
Timorese people must be stopped immediately. We
therefore wholeheartedly support the Secretary-General in
his assertion that the time has come for Indonesia to seek
help from the international community in fulfilling its
responsibility. We are encouraged by signs of flexibility on
the part of the Indonesian authorities, but they have to
deliver.

The international community must also start to
concentrate its efforts on the need for urgent humanitarian
assistance to be provided to the East Timorese people.
Germany strongly calls upon the Government of Indonesia
to assist the deployment of international humanitarian staff
to Indonesia and to provide all the necessary security for
their work. We are ready to provide, as a first step, DMl
million for humanitarian assistance.

We expect the Indonesian Government to take
immediate and efficient measures in line with the
commitments agreed upon on 5 May 1999. A breach of
these commitments cannot be without consequences. In its
capacity as presidency of the G-8, Germany will attach
particular importance to the developments in East Timor at
the forthcoming G-8 Foreign Ministers' meeting to be held
during the forthcoming session of the General Assembly
here in New York.

Let me conclude by expressing our greatest gratitude
to the staff of the United Nations Mission in East Timor
(UNAMET). We highly appreciate their hard work and
their commitment, in particular their readiness to risk their
personal safety. These men and women risk their lives to
keep the United Nations presence in East Timor and to help
the East Timorese who fled to the UNAMET compound in
Dili.

