Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Sir, for having convened this debate and for
presiding over it personally. I also thank Mr. Feltman
and Mr. Antonio for their statements today.

Resolution 2195 (2014), adopted today, addresses a
key aspect of the global fight against terrorism. The
financing of terrorism, including that benefiting from
transnational organized crime, allows terrorists to
perpetrate more deadly campaigns of terror. Criminals
may trade in illicit goods, but when terrorists benefit
from such activities, they trade in a more despicable
currency of human lives. Tragically, we see evidence
of this every day, including this week, when so many
young Pakistani students were gunned down by
terrorists in Peshawar.

In regions where United Nations peacekeepers are
on the frontline, most notably in Africa, transnational
organized crime also increases the risk and complexity
of their job and undermines efforts towards sustainable
peace.
The United Kingdom welcomes today's initiative
for three main reasons. First, it is a timely reminder
of the existing obligation on United Nations Member
States to prohibit all forms of terrorist finance. We
have a responsibility to sever the lifelines that support
terrorism. The United Nations has a robust set of
binding counter-terrorism resolutions. On top of long-
standing obligations to suppress terrorist finance, we
must work to fully implement recent counter-terrorism
resolutions on kidnap-for-ransom, the foreign terrorist
fighter threat and the need to defund the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). I welcome in particular
the emphasis that you placed in your remarks, Sir,
on the need to tackle the way in which terrorism
continues to be financed through kidnapping. We must
also fully implement the sanctions regimes adopted
under resolution 1267 (1999). It is worth restating that
sanctions regimes established by the Council under
Chapter VII of the Charter place obligations on all
Member States.

Secondly, the evolving nature of the linkages
between terrorism and transnational crime are of grave
concern. It is increasingly evident that groups in many
regions of the world, including ISIL, Al-Shabaab and
Boko Haram, among others, exploit transnational
criminal trafficking groups. In some instances, there is
evidence of a growing list of illicit commodities being
treated. The trafficking of arms, persons, drugs, oil,
artefacts or wildlife offer terrorist groups a major source
of finance. All such sources need to be addressed. That
is why in 2014 we have rightly expanded sanctions
designation criteria in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Central African Republic to cover wildlife
and wildlife products, and off the coast of Somalia, we
have authorized the interdiction of charcoal trafficking
in order to cut off another illicit finance source. Yet it
is ISIL that offers the most challenging example of this
trend. The profit from oil sales within ISIL-controlled
territory is widely estimated to run to tens of millions
of United States dollars every month. This illegal trade
puts money directly into the hands of terrorists.

Thirdly, today's resolution focuses on the need to
continue to provide capacity-building assistance for all
afflicted countries and regions. Only a comprehensive
and multidisciplinary response to terrorism by Member
States will bring lasting solutions, and that includes
adequate criminal justice, respect for human rights
and international law when prosecuting counter-
terrorism, and effective border management. The
report we commissioned today can help. It provides
an opportunity to take stock of the relevant counter-
terrorism tools of the United Nations with a view to
developing a more coordinated, comprehensive and
impactful international response to the problem. There
are excellent United Nations resources to draw on. The
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate is a centre
of analytical expertise, and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force is a centre of capacity-
building expertise. The United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime also has a pivotal role to play, and the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre offers a new
source of support to affected Member States. A unified
response is required. We must use all the tools at our
disposal.

I have outlined the United Nations binding
international framework for counter-terrorism, the
urgency of the threat and the need for counter-terrorism
capacity-building. In 2014, the Council has taken steps
to strengthen our response in each of these areas, but
more still needs to be done. Today's resolution is a
further and welcome step in ensuring that our response
tackles every element of the terrorist scourge.

