Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I would like to thank you for having
organized this open meeting, in which Council
members can inform all Members of the United
Nations about the results of our mission to the Great
Lakes region. The delegation of Colombia is especially
pleased with the presence of friends and colleagues
from the African countries that were visited by the
mission.

The head of our mission, Ambassador Levitte,
has delivered a lucid and eloquent briefing on this
topic, and thus there is no need for us to make lengthy
comments. However, it is important to acknowledge, as
earlier speakers have said, that the success of this
mission is largely due to his personal qualities and his
effective leadership.

Allow me to make a few brief comments, with
which I wish to underscore the commitment of this
Council, and of my delegation in particular, to continue
working for peace in Africa. It is worthwhile to
comment on the fact that the actions taken by the
Council enhance the attention that the Economic and
Social Council will give to Africa this year in its
ministerial segment in Geneva in July, as well as the
work of the General Assembly's Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Causes of Conflict and the Promotion of
Durable Peace and Sustainable Development in Africa,
which is currently taking place.

First of all, I believe that our trip through the
different capitals of the Great Lakes region and
southern Africa, and the contacts that we had with
representatives of the peoples and authorities of these
countries, have raised expectations as regards future
action to be taken by the United Nations. What should
be clear to all - and this is what we said to the
signatories of the Lusaka and Arusha peace
processes- is that our contribution to the common
undertaking for peace in Africa is given on the basis of
the contributions made by the different parties to the
conflicts. This means that there will not be any military
solutions. It also means that there will be
demobilization of the combatants and that natural
resources will be placed at the service of development
of the countries. We have taken note of the statements
made by the different delegates of the African States
who participated in this morning's meeting.

During our stay in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, we were pleased to note the positive role
that was played by the United Nations Mission in that
country, its members, its leaders and its growing
contribution to the peace process. We would like to
underscore and pay particular tribute to the efforts of
countries that have provided troop contingents in the
current phase of operations. All of the military
observers and protection units were able to be deployed
in their respective sites. The reopening of navigation
on the Congo River is a sign of improvement for the
Congolese people.

The Security Council hopes that the Government
of that country, and all of the parties to the conflict,
will fully comply with their commitments to cooperate
with the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In a few days, this
Council will begin to review the recommendations of
the Secretary-General for the new phase of operations
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and then we
will be able to reap the benefits of having taken part in
this mission.

With respect to the situation in Burundi, impetus
should be given to the dialogue with the rebel groups
who remain outside of the Arusha Agreement and for
which perhaps it is necessary to establish, in
consultation with the facilitator, an ongoing negotiating
mechanism based in Bujumbura. The United Nations
and the bilateral donors should be ready to offer
additional resources and good offices that are required
by this strategy.

We should not allow the progress that has been
made to disappear. The parties must respect human
rights and the standards of international humanitarian
law. We will closely follow the situation in this
country. Thus we were pleased to hear the
representative of Burundi accept the proposal for a
bilateral commission with Tanzania on the refugee
camps.

Finally, my delegation accords special
significance to the effort being carried out within the
United Nations system to set the issue of the Great
Lakes within a regional perspective. Such a perspective
would make it possible to take advantage of the
strengths of each of the agencies of the Organization,
as well as the participation of the Bretton Woods
institutions, during the peace-building phase, which we
believe that that region of Africa must arrive at.

