Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation abstained in the
voting on the draft resolution on Libya on the basis of
a number of considerations of principle. Our position
regarding the clear unacceptability of the use of force
against the civilian population of Libya remains
unchanged. Any attacks against civilians and other
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights must immediately and unconditionally cease.

We base ourselves on the expectation that the
relevant requirements contained in the unanimously
adopted resolution 1970 (2011) must be rapidly and
fully fulfilled by the Libyan authorities. This has not
happened yet. Given this situation, the League of Arab
States turned to the Security Council with a request
that it take immediate measures to ensure the
protection of the civilian population in Libya,
including the establishment of a no-fly zone in Libyan
airspace. We gave that request our full attention. We
participated actively in the discussions on the draft
resolution. Unfortunately, work on that document was
not in keeping with standard practice in the Security
Council. In essence, a whole range of questions raised
by Russia and other members of the Council remained
unanswered. Those questions were concrete and
legitimate and touched on how the no-fly zone would
be enforced, what the rules of engagement would be
and what limits on the use of force there would be.

Furthermore, the draft was morphing before our
very eyes, transcending the initial concept as stated by
the League of Arab States. Provisions were introduced
into the text that could potentially open the door to
large-scale military intervention.

During negotiations on the draft, statements were
heard claiming an absence of any such intentions. We
take note of these. I underscore yet again that we are
consistent and firm advocates of the protection of the
civilian population. Guided by this basic principle as
well as by the common humanitarian values that we
share with both the sponsors and other Council
members, Russia did not prevent the adoption of this
resolution. However, we remain convinced that the
quickest way to ensure robust security for the civilian

population and the long-term stabilization of the
situation in Libya is an immediate ceasefire. This,
specifically, was the aim of our draft resolution
submitted to the Security Council on 16 March, which
backed relevant efforts by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, the Human Rights Council and the
African Union and underscored the need for a peaceful
settlement of the situation in Libya.

The Russian delegation repeatedly proposed the
adoption of such a resolution without any delay, with a
view to saving numerous human lives. We enjoyed the
support of a number of Council members, and we are
grateful to them. However, the passion of some
Council members for methods involving force
prevailed. This is most unfortunate and regrettable.

Responsibility for the inevitable humanitarian
consequences of the excessive use of outside force in
Libya will fall fair and square on the shoulders of those
who might undertake such action. If this comes to pass,
then not only the civilian population of Libya but also
the cause of upholding peace and security throughout
the entire region of North Africa and the Middle East
will suffer. Such destabilizing developments must be
avoided.

