Mr. Tesch (Australia): Thank you very much,
Madam President, for convening this meeting. Let me
also join others in thanking Mr. Annabi for the
comprehensive briefing he has given the Council on
the Secretary-General's end of mandate report on the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) (S/2005/310).

As underlined in that report, Timor-Leste has
come a long way from a very low base since achieving
independence three years ago. Much has been done to
build the necessary institutions and skills to allow
Timor-Leste to move towards self-sufficiency. The
successful conclusion of UNMISET's peacekeeping
mandate in a few days' time, on 20 May, is testament
to the progress that has been made and signals a new
phase in Timor-Leste's development as a democratic
and peaceful nation.

Australia congratulates Timor-Leste on its
remarkable progress. There is no doubt that the United
Nations, in partnership with the donor community, has
played a key role in restoring security and stability in
Timor-Leste. The engagement of the United Nations in
Timor-Leste will be a case study of how the
Organization can work and how it can make a
difference. The United Nations should be proud of its
efforts in Timor-Leste and we, like others, readily and
gratefully acknowledge all of those who have
contributed to that success. However, a great deal of
the credit must also go to the people of Timor-Leste
and to their leaders for their determination and hard
work to consolidate the gains that they have made over
the past five years. The help and good will of the
Indonesian people and their Government has also
contributed greatly to that end. We also wish to
commend the efforts of the Governments of Timor-
Leste and Indonesia in developing productive relations
and a cooperative approach to border management
issues.

Australia has been at the forefront of
international efforts to support Timor-Leste's transition
to an independent and secure State. We coordinated
and led the original multi-country International Force
in East Timor to restore law and order in 1999. We
have supported and contributed to all subsequent
missions, from the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor to UNMISET, and we
remain one of the largest bilateral donors to Timor-
Leste, having provided $400 million in assistance since
1999. But it is clear that much more needs to be done
to assist Timor-Leste to achieve self-sufficiency.
Australia therefore welcomes Security Council
resolution 1599 (2005) authorizing a special political
mission, the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste
(UNOTIL), as a successor mission to UNMISET.
UNOTIL will play an important role in continuing the
transfer of necessary skills to Timor-Leste's
institutions, but at the same time, the international
community must remain engaged in Timor-Leste. In
particular, further support must be provided to develop
Timor-Leste's police and security forces and the legal
and justice systems. Only through improvements in
those critical areas can Timor-Leste achieve its long-
term development goals.

As we mark the end of UNMISET's mandate, it is
appropriate to reflect on the significant contribution the
United Nations has made in Timor-Leste and on the
progress that Timor-Leste has achieved. But we should
not overlook the fact that the process of nation-
building is not complete. The United Nations and the
international community must remain committed to
Timor-Leste over the longer term. Australia, for its
part, will continue its long tradition of support for
Timor-Leste to ensure its transition to secure and self-
reliant statehood. As a neighbour and a friend, we can
be relied upon to continue with that effort.

