Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank the Russian
delegation for its initiative in calling for a public
meeting of the Security Council to consider all aspects
of the Iraq question. We also appreciate your timely
scheduling of this meeting.

The Iraq question is one of the important
international questions that has been under
consideration in the Council in recent years. Before the
Council makes its decision on the Iraq question,
holding a public meeting of the Council to hear the
views of the general membership of the United Nations
will help to ensure that the Council's decision will fully
reflect the legitimate concerns of the Member States.
This is also a positive step in the reform of the
Council's working methods.

The Chinese Government has always advocated a
comprehensive resolution of the Iraq question on the
basis of relevant Council resolutions. The current
stalemate in the Iraq situation is not in the interest of
peace and security in the Gulf region. It does a
disservice to the authority of the Security Council and
will not be conducive to achieving the overall easing of
the humanitarian situation in Iraq. In order to break this
stalemate as soon as possible, we favour a
comprehensive approach that takes into account all
aspects of the Iraq question and the search for a way
out of the impasse on the basis of resolution 1284
(1999).

This afternoon we received a draft resolution
submitted by the Russian delegation, which
undoubtedly is a useful proposal aimed at breaking out
of the present deadlock in the Iraq situation and
bringing about an early, comprehensive resolution of
the Iraq question. We will carefully study the Russian
proposal.

On 1 June, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 1352 (2001) on the Iraq question. In
accordance with this resolution, the Security Council
will consider new arrangements on the sale and supply
of goods and commodities to Iraq. It is to take a
decision by 3 July.

Some Council members have already put forward
draft resolutions on the new arrangements. We believe
that the Security Council should seriously consider
these drafts in the context of a comprehensive
resolution of the Iraq issue. The Chinese delegation has
actively participated in the consultations on draft
resolutions regarding the new arrangements and the
Goods Review List in a constructive and pragmatic
manner. We have tabled the Chinese Government's
position paper and amendments.

We hope that the discussions in the Council will
be able to create conditions for breaking the stalemate
on the issue of Iraq, so that this issue 4 which has
been before the Council for 11 years - will not be a
perennial item on its agenda. Judging from the weeks
of discussion - whether they have been inside or
outside the Council - there are still quite a number of
serious differences regarding the new arrangements. I
wish to make a few comments on the comprehensive
settlement of the issue of Iraq in the context of these
discussions.

First, resolution 1352 (2001) points out that the
new arrangements are aimed at improving the
humanitarian situation in Iraq and at greatly increasing
the flow of civilian goods into Iraq. The 11-year-old
sanctions have brought dire suffering to the Iraqi
people. In particular they have penalized large numbers
of innocent women and children. The international
community is vigorously called upon to effectively
improve the humanitarian situation in Iraq. If the
Security Council turns a blind eye to or does not do
enough to improve the humanitarian situation in Iraq, it
will not be justly addressing the great expectations of
the general membership of the United Nations.

The Security Council's relevant resolutions
implementing sanctions against Iraq are aimed at
resolving the issues regarding Iraq's disarmament, so
that Iraq's weapons of mass destruction will be
destroyed and Iraq will no longer have the ability to
produce such weapons in the future. Iraq's normal,
civilian interactions with other countries - for
example, trade and investment - should not have been
subjected to sanctions. The oil-for-food programme,
which started in 1996, has played a positive role in
easing the humanitarian situation in Iraq. However,
years of experience have shown that large numbers of
contracts for the export of civilian goods to Iraq have
been put on hold. It has also been impossible for the
Iraqi people to conduct normal economic activities.
Therefore the Chinese Government is of the View that
the new arrangements must take a new approach to
these matters.

During the discussions the Chinese side has
emphasized that the Council should draw up the Goods
Review List on the basis of a reduced list based on
resolution 1051 (1996), so that - with the exception of
items on the final approved list - Iraq will be able to
freely import any civilian goods that it needs. The
financial controls and restrictions against Iraq should
be relaxed, and Iraq should be allowed to use the funds
in the escrow accounts to pay its contribution to the
United Nations, as well as to contribute to other
international organizations. Foreign companies should
be allowed to invest in Iraq, and countries should be
allowed to freely sign service contracts with Iraq.
Civil-aviation flights to and from Iraq should be
allowed to resume.

We believe that a fundamental amelioration of the
humanitarian situation in Iraq is an important and
indispensable step towards breaking the present
deadlock and towards a comprehensive resolution of
the Iraq issue.

Secondly, resolution 1352 (2001) also points out
that the new arrangements will improve the control of
the sale and supply of proscribed or unauthorized
items. This will mean that the necessary sanctions
against Iraq will continue. The Chinese Government
has always believed that Iraq should strictly implement
the relevant Council resolutions and resolve the
outstanding disarmament issues.

The new arrangements must not serve to
perpetuate the sanctions, but should be aimed at
finding a way out of the present deadlock on the Iraq
issue, so that this issue will be resolved in a
comprehensive fashion as soon as possible. We hope
that Iraq will resume its cooperation with the United
Nations, consent soon to the return of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission to Iraq and resolve the remaining
disarmament issues.
The Chinese Government has always stressed that
in order to make progress on the disarmament issues
the ambiguities in resolution 1284 (1999) have to be
clarified. In particular, in order to motivate Iraq to
resume its cooperation with the United Nations, there
is a need to clearly define the criteria for terminating
the sanctions against Iraq. This is another important
and indispensable step towards breaking the deadlock
and achieving a comprehensive solution to the Iraq
issue.

At the same time we also believe that Iraq's
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence
should be respected. The countries concerned should
demonstrate the required good will and sincerity by
putting an early end to bombings of Iraq and by doing
away with the no-fly zone, thus creating conditions for
an early resolution of the Iraq issue.

Thirdly, the tabling of the draft resolution on new
arrangements has caused serious concern among Iraq's
neighbours. China is deeply aware of the losses
suffered by Iraq's neighbours as a result of the
sanctions against Iraq. No new arrangement should
have further negative impact on the political, economic
and social life of Iraq's neighbours. It is our belief that
the Council's approach in this area should be based on
an objective assessment of the facts, pay close attention
to the views of Iraq's neighbours and seek their
understanding and cooperation. We cannot continence
any harm to the legitimate interests and rights of Iraq's
neighbours as a result of the new arrangements.

In addition, the issue of missing Kuwaitis and the
loss of property should be properly resolved at an early
date. This issue has long been a source of great
suffering for the Kuwaiti people and has remained a
priority concern of the countries of the Gulf. In
accordance with the relevant provisions of international
law, Iraq is obliged to cooperate by identifying and
returning to Kuwait the missing Kuwaitis and Kuwaiti
property. We believe that the timely and proper
resolution of this humanitarian issue will contribute to
an early normalization of inter-State relations in the
Gulf, as well as to an early comprehensive resolution
of the Iraq issue.

