I would like to thank Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for her written report and her very enlightening briefing to the Security Council. Today I would like to touch upon three points: the very encouraging developments in recent months in the fight against impunity in the Sudan; the importance for the Sudanese authorities now cooperating concretely with the International Criminal Court (ICC); and the role that Belgium has played in support of the Court during its mandate on the Security Council. First of all, my country welcomes the concrete measures taken by the Sudan in favour of justice and accountability since the most recent Council meeting in June (see S/2020/538) with Prosecutor Bensouda. Having repealed the legislative provisions that prevented any cooperation with the ICC, the Sudanese authorities have made concrete commitments on transitional justice in the framework of the Juba Peace Agreement. In addition to the establishment of a truth and reconciliation commission and a special court for Darfur, the parties committed to provide full cooperation to the ICC in relation to suspects for whom arrest warrants have been issued. Since then, a formal dialogue has been initiated with the Office of the Prosecutor. The official delegation visit to Khartoum in October, led by the Prosecutor, provided an opportunity for talks at the highest level, where the Government of the Sudan expressed its firm commitment to work with the Office. Secondly, I would like to call on the Sudanese authorities to give concrete expression to their strong commitments by lending practical cooperation to the ICC, in accordance with their international obligations as defined in resolution 1593 (2005). In furtherance of the principle of complementarity enshrined in the Rome Statute, that means doing everything possible to ensure the effective implementation of the judicial process, whether in The Hague or in the Sudan, with the support of the ICC, if necessary. Belgium understands the particular situation in which the Sudan finds itself in this transitional period. Nevertheless, the ongoing proceedings concerning Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman require the Office to have access to Sudanese territory as soon as possible in order to contact key witnesses and collect additional evidence. My country therefore encourages the Sudan to expeditiously conclude a memorandum of understanding with the Office of the Prosecutor and to respond to its requests for assistance. We also invite United Nations missions and agencies to facilitate the Office's activities in the field to the best of their ability. In the context of continuing violence against civilians, including women and children, it is more crucial than ever that the Sudan and the international community as a whole - including the Security Council, which has referred the matter to the ICC - mobilize to ensure justice for the victims of the most serious crimes in Darfur and the rest of the Sudan. I would like to conclude by stressing the paramount importance of the support of the Security Council and its member States for the Court. As the focal point for the ICC in the Security Council, Belgium, together with the other States parties that are members of the Council, has ensured that the Court's interests are defended and promoted, including by securing the Organization's essential cooperation in the context of peacekeeping operations. We have also taken every opportunity to reiterate our unwavering support for the ICC as an independent and impartial judicial institution. My country therefore continues to deplore the application of sanctions against the Court and, more particularly, against its Prosecutor and the members of his Office. Those measures hinder the proper functioning of the ICC and are unacceptable. Belgium therefore once again calls on the United States to reconsider those measures. Rest assured that we will continue to stand ready to act and to assist the Court, even beyond the Security Council.
