Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would first like to express our gratitude to
Ms. Karin Landgren and Mr. James Cockayne for their
detailed briefings. We also want to thank the delegation
of Kuwait for organizing today's meeting. The Security
Council has been discussing its working methods in
an open format with the participation of a wide range
of States Members of the United Nations for a number
of years now. We consider this a useful practice, since
periodic reviews of our existing toolkit enable us to
determine what is needed to improve it further.

It is important that today's meeting is being presided
over by the delegation that heads the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. We are confident that this discussion, as
well as the very fact of the external assessment of the
current state of affairs, will make a special contribution
to the activities of the Working Group and help to enrich
it with new ideas. That is of course in the understanding
that the Council's working methods themselves, and
any steps taken to modify them, belong to the members
of the Council. The issue of the Security Council's
working methods is a very sensitive one. We believe
that any changes in this area should focus on increasing
the Council's effectiveness and efficiency in executing
its primary task of maintaining international peace and
security. Using populist rhetoric about this, including
in the context of the endless calls for increasing the
transparency of the Security Council's work, not
only does not help to achieve results, it often actually
does damage.

We welcome the efforts of the delegation of
Kuwait to improve the working methods of the
Security Council and have taken note of its intention to
introduce changes into the revised note by the President
(S/2017/507), which is important as a compendium
of Council working practices and is actively used by
non-permanent members as a serious source. For our
part, we are ready to give the Kuwaiti delegation every
assistance in this painstaking work, which must be
done thoughtfully, thoroughly and without undue haste.
We operate on the assumption that the starting point
of our efforts should be the importance of ensuring
Council members' unity on as many issues as possible.
We note non-permanent members' active interest in
procedural aspects of the Council's work, which should
undoubtedly help our collective efforts to improve our
best practices.

We want to continue to draw attention to the
Council's overburdened documentary workload. The
Security Council produces several hundred documents
every year, some of which, it has to be admitted, have
dubious added value, and the excessive predilection
for micromanaging resolutions is not helpful either.
We believe that the Security Council's final products
should be short, clear, easy to understand and above
all action-oriented, an area in which I support our
British colleagues.

We take a very cautious approach to the
consideration of thematic subjects in the Council,
especially those that according to the Charter of the
United Nations come under the remit of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council or other
bodies of the Organization, violating the established
division of labour and distracting the Council from its
work on its priority tasks on which it can and should
make concrete decisions.

We support the notion of the importance of
expanding the Security Council's coordination with a
wide range of Member States and those that can provide
it with important information for decision-making. The
Council has appropriate mechanisms for that in its
arsenal, including interactive dialogues and informal
Arria Formula meetings. However, they are not official
meetings of the Council, and we believe that such
formats should be used only to raise Council members'
awareness of issues on its agenda. It is unacceptable
to use those platforms for propaganda performances
or for individual delegations' controversial unilateral
approaches. I should point out that the costs of using
the premises of United Nations Headquarters, its
conference services and, in some cases, its translators
for such events are covered by the Organization's
regular budget.

The Kuwait presidency's proposals for further
modernizing and democratizing the Council's work
through an equal distribution of responsibilities for
informally supervising certain dossiers deserve special
attention. Individual Council members should not
consider certain countries and even regions as their
fiefdoms or act as mentors on certain issues. We must
expand the circle of penholders, particularly in favour
of non-permanent members.

We also strongly oppose the practice of working
to artificial deadlines. It is no secret that the adoption
dates for the majority of Security Council resolutions
are usually known by the stage of agreement on the
monthly programme of work. We nevertheless receive
many draft texts unreasonably late, which does not
allow us to gather multiple expert assessments, let
alone hold comprehensive consultations. We sometimes
get the impression that penholders are doing that
deliberately, on the assumption that in their haste, their
colleagues will simply not notice problematic points.
The wording of Security Council draft resolutions
sometimes changes just minutes before a vote, leaving
us with half-baked documents that do not take the
concerns of Council members into account. All of
these issues are unacceptable, in our View, and we
will fight such tactical tricks. We do not exclude the
possibility that ultimately we may also be obliged to
assess the effectiveness of the penholders' work based
on these parameters.

