Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Let me extend
a very warm welcome to Vice-President Naranjo. I
would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to
the Vice-President and, through him, to President
Santos Calderen for their tireless commitments to
peace in Columbia. I also thank Jean Arnault, for his
briefing and presentation of the comprehensive report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1117) detailing the
progress that has been made under the mandates of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
I commend him and his team for their continued
efforts both in supporting the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peacebetween the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia (FARC) and the Government of Colombia
and, more recently, in participating in the Monitoring
and Verification Mechanism for the ceasefire by the
Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional (ELN).

The courage and diligence of both parties have
allowed many positive steps to take place since the Peace
Agreement between the Government of Colombia and
the FARC was signed. More than 11,000 FARC members
have registered with the United Nations, and are now
beginning their reintegration into civilian life. The new
political party - the F uerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Comun i will be able to participate in Colombia's
elections this year, and the FARC has handed over its
last caches of weapons to the United Nations. Those
are remarkable achievements, but we are now getting
to the hardest part. Much work remains to be done. As
President Santos Calderon said in Cartagena last week,
less than 10 per cent of the time set out for the peace
agreement to be delivered has passed.

We welcome the continued commitment of both
parties to achieve a sustainable peace. We encourage
them to continue to work together to overcome the
challenges, which are only to be expected following
more than 50 years of conflict. As we just heard, those
challenges include increasing levels ofviolence in some
areas affected by the conflict and the killing of human
rights defenders and former FARC members. I share
the concerns that the Secretary-General mentioned in
his report, and I therefore welcome the important steps
taken by the Colombian Government to tackle them.
They include the establishment of a more permanent
and visible presence by the police and security forces,
a strengthened early warning system and a renewed
focus on investigations by the Office of the Prosecutor.
Security must be established in those areas to allow
communities to realize the full benefits of the Peace
Agreement. I also welcome come the Government's
commitment to addressing the issue of access to
land for former FARC combatants. All those steps
taken together are a clear signal of the Government's
commitment to implementation.

Looking ahead, I encourage the Government to
Columbia to maintain its focus on adopting the remaining
peace legislation through Congress. An early ruling by
the Constitutional Court on amendments made to some
key laws will be important to maintaining momentum.
That includes the ruling on amendments to the special
jurisdiction for peace, which are vital to making
progress in the transitional justice system. I had hoped
that today we would be discussing the announcement
of a renewed ceasefire between the Government and
the ELN. Instead, I am concerned and disappointed by
the recent news that the ELN has broken its ceasefire
and squandered the chance of bringing about sustained
peace. I urge both sides to work together to find a way
of avoiding further civilian suffering.

President Santos Calderon, together with Columbia's
leaders, took a bold step in coming to the Security
Council for help in 2016. Our support for a sustained
peace in Colombia will not waver, and, as Columbia
holds elections later this year and goes through political
change as all democracies do, it is important to remember
that the Peace Agreement belongs to all Colombians,
not to any specific Government. The United Kingdom
will continue to encourage focus on and commitment
to the peace process to bring about real lasting change.
That process is unique and will continue to inspire us
for years to come, as it has inspired me during all of my
time in the Security Council.

This is my final scheduled public statement in
the Security Council. I am very pleased to be able
to finish my time in New York with a meeting on
Colombia - one of our greatest success stories. I wish
that all the conflicts that we work on could achieve
the peace that has been achieved in Colombia. It is
essential that we learn the lessons of that success and
apply them to the countless other issues on our agenda,
which, frankly, could do with a little bit of that success.

As I leave this role, I want to thank all members
of the Security Council with which I have shared this
horseshoe table in this famous Chamber and all of their
predecessors. I thank them for their cooperation, their
insights and all their support over the past nearly three
years. I should also like to thank everyone who works
for the United Nations, be it here in New York or around
the world. I have been continually impressed by their
expertise and fortitude. They really are the unsung
heroes of the Organization.

Finally, I should like to thank my own team at the
United Kingdom Mission to the United Nations, which
has supported me with skill, expertise and dedication. I
wish all of them the very best for the future.

