Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): The South
Sudanese political process is currently in a critical phase.
The Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), the African Union (AU), and countries of
the region are stepping up their mediation efforts,
and various parties within South Sudan are actively
engaged in dialogue and consultation. It behooves
the international community to have due regard for,
and carefully listen to, the views of the country in
question, regional organizations and other countries
in the region, jointly support the mediation efforts of
regional organizations and help the parties in South
Sudan return to trying to reach a political settlement
with a view to stabilizing the situation and putting the
country on an expeditious path towards development.

China has maintained a consistent position on the
issue of sanctions based on the belief that sanctions are
a means to an end, not an end in and of themselves.
The Security Council should exercise great caution in
implementing sanctions, and its action ought to help
advance the political settlement process in South Sudan
and lend support to the good offices and mediation
efforts of regional organizations, such as IGAD and
the AU.

However, the annex to resolution 2418 (2018), just
adopted, includes some high-ranking officials of the
Government of South Sudan on the proposed sanctions
list and threatens an arms embargo. Given the current
circumstances, those elements are not conducive to
furthering the political peace process in South Sudan
and could further complicate the situation. There was
also no consensus within the Security Council or
among the countries of the region.

In the light of these considerations, China
abstained in the voting on resolution. China hope that
the members of the Security Council will continue to
engage in consultations on relevant issues, with a View
to finding a proper solution and joining forces with
the South Sudanese parties, regional organizations
and countries of the region in order to move to peace
process in South Sudan forward. We stand ready to
work with the international community and continue
to play a constructive role in bringing lasting peace and
stability to South Sudan.
