Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like, on behalf of the delegation of the
Republic of Yemen, to express our pleasure at seeing
you, Sir, preside over the Council. We are confident
that your country's membership on the Council will
contribute to the success of its work and add to the
record of your friendly country, which has always held
clear positions in support of peace and justice. I also
wish to congratulate the new members, which represent
a positive addition to the Council's work.

I also offer our thanks and appreciation for your
prompt convening of this emergency meeting of the
Council to consider the deteriorating situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem,
which requires urgent action from the Council. We also
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his statement to the Council, which contained
important elements and ideas that may be built upon in
taking urgent steps to calm the situation and to ensure
the resumption of negotiations.

In his statement, the Secretary-General expressed
his firm conviction that the key interrelated problems
remain occupation, security, deprivation and economic
suffering. He also stated that the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict could never be solved militarily or on the basis
of security alone, and that the question of security
could not be dealt with in isolation from the other key
political issues, especially those of land, other
economic and social matters and the dire living
conditions of the Palestinian people. The Secretary-
General's message to the Security Council was clear:
failure to address all these issues would lead to more
devastation and violence. It is for that reason that the
Security Council should work together intensively with
the other parties to achieve a comprehensive and just
peace in the Middle East.

The Israeli Government's recent statement that it
would establish buffer zones in the occupied territories
is a continuation of the war against the Palestinian
people, their leadership and the peace process itself.
Once again, we agree with what the Secretary-General
said, that security measures and military solutions will
never bring security for Israel.

The continuation of the bloody military campaign
by the Israeli Government under the leadership of Ariel
Sharon against the Palestinian people and the
Palestinian Authority has led to more Palestinian
civilians being made victims or becoming injured and
to massive destruction of Palestinian institutions and
infrastructure and official buildings of the Authority,
including the headquarters of the Chairman of the
Authority. Israeli occupation forces are continuing their
inhumane blockade and their unjust restrictions on
movement between the villages and towns of Palestine,
thereby preventing the Palestinian people from moving
about freely on a daily basis.

The Government of Israel, the occupying Power,
should shoulder its full responsibility for its violations
of human rights and the crimes and acts of terrorism it
commits against the Palestinian people in flagrant
violation of international human rights laws and
resolutions of international legitimacy. In its most
recent campaign, Israel used F-l6 fighter jets, Apache
helicopters, seacraft and tanks against residential areas
and the facilities of the Palestinian Authority. The
Israeli authorities even opened fire on medical crews
trying to save injured persons. In its recent acts, it has
also aimed at subjugating the Palestinian people and at
undermining the Palestinian National Authority,
depriving it of its inalienable national rights guaranteed
by international law and norms and relevant United
Nations resolutions.

We have called on the Security Council many
times to shoulder its responsibilities with regard to
maintaining international peace and security, to quickly
intervene to protect Palestinian civilians against Israeli
attacks and acts of aggression, and to stop the
bloodshed. Regrettably, the Council has not played its
role or shouldered its responsibilities. Once again, we
have come to the Security Council in the wake of great
deterioration in the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem. It has
become extremely dangerous in recent days. It is now
imperative that the Council intervene immediately and
positively to address this dangerous situation and to
stop the bloodshed.

The latest events have proven that the
continuation of Israel's occupation is the cause of the
explosion in the situation in the region, for there is no
military solution to the situation in the occupied
territories. The Israeli Government's continuing
military campaign will never bring about security for
its people. The solution is to be found through
negotiations on the bases agreed upon and through the
implementation of the agreements concluded between
the two parties. It is for that reason that the Security
Council should shoulder its responsibilities under the
Charter by adopting a resolution to send international
forces or observers or to take any other steps it deems
necessary to immediately provide protection to the
Palestinian people.

What we are hoping for is a comprehensive and
just peace that will provide security in the region, a
peace that makes it possible for the Palestinians to
realize all their rights. Those rights include the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State with
Jerusalem as its capital. We also call on the sponsors of
the peace process - the United States of America, the
Russian Federation and the European Union - to do
everything possible to put an end to the serious
deterioration in the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, to end the violence, lift the
blockade imposed on the territories, end Israeli
aggression, provide international protection to the
Palestinian people, and end Israel's occupation of all
Arab and Palestinian territories occupied since 1967.

In conclusion, we expect a clear message from
the Council. We also expect a new vision to be
translated into a resolution acceptable to all members
of the Council, especially to the permanent members.
Failure to adopt such a resolution at this historic
juncture in the region will lead to disappointment and
serve to push the situation into an unimaginable state
of deterioration.

