Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
Madam President, I should like to express our deep
appreciation to you for convening this public meeting
to consider the question of Angola. I should also like to
thank Professor Gambari for his excellent report on the
situation in Angola, and to welcome Mr. Albino
Malungo.

Although a certain degree of stability has been
noted in several regions of the country where the
authority of the State has been restored, the political,
security, economic and humanitarian situation
prevailing in Angola continues to be a major source of
concern.

As the Secretary-General indicates in his report,
the absence of dialogue has continued to create an
unstable political and military situation in Angola.
While continuing to refuse to disarm its troops and to
respect its commitments to the Lusaka Protocol,
Mr. Savimbi's UNITA is continuing with its
destabilizing activities, thereby causing an increase in
the total number of refugees and displaced persons and
heightening tensions with Namibia and Zambia.

In this connection, we welcome the fact that an
agreement has been reached between Angola and
Zambia to establish a Joint Verification Team to
investigate charges of border violations, which should
help to reduce tensions between the two countries.
The Angolan people have suffered greatly from
this war, which has been going on for far too long.
New initiatives by opposition parties, religious leaders
and various representatives of civil society to bring
about peace and national reconciliation in Angola are a
reflection of the desire of Angolan society to put an
end to the conflict, which has taken hostage not only
the civilian population but also the entire future of the
country and the subregion.

We welcome these initiatives as well as the
efforts that have been made to promote a negotiated
peace. We are gratified also at the renewed
commitment of President dos Santos with respect to the
Lusaka Protocol, which we believe continues to be the
foundation of a political solution in Angola. We also
welcome his readiness to forgive UNITA rebels who
renounce war.

The report of the Secretary-General confirms the
importance of a United Nations presence in Angola and
the usefulness of the work done by the United Nations
Office in Angola. The presence of the United Nations
is likely to contribute significantly to promoting peace
and to bringing about national reconciliation as well as
respect for human rights and security in the region.

In this connection, we would like to welcome the
fact that the Human Rights Division of the United
Nations Office in Angola has intensified its efforts, in
close cooperation with the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
support programmes that approach human rights as an
essential component of a lasting peace.

We also consider that the devising of a creative
plan for the respect of basic rights, particularly as
regards the setting up of an effective justice system, is
of crucial importance at a time when the State is
extending its administration to regions that have
recently been taken back from UNITA.

The situation of children in general, and in
particular that of child soldiers, is one of the most
tragic aspects of the Angolan conflict. We would like
to echo the appeal of the Secretary-General requesting
the international community to take a coordinated and
sustained approach throughout Angola in order to
increase the level of protection for war-affected
children. Particular attention should also be given to
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
child soldiers as well as to the special needs of the
large number of children who are victims of mine
injuries.
The Secretary-General in his report has
emphasized the precarious nature of the humanitarian
situation due to the increased number of people
requiring food assistance. The climate of insecurity that
prevails among various regions owing to the guerrilla
activities of UNITA has considerably reduced the
volume of that assistance as well as the access of
humanitarian organizations to the affected populations.

We are likewise concerned by the number of
displaced persons, which is estimated at 2.5 million,
approximately 20 per cent of the total population of
Angola. This situation requires that the international
community take the necessary action to help the
Angolan authorities in their efforts to resettle displaced
persons in secure areas.

Despite its natural and human resources, Angola
today has been reduced to poverty and destitution.
According to the report of the Secretary-General,
poverty has become endemic, with some 78 per cent of
the rural population and 40 per cent of urban dwellers
living below the poverty line. We hope that the return
to stability in those areas now under the control of the
Government will allow for a tangible amelioration of
the economic and social situation and for an improved
standard of living for the population.

It is important also that the takeover by the
Government of the regions formerly occupied by
UNITA should be accompanied by increased assistance
by the international community. In this connection, we
would like to express the hope that, as stated by the
Secretary-General in his report, the donor community
will respond as generously as possible to the 2000
United Nations Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal for
Angola.

My delegation finally would like to welcome the
release of the five Russian crewmen who had been
taken hostage in May 1999.

In conclusion, it is our hope that the Council will
continue to follow closely the situation in Angola in
order to speed up the advent of stability, security and
economic recovery. In this connection, we would like
to reiterate our appreciation and support for the work
of the sanctions Committee, under the leadership of
Ambassador Robert Fowler, who, through his
outstanding professionalism and the actions he has
undertaken, has made it possible to bring about a
process aimed at cutting off the supply lines and
distribution mechanisms of UNITA diamonds.

It is thanks to the Committee's able work that we
now have effective sanctions that are reducing
UNITA's capacity to obtain weapons to continue the
war.

