Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We are grateful to the
Prosecutor for her twenty-sixth report regarding the
Darfur situation. At the outset, let me reiterate our full
support for the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
underscore its central role in the fight against impunity
and the promotion of international justice.

As Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005),
concerning the Sudan, I am pleased to note that
the overall security situation in Darfur remains
stable. Consequently, civilians suffer much less from
violence. At the same time, we remain concerned
about the fragility of the situation and the continued
violations and abuses of human rights, which mostly
remain underreported.

We note, at the same time, the report's references
to extrajudicial killings, rape and sexual violence,
arbitrary arrests, illegal detentions, pressure on
political opponents and human rights activists, as well
as unlawful restrictions on the freedom of expression,
association and assembly, which continue to take place.
All parties responsible for those acts should be brought
to account.

Another point of concern is the fate of internally
displaced persons in Darfur, who must be treated in
full compliance with international human rights law
and standards. Without the cooperation of States all
suspects in the Darfur situation will remain at large
and their status will be used as an excuse to evade
the responsibility of States to fulfil their international
obligations. The same goes for the Council, which is
still not ready to take measures to give effect to the
Court's decisions on non-cooperation. We express
readiness to continue work in that regard and call
on Council members to reconcile different, or even
opposite, views.

We are convinced that every unimplemented
decision of the Court only widens the gap between
crime and accountability, thereby rewarding impunity
and provoking further violations. In that regard, we
call upon all States Members of the United Nations to
strictly abide by and fully implement resolution 1593
(2005). That should not be regarded as a manifestation
of goodwill, but as a matter of legal obligation.

We would like to emphasize once again that
non-compliance with ICC decisions and requests
undermines the foundations of the international
criminal justice system. The consolidation of efforts to
fight against impunity should prevail over any concerns
that impede decisive steps towards the arrest and
surrender of ICC suspects.

Finally, since this is our last statement on this
subject during Ukraine's current Security Council
membership, I would like to thank Prosecutor Bensouda
for her dedicated efforts and express hope that her work,
despite the existing challenges and limited resources,
will always bring about concrete results, thereby
contributing to the maintenance of international peace
and security.

