Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo
and Mr. Joao Vale de Almeida for their edifying
briefings. I also congratulate our colleague
Ambassador Karel van Oosterom for the work he has
done in his capacity as the Facilitator entrusted by the
Security Council to promote the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).

Almost three years after its adoption by Germany,
France, the United Kingdom, China, the United States
of America, the Russian Federation, the European
Union and the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), which in the
view of my delegation is one of the best achievements
in the field of nuclear non-proliferation, has reached
an impasse.

In adopting resolution 2231 (2015), the Security
Council sought, inter alia, to guarantee the exclusively
civilian character of Iran's nuclear programme,
in accordance with article IV of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). My
delegation believes that this agreement constitutes a
solid foundation for the implementation of the NPT
and that bringing it into question is likely to undermine
the collective efforts of the international community to
find a peaceful solution to the Iranian nuclear issue.
Moreover, it calls on all stakeholders to resolve all
disagreements relating to the implementation of the
provisions of the JCPOA through negotiations within
the Joint Commission provided for in annex 4 of
the agreement.

The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
the function and findings of which play a pivotal
role in the Iranian dossier, has admirably discharged
its obligations since 2015, as demonstrated by the
11 reports that it has issued since then. In its most
recent reports, the IAEA has once again pointed out
the successful implementation of the 2015 agreement
owing to the frequent inspections in Iran, which have
confirmed limited uranium enrichment exclusively
for civilian use and the provisional implementation of
its Additional Protocol to its Safeguards Agreement.
The IAEA, which has not discovered any violation
concerning restrictions placed on Iran's ballistic
missile-related activities, pursuant to paragraph 3 of
annex B of Resolution 2231 (2015), has also indicated
the non-diversion of declared nuclear material and the
absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities.

Furthermore, the successful implementation of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action was just reaffirmed
by the 12 June fifth semi-annual report (S/2018/602)
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015). My country
welcomes its recommendations concerning the
strengthening of capacities of States Members to better
avail themselves of the procurement channel and the full
compliance of States of the region with their obligations
pursuant to resolution 2231 (2015). In that light, Cote
d'Ivoire believes that Iran's implementation of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is satisfactory,
although, as with all agreements, there is still room
for improvement.

My delegation believes that it is essential that all
concerns involving the implementation of the Plan of
Action be addressed through mechanisms established
for that purpose, in particular within the framework of
the Joint Commission provided for in annex 4 of the
agreement. My country therefore urges all parties to the
Iranian nuclear agreement to return to the negotiating
table, and calls on them to respect their respective
commitments fully, while at the same time keeping
in mind the importance of strengthening international
security through the comprehensive implementation of
the agreement, which has led to significant progress
concerning the Iranian issue. Moreover, Cote d'Ivoire
calls on the Islamic Republic of Iran to pay particular
attention to the concerns raised by other States,
especially the countries of the Middle East region, and
to increase its cooperation with the IAEA. It also calls
on Iran to comply with the travel ban and asset freeze
provisions of the relevant Security Council resolutions
in good faith.

In conclusion, my delegation believes that, with
regard to the Iranian dossier, the effectiveness of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, as well as the
IAEA verification regime, has made the agreement
into a diplomatic success, which the international
community must work arduously to preserve. In that
regard, it welcomes all initiatives aimed at finding a
peaceful and lasting solution that is satisfactory for all
those who have a stake in the Iranian nuclear issue.

