Lieutenant General Afzal: I appreciate the
concern shown by the members of the Council in
respect of Liberia and will endeavour to answer the
questions that they have raised.

I would like to thank all participants for their
questions, especially the question dealing with the
transition from the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) to the security forces of Liberia and the
concern they have shown for the successful completion
of the Mission.

First, to start in a sequential manner, the
drawdown, as envisaged to date by the Security
Council, has been completed, and the present strength
of the UNMIL military and police components,
including the enablers, is more than sufficient to meet
the requirements that the Security Council has
mandated for the conduct of the forthcoming elections
by the end of next year.

Secondly, the transition phase, which is the
handing over of security responsibilities from UNMIL
to the Government of Liberia's security agencies, is
already in progress. On the instructions of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, UNMIL
commenced with a workshop, which was held in June
this year, between not only UNMIL and the Government
of Liberia's different departments and ministries, but
also experts from other missions that had transitioned to
this phase. As a consequence, we identified a list of
those actions or functions that UNMIL undertakes at
present to provide security and those persons who, from
the side of the Government of Liberia, would be taking
over that responsibility in the future. We also identified
the existing capacity of that particular agency of the
Government of Liberia to undertake the task and the
assistance and guidance that would be required to
develop that capacity and capability.

Moving on to the forthcoming elections, UNMIL
is mandated to provide logistical support and, as I
mentioned earlier, we can do it with the existing
resources. However, there is definitely going to be an
area of concern, and that would be the capacity of the
security forces of Liberia themselves, especially the
police and the military, to ensure security during this
period.

As the Council is well aware, the existing United
Nations police strength in Liberia is 4,000 personnel,
whereas the strength of the Liberian National Police
stands at 3,000. The existing United Nations military
strength in Liberia is 8,000, and the existing military
strength of the armed forces of Liberia stands at 2,000.

The Council is well aware of where the gap
already lies, and what is essential is to raise more
officers for the Liberian National Police, which should
be able to fulfil the security requirements during the
forthcoming elections and afterwards. This would not
only mean raising additional police, but also
establishing police stations, providing them with
vehicles, wherewithal, communications and, last but not

least, the sustenance required for the police personnel
to be operable in the long run. This also relates to
Liberia's limited budget. With a limited budget, they
can only provide so much space for the security sector
within the existing budget. As has been noted, the
existing budget for this year has been increased
nominally for the Government security sector.

Last but not least, I would like to conclude by
saying that without providing security, there can be no
governance and no security.

