Mr. Poukre-Kono (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): I would like to thank you, Sir, for
giving me the opportunity to take the floor and explain
the position of the Government of the Central African
Republic on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/760), which we believe is of major and
decisive importance to the future of our country. But
first of all, I wish to congratulate the Republic of
Croatia and you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December 2008.

We welcome the report before us, which deals
with the extension of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT), its
military component and the transfer of authority from
the European Union-led military force (EUFOR),
whose mandate will end soon, to a United Nations
military component.

We wish to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of MINURCAT,
Mr. Victor Angelo, for his useful and helpful
presentation of the report. However, the report has
prompted my delegation to ask a few questions, which,
if permitted, we would like to voice now.

Are the defense and security forces of the Central
African Republic sufficiently battle-tested to be able to
ensure safety and security in the north-eastern part of
the country? The situation in that region is unclear, so
should the civilians and refugees from other countries
who are there just be abandoned? The recent
withdrawal of humanitarian workers because of a lack
of security was heartbreaking. However, can bad
weather conditions prevent troops from continuing to
move around in a time of war? Are those signs that
people are tired of the Central African problem?

The security issue in the Central African Republic
is relevant and topical today. There is a very complex
crisis in the subregion, in particular in Darfur. There
are people who are forced to flee because of violence;
there is poverty and trafficking of illicit weapons. The
armed forces are unable to control bandits or to impose
order. Those are all issues that must be addressed over
time.

As Council members are aware, the Central
African Republic is trying to emerge from two decades
of political and military upheaval that thwarted any
attempts at development. The inclusive political
dialogue began on 8 December and demonstrates that
the people and Government want to turn the page of
history. That is a significant step forward and cannot be
ignored. But the Central African Republic is still too
fragile for it to attempt to resolve all of its sovereign
responsibilities. It needs the support of the
international community, and we appreciate the efforts
that have been made.

The United Nations technical assessment mission
completed its report and has offered its assessment. We
welcome the excellent report. But we are left
wondering, because there is no reference to the
exchanges with the authorities of the Central African
Republic except for a reference to the confirmed desire
to have a United Nations presence in the north-eastern
part of the country. Council members should read
08-6445]
between the lines with regard to discussions with the
country.

My delegation has another question about the
numbers in the three options proposed for military
presence in the north-eastern region of the Central
African Republic. We have the impression that those
conclusions are not the strongest.

The region being discussed today is it must be
noted, a sensitive area, which is part of a triangle that
includes borders of Chad, the Sudan and the Central
African Republic. It is the trade route, via Port Sudan,
to reach the Red Sea. It is also a zone rich in mineral
resources with abundant fauna, but this animal life has
been decimated by poachers over the past two decades
of crisis because there has not been a powerfully
equipped army in place.

With the Darfur crisis, refugees are pouring in
because of rebellions and the reception of internally
displaced persons. What used to be a haven of peace is
in total upheaval today. Consequently, human rights
have been affected and the environment has been
devastated.

Humanitarian workers - whom we praise for
their bravery and willingness to work in difficult and
dangerous conditions - are always welcome. At this
point, we believe that stabilization in that part of the
Central African Republic has not yet really begun. The
State is still trying to begin reforming the security
sector. That very long and complex process requires
the political will of the Government, which is now
evidence, and adequate resources, in addition to the
$4 million received from the Peacebuilding Fund. This
apparent stability is the result of the presence of
EUFOR, since the Central African State has not really
re-established its authority in the area.

The persistent instability that we would like to
eradicate for good in the subregion also hampers good-
neighbourly relations. It is time for concerted action
with support from the United Nations to lead to the
re-establishment of law and order. We welcome the
MINURCAT exit strategy proposed in the report,
which is perfectly in keeping with the reform process
for the security sector. As has been said by an eminent
diplomat, a close link should be created between
security sector reform and MINURCAT.

We want to continue cooperating closely with the
United Nations system, its humanitarian personnel and

associated humanitarian personnel. Out of a desire for
continuity and because we do not want to leave any
legal vacuum, and, given the fragility of the
institutions in the country, the Government of the
Central African Republic is therefore requesting that an
operational military unit of about 500 troops be kept in
the consolidated Birao area for humanitarian, political
and economic reasons.

