Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to extend our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your timely
initiative in convening this debate. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his important
statement.

Our appreciation also goes to the Prime Minister of
Somalia, His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed, for his presence and for his remarks to the
Council.

May I also express our recognition for the work
of the African Union in Somalia, as presented by the
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Somalia, Mr. Boubacar
Diarra. We are also pleased that Special Representative
Augustine Mahiga is able to join us today through
video link.

As the second decade of the conflict in Somalia
comes to a close, one realizes with sadness that the
goal of achieving peace and security for the country
has so far eluded us, in spite of the efforts carried out
by the Somali people with the support of the
international community. Continued instability in
Somalia has effects that are devastating for its
population and reach far beyond its borders. The time
has come to review our collective approach and design
a strategy that takes into account the multiple
dimensions of the situation.

A strategy that leads to a lasting solution is one
that will consider how best to combine efforts to
generate security and stability, promote political
reconciliation and support reconstruction, economic
revitalization and capacity-building. Peace and
development must go hand in hand in Somalia. The
India, Brazil and South Africa ministerial declaration
issued on 8 March reiterates our readiness to support
international efforts aimed at reconciliation,
reconstruction and development in Somalia.

Recent progress, such as the appointment of a
new Government with a professional Cabinet and the
improvement of the security situation in certain areas
controlled by the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG), are important and should be commended. The
challenges, however, remain daunting. Efforts must
continue to be made to consolidate security gains. The
deployment of the additional 4,000 troops to the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), as
authorized by the Security Council, should be
implemented as swiftly as possible.

We commend the African countries that have
contributed troops to AMISOM, in particular Burundi
and Uganda, and extend our condolences for the
sacrifices made. In order to be more effective,
AMISOM. must be given adequate conditions for its
operation, including through strengthened United
Nations support. The same goes for the Somali
Security Forces in order to address the problems of
retention and integration of personnel, under a unified
chain of command.

The security challenges in Somalia have severely
hindered humanitarian assistance. As we have learned
from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, drought has affected almost 2.5 million people

11-2583]
and caused alarming levels of malnutrition and massive
migration. There is a need to step up humanitarian
funding and create conditions for secure aid delivery.

The situation in Somalia is also deeply affected
by the growing scourge of piracy. The recent killing of
hostages and new reports of kidnappings seem to
confirm the worst predictions regarding piracy off the
coast of Somalia. The report (S/2011/30, annex) of
Special Adviser Jack Lang contains important
recommendations. The Security Council must react to
them in a timely manner. Again, a comprehensive
strategy is required so as to combine repressive and
punitive measures with preventive ones, through
initiatives on land that can help mitigate the problems
at sea.

The efforts of the Transitional Federal
Government towards stability and institution-building
deserve our support. As the Council set out in its latest
resolution regarding Somalia (resolution 1964 (2010)),
significant progress by the TFG on the remaining
transitional tasks, in particular the constitution-making
process and the delivery of basic services to the
population, is essential to the recovery efforts in
Somalia.

We note that the decision of the Transitional
Federal Parliament to unilaterally extend its mandate
has raised strong reaction and may not be conducive to
a lasting political solution to the situation in Somalia.
An inclusive dialogue among all Somalis and key
stakeholders may pave the way for progress towards
stability. Transitional authorities must demonstrate
their statesmanship for the success of this crucial
endeavour.

As we approach August, a clear strategy for the
post-transitional period needs to be devised. It will
require a solid and encompassing political settlement
enshrined in a new constitution and significant
improvement in the security situation. These steps will
help to establish a virtuous cycle in which stability can
take hold.

Today's debate and the draft presidential
statement before us signal the Security Council's
commitment to a process that can lead to a peaceful
and stable Somalia.

