Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I wish to start by
expressing our appreciation to Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei for their reports today. Their reports, I
hope, will help to ease the severe tension we are facing
in the world today.

The Security Council is meeting once again to
discuss Iraq. The Government of Iraq has been the
subject of several Security Council resolutions aimed
at curbing its perceived threat to international peace
and security. This is the third time this year that the
Security Council has been called upon to consider this
matter.

As we are all aware, my country experienced
three decades of war, a war that inflicted a great deal of
suffering and destruction on Angolans. Thus, it is
pleasing that the reports we have just received provide
us with a beacon of hope that we can indeed save the
world from imminent conflict. The collective efforts of
the Council, combined with strong military and
diplomatic pressure, have increased Iraq's level of
cooperation with the international inspectors. In the
process, not only have we strengthened the inspections
regime, but we have also strengthened our ability to
carry out the pivotal portion of our mandate - that is,
to save our world from the scourge of war.

Simultaneously, we advance the cause of
multilateralism by translating the consensual will of the
international community in its desire, peacefully, but
with determination, to disarm Iraq.

On behalf of my Government, I would like to
reiterate our confidence in the inspectors of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and to thank them for
the progress that has been achieved so far, since the
renewal of their respective mandates. Similarly, I
would like to thank Member States for their many
contributions, both material and diplomatic, to this
process. These have been instrumental in reinforcing
and enhancing the effectiveness of the inspections. In
that regard, my Government particularly acknowledges
the presentation by United States Secretary of State
Powell, and 1 echo the sentiment of my Government
and my continent by stating that this progress
represents what can be achieved by diplomacy backed
by a credible willingness to act.

In this connection, I welcome Iraq's acceptance
of the offer by South Africa to assist in cooperation
with the inspections, based on the South African
experience of disarming peacefully. Africa has adopted
a clear position on the question of disarming Iraq by
peaceful means. Moreover, African countries decided
to free their continent from weapons of mass
destruction, an example that could be followed by the
countries in the Middle East region.

Clearly, there is much more to be done.
Unfortunately, we are unable at this time to state that
Iraq is free from weapons of mass destruction or that it
has embarked on an irreversible road to construct a
society free from weapons of mass destruction
programmes. However, we are equally unable to state
unequivocally that Iraq is fully armed with weapons of
mass destruction or other weapons that pose a clear and
impending threat to international peace and security.
What we are able to state unequivocally is that the
international community has sent a clear message to
the Government of Iraq. That is why the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1441 (2002), backed
by a credible willingness to use force to see to its
implementation.

The positive result is that we have been able to
secure Iraq's cooperation concretely, as reported to us
this morning by the inspectors, such as the
authorization of the use of U-2 planes, interviews with
scientists and more documentation on its arms
programmes. In addition, legislation has been enacted
to effect the outlawing of such programmes in future,
as confirmed by the inspectors this morning. This
proves that Iraq is capable of cooperation with the
international community and can act if there is
determined pressure by the community acting within
the confines of our mandate. This serves as an example
of the progress that can be achieved when the Security
Council speaks with one voice, reflecting the
consensus and determination of the international
community. The adoption of resolution 1441 (2002)
was a clear demonstration of that.

The use of force today would deprive us of
valuable information that could be gathered from U-2
flights and of information derived from interviews with
scientists and from the additional documentation
provided by Iraq. Such information constitutes
necessary inputs for the intrusive inspections that the
Council has demanded. We need to allow sufficient
time for the inspectors to gather the necessary
information for us to make informed decisions at the
appropriate time. Such time is a very valuable
investment in peace and multilateralism, and in the
validity of the Charter of our universal Organization.

In conclusion, let me say that I am confident that
the Council represents a unified coalition of the willing
to ensure international peace and security. Our ability
to retain the credibility that will enable us to remain
relevant to international peace and security in the
future is greatly dependent on our ability to weigh
carefully the consequences of the measures we choose
to take collectively. Whatever the decision may be, it is
pivotal that it be based on convincing and far-reaching
information. Whatever decision we collectively take
must be proportionate to the gravity of the issue before
us. That decision need not be popular; but it must
reflect the consensus of the Council and must be
justified. The consequences of a war clearly outweigh
its benefits. I need not remind those present that war
represents human nature at its worst.

