Sir Jeremy Greenstock: We have heard today
about some very good examples of regional and other
collective approaches to the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), and I am very grateful to those
Members of the United Nations who have spoken to
that theme and shown their very clear general interest
in making sure that resolution 1373 (2001) and the
work of the Security Council and the Committee make
a difference on the ground in the area of counter-
terrorism.
There were no direct questions to me, but there
are one or two individual points that I would like to
pick up. In his statement this morning, the
representative of Mauritius spoke about the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) needing to make
judgements about the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001), and I would like to pick up on a couple of
points in that respect. Mr. Gokool asked three
questions, I think. First, is the CTC exceeding the
scope of the resolution itself in the way that it is
approaching implementation? Secondly, will the
answers received from Member States really help the
CT C to judge whether a State is truly compliant? And
thirdly, what action would be taken if a State were not
compliant?

I think if we look at the text of resolution
1373 (2001), we will see that it is extremely broad.
States are asked, basically, to do everything possible, in
cooperation with others, to make sure that terrorist acts
are not committed, to prevent and suppress terrorist
acts, to take action against the perpetrators of such
acts, to cover the whole area of the financing of
terrorist acts in great detail and to refrain from
providing any form of support, active or passive, direct
or indirect. The resolution also expresses the Council's
determination to take all necessary steps to ensure the
full implementation of the resolution.

We in the Committee - and Mauritius is a prime
exponent of this - have agreed that we will implement
that mandate - nothing less and nothing more than
that mandate. So I do not think that the Committee is in
any way exceeding the very broad scope of resolution
1373 (2001) in the way that it is going about its
business. But the answer to the particular question
about whether, from the reports, the CTC will be able
to judge whether a State is compliant is, I think, "Yes,
up to a point; but other things are necessary". And
members of the Committee, like members of the
Council, need also to be aware of their own individual
and collective roles in making sure that all Member
States - or each Member State, as we come to its
case - is truly implementing the resolution, whether
or not it is reported to be doing so. The Committee has
a role there. It is not just for experts or the State itself
to decide - the Committee has a role of assessment.
But the work of the experts in setting broad, objective
criteria is of great importance to the Committee.

What action will be taken if a State is not
compliant? That has not yet happened, and we will
address it if and when it does happen. But the response
from States Members of the United Nations has been
extremely positive, constructive and cooperative so far.

I do not think we have to tie ourselves down by
trying to answer that question until we meet it. If we
do, the Committee will discuss it. We are working by
consensus, so within the Committee we are not going
to solve any contentious or highly political and
sensitive issues. We have already said as a Committee
that we will, if necessary, bring such issues, if they
affect our mandate, back to the Security Council itself.

I think that we are proceeding in the right way.
We are starting with the intention to make sure that
every State has the right legislation in place, then is
implementing that legislation with the right
Government machinery in place and is using, as I said
this morning, those instruments to make sure that
terrorism does not surface on its territory.

So there are questions that we have to have in our
minds, but the resolution itself is our guide in this
respect. From my point of view as Chairman I will
make sure that we stick scrupulously to the terms of the
resolution.

Chile made a suggestion that we should compile
our experiences to facilitate progress towards an
elaboration of a new concept of security in the twenty-
first century. That is much too broad a suggestion to
discuss this afternoon, but I think it is the Committee's
intention to be very frank and open about its
experiences. We have already had three members of the
expert team circulate papers about their view of how it
has gone so far. We are, to some extent, in new
territory as we move forward. I think that the
delegation of Chile is right that we should - as far as
we can, and without straying from our mandate -
share our experience with the international community
and with Member States in terms of - well, who
knows what a new concept of security is - in terms of
the global, the comprehensive, collective approach to
dealing with security problems of this nature. We will
bear that in mind and make sure that our web site and
the other means that we use to distribute our
experience will be full of what I hope Member States
will find is interesting material.

Australia brought up its own very welcome
contributions to regional efforts to understand the
problem and to start dealing with it. In response to that,
I think it is time for me to thank, from my position,
quite a broad range of Member States who have
already begun or are already contemplating putting in
place a number of measures to help those States who
need technical and financial assistance in meeting the
requirements of resolution 1373 (2001).

I mentioned Norway and the Organization of
African Unity this morning, and Australia and New
Zealand in their area. The United States in virtually
every area has been highly active in this regard. The
Group of Eight industrialized countries under Canadian
leadership is very active at the moment. Your own
country, Mr. President, is active in the area of the
Commonwealth of Independent States. The European
Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe has been active in Europe and
beyond. I would mention also Japan, in its role within
ASEAN + 3, the G-8, the ASEAN Regional Forum
(ARF), and beyond that as a bilateral donor of
importance. I would also mention the regional
organization that has made the most progress so far of
collective, considered reaction against terrorism, and
that is the Organization of American States. All these
are playing increasingly important roles, and I hope
that others will join them. It is already, as you will see
from my list, a very broad collective effort.

Turkey mentioned definitional problems. I am not
going to get back into them. It is not the business of the
Committee to solve definitional problems. As I have
said on other occasions, the CTC has an enormous
amount of work to do and can do that work without
stumbling over definitional problems. We work by
consensus and we will regard an act of terrorism, if it is
necessary to do so, as one which all 15 of us will agree
is an act of terrorism. That covers a huge area that
needs work under resolution 1373 (2001). So we
ourselves will not cut across the responsibility of the
General Assembly to take action in that regard.

I was very pleased that Malawi spoke to us on
behalf of the Southern African Development
Community to say what that subregional group is doing
and that it also, in respect of its own national approach,
expressed very clearly the seven areas where it was
seeking improvements and was unequivocal in wanting
international assistance to help it fulfil its obligations
in those areas. I hope that many Member States will
follow Malawi's example and make specific requests
for assistance, because in our work as the Committee
with international organizations and donor States, we
are beginning to bring together the availability of
supply of assistance, which will be relevant in the case
of Malawi and, I suspect, many others.

I think today's debate has been extremely useful.
I would like again to express my gratitude to all those
delegations that have taken a part. There is a huge
amount of work to do. We in the Committee will do it
with a will, and we look forward to further open
briefings. I will try to hold one before the next week is
out with Member States of the United Nations. I end
with thanks to my colleagues on the Committee and
our experts in the Secretariat for the hard work that
they have done and that is still to come.

