Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): Allow me to
express my appreciation to Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo, for
his leadership and commitment to the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and his efforts to implement its mandate in Kosovo.

I also thank Mr. Ivica Dacie and Mr. Hashim
Thaci for their statements. Their presence today in the
Council demonstrates their political will and courage
to embark on the difficult yet indispensable process of
working together in order to normalize the relationship
between the two capitals.

When we look at the history of the issue at hand, the
trail we see is one of a bitter past and bitter memories.
However, in Rwanda we believe that it is in the common
interest of both parties to turn the page on that part of
their history and continue with serious negotiations to
bring peace and lasting security in the region. In the
same spirit, it is our hope that both leaders will make
further progress on the outstanding issues, mainly those
concerning northern Kosovo, and reach an agreement
in view of the upcoming meeting on 2 April.

Both leaders have made important strides. In that
respect, we hope that the international community,
in particular the Council, will be well prepared to
mobilize resources and political backing to encourage
both leaders to reach a sustainable agreement leading
to lasting peace.
With reference to the report that is before the
Council (S/2013/72), it notes the positive developments
in Kosovo, and we acknowledge that the situation
has been relatively calm. However, the ongoing
tensions in northern Kosovo are worrisome and could
spark intercommunal violence, which would cause
lasting harm to peace and security and even the
agreements that have been reached. I acknowledge
that improvement has been seen in the Kosovo police,
which has taken ownership in the provision of law and
order and addressed the concerns of its citizens through
increased participation of the municipal community
safety councils.

In addition, we welcome the collaboration between
UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo in helping the Ministry of Justice
to implement reform of the justice sector. We also
welcome the cooperation between UNMIK and other
international organizations, as manifested in the work
achieved. We encourage the international community
to maintain its commitment and increase its support to
enable those organizations to achieve their mandates. I
also remain convinced that the task of building a stable
and prosperous region will need both leaders to come
together and negotiate a lasting solution.

To conclude, my delegation believes that achieving
peace in the region lies within the hands of the two
countries; it is therefore crucial that both parties
demonstrate political will and a sincere desire to
continue through dialogue to bring about a lasting
peace.

