Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me first of all to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I would
also like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
Mr. John Holmes, the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for their briefings this morning
on this agenda item.

Over the past 10 years, the Security Council has
taken measures to improve the means to protect
civilians in armed conflict, including the adoption of
four historic resolutions and presidential statements
that lay out the main rules and norms that address our
concerns and cover all aspects related to this matter.
However, the international community unfortunately
continues to witness the suffering endured by
thousands of civilians in armed conflict around the
world, especially women and children, the victims of
increasingly complex forms of blind acts of violence
that lead to numerous deaths and disabilities and an
increasing number of wounded, as well as acute
humanitarian crises that are hard to contain.

This ongoing suffering, which can be horrifying,
is brought about when parties to a conflict do not
respect their obligations to protect civilians in
accordance with international humanitarian and human
rights law. This shows that measures adopted on the
ground fall short of the progress touted in the
international statements and resolutions adopted thus
far on this topic.

The United Arab Emirates condemns all
deliberate attacks on civilians and the indiscriminate
and disproportionate use of force. We must therefore
reflect further on all aspects of this problem in order to
guarantee continued long-term protection for civilians,
taking into account the five challenges raised by the
Secretary-General in his most recent report
(S/2009/277) on this topic. That could help to promote
the rule of law, respect for human rights, stability and
sustainable peace in countries ravaged by conflict.

We support and welcome General Assembly
resolution 64/10 on the follow-up to the report of the
United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza
Conflict (A/64/490, annex) concerning war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed by Israel in the
Gaza Strip. We hope that proper measures will be taken
to implement that resolution, including the exertion of
pressure on the Israeli Government to organize proper,
independent and credible investigations within three
months on the serious violations of international law
and international humanitarian law mentioned in the
report of the Fact-Finding Mission in order to
guarantee greater accountability and justice.

We support the measures taken by the Secretary-
General to guarantee the safety of United Nations
personnel in Afghanistan. We hope that the
international community and, above all, the United
Nations agencies will adopt, pursuant to their
respective mandates, even more effective measures
along those lines, including through capacity-building
and the provision of technical aid to countries and
Governments. In this way, they will be able to
implement the necessary prosecutions and determine
the criminal responsibility of the perpetrators of violent
crimes against civilians, United Nations peacekeeping
personnel and other international humanitarian actors.

In response to the unstable security conditions
and dangers facing United Nations personnel in
Afghanistan, the United Arab Emirates recently took
part in regional efforts to guarantee their security in
that country.

We are convinced that States must assume the
primary responsibility for protecting civilians in armed
conflict. It is also crucial to promote regional and
international coordination and cooperation in that field.
We reaffirm the effective role that must be played by
the Security Council in responding swiftly, directly and
decisively to armed conflicts and emerging crises and
in addressing their deeper causes. We reaffirm the
importance of the role the Council must play in
prevailing upon parties to conflicts to create safe and
neutral zones and to guarantee humanitarian corridors,
the evacuation of victims, and safe, timely and
unhindered access for humanitarian aid. It is important
to bolster respect for those measures and to promote
accountability with respect to international law and
international humanitarian law in accordance with the
provisions of the United Nations Charter, in order to
mitigate the damage caused by armed conflicts and the
suffering they inflict on civilians and to prevent their
recurrence.

Lastly, we hope to swiftly reach an international
agreement on the role that must be played by United
Nations peacekeeping missions in protecting civilians
and humanitarian personnel in their area of operations,
within the framework of full respect for the
sovereignty of States and on the basis of their special
status.

In order to enhance the Organization's credibility,
we call for negotiations between the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the troop- and police-contributing
countries, in particular with respect to monitoring
efforts, presenting reports and accurate information,
guaranteeing various capacities and adequate
resources, improving the operational guidelines of
mission mandates, and protecting civilians in a
coordinated and efficient fashion.

