Mr. Gunnarsson (Iceland): Allow me to thank the
United States presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today's quarterly debate on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

Allow me to also thank Mr. Mladenov for
his briefing.

The Middle East region remains in a state ofturmoil.
Complex internal conflicts have led to displacement and
suffering on a massive scale, with famine looming in
many areas, including in Yemen. The work programme
of the Security Council is heavily charged with issues
of the region, with separate meetings and reports on
various aspects of Syria, Yemen, Libya and Iraq.

Iceland participated in the Brussels conference
on Syria earlier this month. Along with many others,
we have committed significantly increased funds to
alleviating the humanitarian impact of the Syria crisis.
We have also welcomed Syrian refugees in Iceland,
in coordination with Office of the United Nations
Commissioner for Refugees. The continued targeting
of civilians and civilian infrastructure by the Syrian
Government and rebel forces, particularly medical
facilities, is completely unacceptable, and the use of
chemical weapons at the beginning of this month, with
strong evidence pointing to the Syrian Government,
is outrageous. The perpetrators of that and other acts
which violate international law must be brought to
justice. That is why the work of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism is of key importance and why
Iceland supports the Syria accountability mechanism.

The Security Council has a clear responsibility
to end the conflict in Syria and pave the way for a
political solution 4 the only way forward. All parties
to the conflict have a responsibility for making peace
negotiations work. In particular, that responsibility lies
with the Al-Assad Government and its State backers,
Russia and Iran. The hopes raised by the Astana process,
and the energy put into the main United Nations-
sponsored Geneva peace process require concerted
political energy and will. The failure to establish a
proper political peace process will cause continued
suffering among the Syrian people and allow for the
violence to further spread into neighbouring States,
such as Lebanon.

Despite the bleak outlook in much of the region, there
is one conflict that should be amenable to resolution and
where preventing further conflict should be possible. I
am referring to the Israel-Palestine conflict. The two-
State solution to the Israel-Palestine conflict is the only
viable peace plan, and it has been on the table for years.
It should therefore be a key priority of the Security
Council to protect and nurture the two-State solution,
even when both parties to the conflict seem, at times,
hell-bent on tearing that plan up. On the one hand, we
have violent acts by individual Palestinians against
Israeli citizens and the frequent firing of rockets into
Israel and that is totally unacceptable. On the other
hand, we have Israel's constant undermining of the basis
for a two-State solution through illegal settlements.

The Security Council took important damage
control measures when it adopted resolution 2334
(2016) last December. The resolution aims to safeguard
a key prerequisite for the two-State solution - the
possibility ofa viable territory for the Palestinian State.
We welcome the first quarterly report by the Secretary-
General, delivered orally on 23 March. The monitoring
of the implementation of the resolution must continue.

Finally, in line with paragraph 9 of resolution
2334 (2016), we would urge an intensification and
acceleration of international and regional diplomatic
efforts and support aimed at achieving, without
delay, comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East.

