Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation believes that,
had it not been for that fateful report of the former Chief
Inspector of the United Nations Special Commission on
Iraq, which triggered the December 1998 bombing of
Baghdad and other Iraqi cities, the United Nations Special
Commission would still be operating in Iraq, engaged in
the important tasks that were mandated to it by this
Council. The exercise before the Council today is one not
just of asserting its authority and reclaiming its credibility
with respect to the issue of Iraq, but equally importantly,
one of restoring confidence and trust between the Council
and Iraq. Indeed, the Council cannot reasonably expect to
effectively re-establish its authority on this enormously
difficult issue without also re-establishing a modicum of
that confidence and trust that have been broken since
December 1998.

Despite your best efforts, Sir, which we appreciate
very much, the draft resolution does not go far enough to
incorporate the concerns that had been expressed by my
delegation and others, which would have enabled us to
join in supporting a consensus text. It also is not
comprehensive enough, as, out of expediency, it has left
out the important issue of financial modalities. This is a
difficult and complex issue which should have been
resolved and incorporated into the resolution, along with
the other issues, as a total and integrated package, since
leaving it out is likely to create a lot of uncertainties and
would complicate the implementation of the draft
resolution. We reiterate the view that a consensus
approach would contribute enormously to the success of
this exercise.

The draft resolution provides, inter alia, for the
resumption of arms inspections in Iraq and the suspension
of the nine-year-old sanctions, but while it is precise in
respect of the establishment of a new monitoring,
inspection and verification commission and the return of

 

disarmament inspectors on the ground, it is less clear,
indeed vague and full of conditionalities, in respect of the
triggering of the suspensions; nor does it establish a definite
benchmark or a time-frame for the final lifting of the
sanctions, which ought to be as much the objective of the
entire exercise as are the accounting for and disposing of
Iraq's alleged remaining weapons of mass destruction. In
our view, it is reasonable, in the absence of such a
benchmark or time-frame, for there to be an element of
certainty and predictability in the renewals of the
suspensions based on the positive reports of the new
commission. This is important not least for purposes of
economic and development planning for Iraq, which must
urgently embark on rebuilding its shattered economy. Nine
years of punitive sanctions are far too long for any country
to bear.
This Council has the responsibility to assess the
enormity of the effects of the sanctions on the Iraqi people
and must begin the process of dismantling them as soon as
possible, predicated, of course, on Iraq's compliance with
all relevant resolutions of the Council. It cannot be denied
that the sanctions have had debilitating effects on the Iraqi
population as a whole, especially the most vulnerable
groups, such as the elderly, the infirm and children, who
are deprived of many of the most basic amenities which are
taken for granted elsewhere.

The indefinite continuation of the sanctions violates
the very spirit and purposes of the United Nations enshrined
in its Charter, which, inter alia, seeks "to reaffirm faith in
fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the
human person" and to "promote higher standards of living,
full employment, and conditions of economic and social
progress and development". These are the very words of the
Charter.

These lofty ideals ring hollow indeed in the context of
the reality of the situation in Iraq. The recent report of the
United Nations Children's Fund on infant mortality,
attesting to the preventable deaths of half a million children
below the age of five years in Iraq since the imposition of
the sanctions, is a telling indictment against the
continuation of the sanctions and a sober reminder of the
responsibility of the Council to end them as soon as
possible. The only way to alleviate the dire plight of the
Iraqi people is for the Council to work out a clear
sanctions-lifting plan that would allow Iraq to resume
normal economic relations with the international
community.

There is consensus on two aspects of the draft
resolution. The first is the crucial need for the return of
a new monitoring, verification and inspection system to
Iraq to complete the disarmament tasks that were once
entrusted to the former Special Commission. There is
broad agreement within the Council on continued
monitoring and the urgent need to resolve the key
remaining disarmament tasks in Iraq. However, any
reinforced ongoing monitoring and verification system
should take into account Iraq's dignity as an independent,
sovereign State, as well as the religious and cultural
sensitivities of its people.

My delegation regrets that this draft resolution
persists in effecting stringent controls that could not but
impact negatively on innocent civilians. The much touted
oil-for-food programme, while important, has limited
capabilities to meet the pressing needs of the Iraqi people.
By one estimate, Iraq would need at least $30 billion
annually to meet its current requirements for food,
medicine and infrastructure. Improvements to this
programme, which are proposed in this draft resolution,
are essentially selective humanitarian measures which will
only lead to incremental improvements and address a
small fraction of the needs of the Iraqi people.

Lifting the oil export ceiling is welcomed, but is
limited in its impact by the severely debilitated oil
infrastructure in the country. Clearly, no real
improvements are possible if urgent oil spare parts and
equipment continue to be placed on hold in the 661
Committee. We continue to believe that nothing short of
the massive rehabilitation of the entire economy and the
rebuilding of Iraq's infrastructure will enable the situation
to improve in a fundamental way.

The second consensus in the Council relates to the
equally urgent need to resolve the Kuwaiti issues, namely,
Iraq's commitment to facilitate the repatriation of all
Kuwaiti and third country nationals and the return of all
Kuwaiti property, including Kuwait's priceless archives.
Clearly, there will be no final resolution of the Iraq issue
until and unless all of these issues have been resolved.
Aside from the need to demonstrate its clear cooperation
in respect of the remaining disarmament issues, Iraq will
have to show its cooperation in respect of these other
equally important issues, beginning with resuming its
cooperation with the Tripartite Commission and the
Technical Subcommittee to resolve the questions of
Kuwaiti and third country missing persons.

 

The humanitarian nature of the issue is indisputable
and must be addressed by Iraq, which must make every
effort to resolve this and the equally important and emotive
issue of the return of the missing Kuwaiti property and
archives. The importance of these issues to Kuwait has
been eloquently underscored yet again by the Permanent
Representative of Kuwait in the Council this morning. My
delegation firmly hopes that what he said will be taken to
heart by Iraq.

Malaysia attaches particular importance to the issue of
the hajj flights. We are opposed, as a matter of principle, to
the imposition of sanctions on the performance of the hajj,
which is one of the five sacred pillars of Islam, and have
consistently urged the lifting of any such restrictions,
whether in respect of the previous sanctions on Libya or on
Iraq. While it is true that hajj flights are not under sanctions
per se, aspects of the performance of the hajj by Iraqi
pilgrims are subject to approval by the sanctions Committee
in respect of Iraq or the 661 Committee.

I regret that a number of proposals made in this
regard, including by my delegation, have not been accepted.
On the basis of our experience in the 661 Committee, we
do not believe the current formulation in the draft resolution
will resolve the problems that occur every hajj season. It is
imperative that the hajj issue be depoliticized once and for
all by removing it from the sanctions regime altogether or
by providing maximum latitude or flexibility in its
implementation. This is an important matter to be urgently
addressed out of respect for the Islamic faith, especially in
the context of the upcoming hajj, which is only three
months away. We wished that the issue of the hajj flights,
which should also include the umrah, could have been
treated with greater sympathy and understanding,
particularly in the context of the inter-civilizational dialogue
on which the international community is embarking.

The Council is about to adopt an enormously
important resolution which will affect the lives of the Iraqi
people in many ways. My delegation had proposed that the
Council give a hearing to Iraq's views before it took action
on this draft resolution. This is, after all, part of due
process before a decision is made affecting the party
concerned, as is provided for in the Charter of the United
Nations and the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

My delegation regrets that its proposal has not been
accommodated, in spite of support from a number of
Council members. We will, nevertheless, continue to call
for a dialogue and engagement with Iraq, in the belief that
engaging Iraq, rather than isolating and demonizing it, will
serve the best interests of both the international
community and the people of Iraq. In this regard, we
reiterate our conviction that the Secretary-General, who
concluded an important memorandum of understanding
with Iraq in Baghdad on 23 February 1998, has an
appropriate and pertinent role to play and should be
encouraged to do so.

The draft resolution before us is intended to set out
a new Council approach towards Iraq. Unfortunately, it
does not have the right balance. It is driven largely by
political, rather than humanitarian, considerations. It is
aimed at keeping Iraq under continued isolation, rather
than bringing it out into the mainstream of international
life, which should have been the real aim of this exercise.
The language of the draft resolution is ambiguous in some
important parts, so that it may lend itself to unilateral
interpretation and/or action in its implementation, which
must be avoided. The Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation alluded to this fact.

The text incorporates only some of the
recommendations of the Amorim panels. My delegation
had strongly supported the panels' recommendations,
which, in our view, provide the most viable basis for
resolving the outstanding issues with Iraq and should have
been the basis of this omnibus draft resolution. We also
believe that for the successful outcome of this exercise, it
is important for the international community, particularly
members of the Council, to create a conducive
atmosphere. Regrettably, this is not the case, given the
continuing violation of Iraq's sovereignty and territorial
integrity.

For the reasons I have given, my delegation is
unable to support the draft resolution.

