Mrs. Arce de Jeannet (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico appreciates the information provided
by Mr. Kenzo Oshima concerning the humanitarian
situation in Angola. We wish to express our great
appreciation to the staff of United Nations
humanitarian agencies working to assist the population
of that country. Our appreciation also goes to the
national and international civil society organizations
working in this area, as well as in promoting human
rights in Angola.

Mexico believes that responding to the
humanitarian needs of the Angolan population is the
greatest challenge the Government and the people of
Angola face in the current stage of peace-building and
national reconciliation, requiring the decisive support
of the international community and multilateral
organizations, primarily the United Nations.

Given the information we have been given this
morning by Mr. Oshima and other information we have
received from various agencies and organizations, we
are aware of the magnitude of the problem that Angola
faces in terms of the return of refugees and the
resettlement of internally displaced persons. We would
like to ask Mr. Oshima whether regulations and norms
for the resettlement of internally displaced persons are
being applied in those activities. That is, are efforts
actually being made to ensure that returns and
resettlements are occurring voluntarily, with the
provision of land, tools, seeds and basic physical and
social infrastructure? We express this concern because,
according to information received from certain
organizations, some internally displaced persons who
were living in Kuito, the capital of the Bie province,
were forcibly returned to their communities when the
basic conditions for subsistence did not exist there.
Although the case of Kuito is an isolated one, which
seems to depart from Government policies, it reflects
the risks of premature and spontaneous returns.

We would also like to know whether Mr. Oshima
could confirm the information with regard to the
number of refugees who will return from Zambia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Namibia this
year and next. We have a figure of approximately
470,000 refugees who would be returning to Angola. If
that is correct, then we would like to know whether the
United Nations, in coordination with the various
agencies in the field, is carrying out the planning
necessary to ensure that that return and resettlement
process is carried out in safe areas and with minimum
basic services to ensure the survival of the refugees.

We would also like to know whether the United
Nations has any more precise information concerning
the number of persons requiring provisions from the
World Food Programme in order to survive this year.
According to information that we have received,
apparently there would be between 1 million and 1.5
million persons who would depend on such supplies. In
that context, we would like to know whether there are
special programmes for the care of malnourished
people, particularly programmes to care for children,
since, according to information that we have received,
approximately 30 per cent of the child population of
Angola is malnourished.

The Mexican delegation also wishes to echo the
satisfaction expressed by other delegations this
morning concerning the decision of the Angolan
Government to ratify the Ottawa Convention on the
total prohibition of anti-personnel mines. In the case of
Angola, we are mindful of the tremendous effort still
required, which should involve the international
community and the donor community: without an
adequate demining programme, especially for the
transport infrastructure, any effort made in the areas of
agriculture, human settlements or national
reconstruction would be seriously compromised.

Finally, the Mexican delegation wishes to pose a
question to Mr. Oshima or perhaps to the representative
of Angola. We understand that this week the National
Assembly of Angola is considering the new
Government budget. Mexico would like to know
whether, in the restructuring of the new budget, priority
is given to social and humanitarian assistance
programmes.

