The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Indonesia.

We thank His Excellency Mr. Charles Nqakula,
Minister of Safety and Security of South Africa and
Facilitator of the Burundi Peace Process, for his
briefing on the latest developments in the peace
process in Burundi.

Our delegation would like to stress our support
for the peace process in Burundi and the positive role
played in that effort by the Facilitator personally, by
the countries of the region through the Regional
Initiative and, of course, by South Africa. In that
regard, we are mindful of the importance of the
establishment of a new Government in Burundi in
November 2007 and View this more inclusive nature as
a significant step in bringing opposition elements fully
into the peace process. We hope that all political
parties will be able to collaborate collectively in the
interest of the country as a whole.

In this peace process we encourage the parties to
implement all of the provisions agreed under the Dar es
Salaam Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement of
September 2006. Further, we call on all Burundian
political stakeholders to maintain the spirit of dialogue,
consensus-building and inclusiveness, including in
addressing the issue of power-sharing in an equitable
manner which has enabled them to achieve a successful
transition in their country.
We also appreciate the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in supporting Burundi to achieve long-
term peace and stability. We encourage the
Government of Burundi to intensify its efforts in all
aspects of security sector reform, particularly with
respect to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, so that the presence of potentially armed
elements and the incentives for conflict will be
reduced. Related to security sector reform is the
problem of small arms and other weapons in the
country which also contribute to violence and
instability. Efforts must be made to stem the flow of
those weapons in order to create conditions conducive
to peace. Once again, Indonesia would like to reiterate
its support for the peace process in Burundi.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the Minister of
Safety and Security of South Africa and Facilitator of
the Burundi Peace Process, His Excellency Mr. Charles
Nqakula, to respond to the questions raised.

