Mr. Holmes: Let me take the opportunity to
thank all those delegations that have spoken in today's
debate for their participation and the great commitment
they have shown through that participation to the
protection of civilians agenda, now and in the future.
Let me also thank those who have sat through the
debate this afternoon for ignoring the temptations of
the World Cup. Let me also thank the many delegations
that thanked the Secretary-General, myself and the
High Commissioner for Human Rights on our initial
presentations and on the role of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.
Of course, many delegations also mentioned in
very kind terms my own role. Let me say that I hope
that this is my last statement to the Security Council,
although because I still have almost two months of my
mandate still to run, nothing is excluded in this rather
uncertain world.

I was struck by the reference that was made, I
think, by the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to the forthcoming anniversary of Srebrenica, which is
a very powerful reminder of exactly what we are
talking about here. If we needed further reminders,
today has seen further suicide bombings in Iraq,
resulting in at least 35 civilian deaths amongst Shiite
pilgrims in that country.

I noted the strong interest of many of those who
spoke in the protection of civilians mandates in
peacekeeping contexts, the particular value of the study
that was commissioned jointly by OCHA and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and,
of course, the work that has been done since then to
implement some of the recommendations of that report.
I note the particular emphasis, which I also strongly
welcome, on getting mandates of peacekeeping
operations right in the first place and, in particular, on
matching mandates to means and ensuring that
expectations and resources for the protection of
civilians are not too far removed from each other. Let
me assure the Council that OCHA will continue to
work with DPKO and the Department of Field Support
in this area.

I also noted the worries that many delegations
expressed, as I did myself, about the implications for
the protection of civilians of the withdrawal of the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad later this year and the potential
withdrawal at some future stage of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). Again, let me
assure delegations that we will continue to follow these
questions very closely.

Let me respond very briefly to some specific
points that were raised by delegations during the
debate. The representative of United Kingdom drew
attention to the difference between deliberate or
indiscriminate attacks on civilians and those military
actions where efforts are made to avoid civilian
casualties but they nevertheless result. I agree that
there is a difference between these two kinds of
situations, and I understand the difference and the point
that is being made. But of course, this does not justify
the civilian casualties that are caused in an unintended
manner, since the requirements of distinction and
proportionality, which are basic to international
humanitarian law, still have to be fully met in all cases.

I also appreciate the points made by the
representative of Pakistan about the displaced in his
country. Of course, a briefing of the kind that I gave

this morning cannot do full justice to all the aspects
and subtleties of any particular situation. I recognize
the efforts that have been made by the Government of
Pakistan to protect civilians, but the fact remains that,
despite the returns that there have been in the past few
months, there are still around 1 million people
displaced in Pakistan, and that process of displacement
continues.

There has been mention by several delegations of
the relationship between the protection of civilians
agenda and the responsibility to protect. These are, of
course, linked but distinct domains and distinct
initiatives, and it is important that they remain so. The
protection of civilians is a much broader and wider
concept, with wider application, whereas the
responsibility to protect is very much focused on the
four major crimes, and we need to bear those
distinctions in mind.

A few speakers have mentioned the sensitive
subject of engagement on humanitarian issues with
non-State armed groups. Let me echo again the view
that was expressed by the Secretary-General this
morning that engagement with such groups is a critical
element to ensuring compliance with international
humanitarian law and especially with requirements to
enable humanitarian access. I note that some States
have suggested - or asserted - that their consent is a
precondition to such engagement, even on
humanitarian subjects. Of course, such consent is
preferable, but let me point out that the first duty of
States that are party to the Geneva Conventions is not
only to respect international humanitarian law but also
to ensure respect for international humanitarian law. I
believe that this duty also includes the facilitation of
engagement with non-State armed groups, again to
enhance their compliance with international
humanitarian law.

We are long past the days in which either the fate
of civilians or the conduct of non-State armed actors
can simply be seen to be beyond the proper purview of
the international community, even if no one is putting
in question, naturally, the sovereignty of nation-States.
This is the reason why, as both the Secretary-General
and I noted earlier today, that States need to distinguish
between engagement with such groups for political
purposes and engagement with such groups for
humanitarian purposes.
On the related point of the applicability of
international humanitarian law to situations where
terrorism is being practiced, I must respectfully
disagree with the idea mentioned by some delegations
that counter-terrorism cannot be defined as armed
conflict, and therefore subject to international
humanitarian law, and that it is instead entirely a matter
within a country's sovereign right. Naturally,
Governments have the responsibility to protect their
citizens, including against terrorist acts. Nevertheless,
the rules of international humanitarian law, including
the Geneva Conventions, apply not only wherever
there is conflict between States in international
relations, but also when armed hostilities involving
non-State armed groups rise to levels of frequency or
severity that go beyond that of sporadic violence,
occasional riots or internal disturbances. Thus, facts on
the ground that reflect conditions above these
thresholds do trigger the application of the
international humanitarian law of armed conflict,
whether or not they also involve acts that can be
characterized as terrorism.

Some delegations have also referred, as we have
heard before in similar debates, to the difficulties of
asymmetric warfare and of reconciling the protection
of civilians with this kind of warfare - in other words,
fighting non-State armed groups that often take
advantage of operating from within the civilian
population. Asymmetric warfare is not, in fact, quite as
new of a phenomenon as it is sometimes portrayed.
However, there is no doubt that it does increasingly
characterize many of today's internal conflicts and
pose significant problems for those trying to conduct
such warfare. I recognize that systematic violations by
one party to armed conflict in these situations create
great challenges for other parties, especially when
these violations themselves involve the principle of
distinction and the use of civilians as human shields in
one way or another.
But the point that I want to make is that such
challenges and violations cannot and do not justify
disregard of the rules of international humanitarian law
by other parties to the conflict. Indeed, as I have
argued before, they actually require the party to the
conflict to take more care, and not less, to protect
civilians in such hostilities, however difficult that may
be.

Let me assure the representative of Sri Lanka that
we do believe that non-State actors should be held as

accountable for the acts they commit as member States
are. Let me also assure him, in response to some of his
comments, that we accept that the military can and
does play a role in the protection of civilians. However,
we also have to accept that it does not always play such
a role, or does not always play such a role as well as it
should, and I therefore agree with him that further
training for military forces of whatever kind would be
well worthwhile in this area. I also agree with him that
the realities on the ground must be respected and taken
into account in all these areas, but we must also start
from principles such as unhindered access for
humanitarian actors, or we shall be lost.

A lot of speakers have referred to the issue of
accountability, as the Secretary-General, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and I
did in our presentations. Several delegations have
echoed the call for enhanced or more regularly
available mechanisms to investigate violations of
humanitarian law and human rights law in armed
conflict. I take particular note, for example, of the
recommendation of the representative of Argentina,
that the existing International Fact-Finding
Commission established under article 90 of Additional
Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions be considered by
parties to armed conflict as a neutral and independent
body designed for this purpose. This is not a new idea,
and I have to say that previous efforts to actually put it
to practical use have not hitherto been successful.
However, what is clear to me is that something more
systematic, more automatic and less politicized than
the system we have now would be well worthwhile.

On the question of accountability, let me also add
that, while there is room for legitimate disagreement
over the right process for any given situation, it does
not seem to be acceptable that a Government minister
in Sri Lanka should advocate blocking the activity of
the United Nations in that country to put pressure on
the Secretary-General over a legitimate decision that he
has taken to establish an advisory panel. I trust that the
assurances that we have received about the safety and
freedom of United Nations staff in Sri Lanka will be
fully restored or fully met, and that the Government of
Sri Lanka will clearly dissociate itself from the call of
one of its own ministers and reassert the normal
Government doctrine of collective responsibility for
Government policies.

In conclusion, let me once again thank all those
who have spoken in this debate and contributed to it. I
think it was a very rich and worthwhile debate. Let me
repeat, as this is probably my last word to the
Council- although not necessarily, as I said at the
beginning - my basic point that the gap between
principle and practice, between norms and the reality
on the ground, and between statements in the Council
and how many States behave outside it is simply too
wide at present to be acceptable. It must be bridged. If
it is not, not only will the condition of civilians on the
10-43968

ground deteriorate, but so will the credibility of the
Council and its members. Thank you again, Madam,
for giving me the opportunity to respond.

