Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Let me begin by
congratulating Malaysia and your team, Mr. President,
for conducting the Security Council's work so well
during this past month. We want to thank you, Sir,
for convening this meeting and for providing a very
useful focus for our discussions, including on conflict-
prevention and on the Council's working methods. In
our View, the Council's capability to prevent conflict
is inherently linked to its methods of work and to the
way Council members relate with each other and with
the Secretariat. I want to make a couple of points on
two related subjects, namely, the importance of timely
information from the Secretariat and some observations
on confidentiality.

For the Council to act early, it is important that it
be aware of the potential threats and security. We need
to be well informed of developments where the Council
has a mandate to respond. In situations where there are
conflicting narratives of developments, the Secretariat
has a particularly important role in providing an
authoritative account. We saw that last week with the
briefing on Western Sahara, which was very useful
in providing a clear account of developments on a
contentious and sensitive issue. In situations that are
developing rapidly, it is vital that all Council members
be brought up to speed on the situation on the ground
quickly. Otherwise, elected members can be at a
significant disadvantage in such matters.

Council members also need to be informed of
broader emerging issues and potential crises where a
political impasse risks boiling over, or where regional
issues threaten to aggravate a fragile peace. We are
thankful for the efforts that the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs has been making in that
regard. As Council members, we need to continue to
apply political energy and creativity on this issue - one
that we are going to take up next month in our presidency
of the Council.

The question of the timeliness of information also
relates to the reverse issue of confidentiality. During
our 20 months on the Council, we have championed
the importance of transparency in the Council's
work as an important element of our responsibility
to the membership that elected us, and of our own
legitimacy, as the Security Council acts on their behalf.
But confidentiality is an important counterpoint to
transparency. The Secretariat cannot provide frank
assessments if they are immediately relayed outside
the Consultations Room. The members of the Council
cannot have meaningful political-level exchanges when
sensitive discussions are repeated verbatim. Ideas cannot
be tested and explored and instead become limited to
set-piece interventions, safe for public consumption,
not the frank exchange that is necessary when dealing
with complex and novel issues. In our View, we need
to do much better in ensuring that confidentiality is
respected as much as appropriate. If the Consultations
Room is not private, inevitably discussions will go
elsewhere, which is not in anyone's interests.

We look forward to hearing further from the new
Council members on their reflections. I know that I can
count on members' support in the month ahead.

