Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): Mr. President, I thank you
and the other members of the Security Council for
convening this open debate.

The central question before us today is the same
one we have been discussing over the past few months:
In the face of the regrettable events in the Middle East,
what more can we expect the Security Council to do to
really assert its legitimate authority in dealing with this
grave threat to international peace and security? We all
agree that the record of Security Council initiatives in
recent weeks has been impressive in comparison with
the past practice of immobility and passivity. The
Council has now listened to the general membership on
several occasions: it has adopted resolution 1397
(2002), with a long-term vision for peace and stability
in the region; it has adopted resolution 1402 (2002),
with a checklist of steps to ensure a ceasefire and the
resumption of the political talks; and it has adopted
resolution 1403 (2002), calling for an immediate
withdrawal of the Israeli Defence Force from
Palestinian areas and backing the efforts that the
United States Secretary of State, Mr. Powell, was about
to launch with his visit to the region.

But the situation we face now represents a
negation of every single action taken by the Security
Council. The unfolding crisis has deteriorated even
further and resistance to comply with Security Council
decisions seems to be even more adamant. Instead of
withdrawing from Palestinian areas illegally occupied,
Israel has escalated its military offensive. We are
appalled by the human toll of these actions and by
reports of alleged atrocities that cannot be investigated
because all the areas affected, such as the refugee camp
in Jenin, were kept out of bounds as the destruction
continued. We are distressed at the material loss and
the suffering inflicted on innocent civilians.

We fail to understand what the Israeli leadership
really wants to achieve with these actions. But we
know that this is surely not the road to peace. And we
all agree with Secretary-General Kofi Annan that the
right of self-defence does not mean a blank cheque for
aggression. The international community is outraged
by the persistent denial of access by providers of
humanitarian assistance to the areas recently invaded.
And it simply cannot tolerate a fact-finding mission
mandated by the Commission on Human Rights not
taking place simply because Israel decides that it is
"inopportune". Israel must allow full freedom of
movement for humanitarian agencies in the Palestinian
territories, in compliance with universally adopted
human rights provisions and principles of international
humanitarian law.

The United Nations as a whole has a
responsibility to lay down a clear strategy to halt the
humanitarian catastrophe that continues to unfold in
the occupied territories and to establish a clear path
towards rekindling our hope for peace. Illegal
occupation, lack of respect for human rights and denial
of the right of self-determination are at the root of the
crisis in the Middle East, and those problems must be
addressed within a comprehensive strategy.

The search for a solution cannot be left entirely in
the hands of the two parties, as they seem to have been
dragged to the point where if left to themselves they
will never be able to restore mutual trust, which is a
requirement for the construction of a solid peace
process.

Once again we condemn all acts of violence and
the killing of innocent civilians, including the repulsive
resort to suicidal bombings as a means to advance any
legitimate political cause. We also condemn the
destruction caused by the disproportionate use of force
and persistent attempts to demoralize and humiliate the
Palestinian people and its leadership. Neither side can
take the high moral ground when acts of violence are at
issue. Violence and intolerance cannot prevail over
reason and truth.

We only hope that both Israeli and Palestinian
leaders will soon realize that their own peoples are on
the brink of exhaustion. Working for peace and
reconciliation requires a great deal of courage: not
exactly the same kind of courage needed to fight a war,
but rather the courage of statesmanship and the ability
to overcome intolerance and plant the seeds of a better
live for all.

The international community can certainly help,
and it must continue to offer its unfailing contribution
in order to push ahead the peace negotiations. We want
the Oslo process to resume from where it was left off
so many months ago. But it is ultimately up to the
Israeli and the Palestinian leaders to accept the simple
fact that they are bound to live together, that no
military solution can be imposed to end the conflict
and that they must return to the negotiating table. We
earnestly expect that they will finally give peace a
chance. But that will take place only if there is a total
pull-out from the occupied Palestinian cities and a
resolute decision by both parties to contain and lower
the level of violence, aggression and provocation.

At this very crucial moment, we all look to the
Security Council and ask a very legitimate question:
What can the Security Council do, and what will it do
next? Can it stand by silently or passively as its
repeated calls remain unheard, as its authority
continues to be challenged and as those engaged in
mediation efforts fully backed by the Council come
away empty-handed? Brazil welcomes the progressive
engagement of the Security Council in this question,
and we strongly encourage the Council to move
towards active involvement on the ground with full use
of the instruments at its disposal.

We fully agree that an effective international
presence in Palestine is immediately required. We think
it is of the utmost importance to monitor directly on the
ground the grave human rights and humanitarian
situation. We support the idea of a credible
international mechanism to help the parties implement
the recommendations of the Mitchell report and the
Tenet plan. We encourage the Security Council to
consider sending a mission to the region. We favour the
establishment in due course of a multinational force
mandated by the Council to ensure that the parties
observe a ceasefire and any other agreements that may
be reached between them.

We fully agree that an effective international
presence in Palestine is required immediately. We think
it is of the utmost importance to monitor directly, on
the ground, the grave human rights and humanitarian
situation. We support the idea of a credible
international mechanism to help the parties implement
the recommendations of the Mitchell report and the
Tenet plan. We encourage the Security Council to
consider sending a mission to the region. We favour the
establishment in due course of a multinational force
mandated by the Council to ensure that the parties
observe a ceasefire and any other agreements that they
may reach. We encourage the Council to develop a
clear strategy to set in motion a negotiating process on
the basis of the proposal made by Crown Prince
Abdullah, recently endorsed by the League of Arab
States.

We also want to express our full appreciation of
the efforts personally deployed by Secretary of State
Colin Powell, whose dedication to peace has always
been a important factor in the entire region.

Finally, I want to reaffirm the message, conveyed
time and again by the Brazilian authorities, including at
the highest level, of our strong support of the Security
Council and of all initiatives aimed at ensuring a
ceasefire and at resuming the political process towards
a peaceful settlement of the Palestinian question. We
are certainly prepared to offer our active cooperation in
any action that the Council and the international
community deem useful in pursuance of those
objectives.

