We thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Ms. Noura Ghazi for their briefings. As mentioned by the Special Envoy, the current situation in Syria is indeed very challenging, with the social and economic impacts of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the prolonged humanitarian situation due to the Syrian crisis. Clearly, there is no magic bullet that could solve all these challenges overnight. A strong commitment from the Syrian parties to remain engaged in a constructive dialogue is imperative as part of the step-by-step efforts necessary to address the various issues in Syria. Respecting a nationwide ceasefire is key to being able to sustain calm throughout Syria. My delegation reaffirms the importance of the implementation of a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process, facilitated by the United Nations, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), and it believes that a broader process should respect and ultimately restore Syria's sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity. I wish to focus on the following points in particular. First, the Syrian people need to make tangible progress on the ground, from ensuring the delivery of humanitarian assistances to all people in need to enhancing the capacities of laboratories and COVID-19 testing kits, and from maintaining the ceasefire agreement to securing a significant release of detainees, abductees and missing persons. We urge all relevant parties to step up their efforts in this regard. Secondly, the agreed agenda of the Constitutional Committee must be respected by all Syrian parties. We are pleased that the agenda has been agreed upon and that it will serve as the basis for the next round of Committee meetings, to be held in Geneva once international travel allows. As mentioned by Special Envoy Pedersen, we are also hopeful that the third session will be able to take place at the end of August. We all are aware that this is only the beginning of the process; however, this is a crucial step in order to advance to the next stage of the political track. Only through constructive and substantive discussions based on trust and confidence among its members will the Committee be able to reach its objectives. Despite the fact that the problems being faced by the Syrians cannot be addressed solely by this discussion, as highlighted by Special Envoy, we should spare no effort in capitalizing on all of the available positive momentum in order to open up every possible opportunity to end the suffering of the Syrian people. Thirdly, the international community should work together in helping the Syrian people to survive the dire economic situation. Syria's currency has plunged, and the prices of essential goods are rising. The Syrian people are now facing food insecurity, and major humanitarian needs are increasing across all sectors. COVID-19 mitigation measures are also facing challenges in these particular conditions. My delegation shares the Secretary-General's call for the waiver of sanctions that could undermine the capacity of countries to ensure access to food, health care and medical supplies in responding to the pandemic. After all, we must not lose faith in humankind. The risk of escalation in some areas in Syria is high, as reported by the Special Envoy. Indonesia urges all key parties to cease violence and to refrain from unnecessary actions that would put the Syrian people in an even more dangerous situation. To conclude, I wish to reiterate my delegation's strong support for Special Envoy Pedersen's good offices in facilitating discussions among the relevant stakeholders aimed at implementing resolution 2254 (2015) and giving peace in Syria a chance.
