Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to
begin by thanking the co-leads for organizing this
important and timely mission. Allow me to also thank
the Governments of both Bangladesh and Myanmar

for their cooperation, as well as the Secretariat and the
United Nations country teams for their support.

The Council's visit allowed members to see for
themselves the massive refugee crisis sparked by the
widespread violence that has taken place in Rakhine
state since last August, to hear at first-hand from
those who fled the violence, as well as those who have
remained in Rakhine, and to assess the situation in
Myanmar and the possibility for voluntary, safe and
dignified returns.

What the Council saw during its visit left an indelible
mark. There was shock at the stories of the brutality
suffered by the Rohingya. There was appreciation for
the open and generous reception that refugees received
in Bangladesh. And, there was alarm at the scale of the
crisis and the response necessary. Ensuring the full
implementation of the Council's presidential statement
of 6 November 2017 (S/PRST/2017/22) remains
relevant and urgent. The Council's visit demonstrated
our determination to make sure that happens. The
appointment by the Secretary-General of Christine
Schraner Burgener as his Special Envoy for Myanmar
is another step in that regard. We would like to express
our strong support for the Special Envoy and her work.

The Council's visit serves to underline the need
to remain seized of the situation and to increase our
efforts to find a solution to the crisis. Several matters
must now be urgently addressed.

First, we need to urgently respond to the needs of the
refugees. We commend the efforts of the Government
of Bangladesh and the communities hosting Rohingya
refugees. As witnessed by the Council members, the
immensity of the crisis means that they must have
support to sustain the response needed. The upcoming
monsoon rains will likely further exacerbate the
difficult situation for the refugees. We encourage all
States to continue and increase their support.

Secondly, we need to ensure that the conditions for
voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable returns are
created. It is clear that, for the process of returns to
begin, conditions that allow for returns to be voluntary,
secure and dignified, in line with international law
and the principle of non-refoulment, must exist. It is
essential that the root causes that led to the violence
and displacement in the first place be addressed in
full. During the Council's visit, it was clear that there
exists an urgent need for security, reconstruction and
livelihood programmes that benefit all communities in
Rakhine. The implementation of the recommendations
of the report of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine
State must be stepped-up, in close cooperation with
international and regional partners, including seriously
addressing the issue of citizenship.
Refugees told the Council that those who do decide
to return voluntarily want to be able to do so to their
place of origin. When conditions do allow for return,
it is important to avoid setting up new internally
displaced person camps or camp-like arrangements
in Rakhine. Transition and reception centres need
to be temporary. We encourage the Governments of
Myanmar and Bangladesh to expedite the ongoing
bilateral consultations and efforts, and to implement
the memorandum of understanding and agreement in a
timely manner. International actors should continue to
support the efforts to that end. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
with its global mandate as the international refugee
agency, must be associated with the process.

The stories Council members heard of sexual
violence were harrowing. Particular attention must be
given to the perspectives and special needs of survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence, including
protection needs in the return process.

Thirdly, United Nations access and engagement is
essential. It is time for the Government of Myanmar
to grant the United Nations, as well as other domestic
and international non-governmental organizations,
full and unhindered access to Rakhine state. We
welcome the United Nations leadership on Rakhine
under the Resident Coordinator. The memorandum of
understanding with the United Nations Development
Programme and UNHCR should now be concluded as
soon as possible. Access is also essential to support
the implementation of the Advisory Commission's
recommendations. In that regard, we welcome the
renewed commitment to implement the Commission's
recommendations and to work with the United Nations,
as set out in the State Counsellor's press release of
1 May following her meeting with members of the
Security Council.

Finally, numerous reports, including testimonies
heard by Council members themselves, of systematic,
widespread and coordinated acts of violence strongly
indicate that crimes against humanity have been
committed. Impunity for such crimes cannot be
tolerated, and those responsible must be held to
account. All States have a responsibility to address
and prevent violations of international law, including
human rights violations and abuses. In this case the
primary responsibility lies with the Government of
Myanmar, which must genuinely address the issue of
accountability. Otherwise, the international community
will need to assist and look seriously into the possible
mechanisms available for that purpose. We are aware
of the ongoing process at the International Criminal
Court. Without true accountability, the trust needed
for refugees to return will be hard to garner. We fully
support the work of the fact-finding mission, which
should be given full and unhindered access to do its
work. Evidence-gathering at Cox's Bazar could also
prove to be an important contribution.

The visit was a demonstration of solidarity with the
refugees sheltering in the camps in Bangladesh. There
was a strong and clear call from the refugees for the
Council's ongoing support and action. We must not let
them down. The visit also represented solidarity with
the Government of Bangladesh and the Bangladeshi
host communities, whom we must continue to support.
The visit also represented commitment to supporting
the Government of Myanmar to create the conditions
for return and to build peace and prosperity for all
people in Rakhine state. We invite them to fully engage
with the United Nations agencies on the ground and
with other regional and international partners. Sweden
stands ready to continue to support Myanmar on its
path towards democracy and peace.

