Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Before I start, I want to pick up on what both the American and the German Ambassadors said about the Holocaust commemoration, which of course takes place this year. It is a very important commemoration. Some of us will be joining the Secretary-General at the weekend in New York to commemorate this important anniversary. Turning to the open debate, the year 2020 opened with a new crisis in the Middle East following the killing of Qasem Soleimani in response to strikes by Iraqi militias against coalition bases, and the downing if Ukrainian Airlines Flight PS-752. The United Kingdom continues to urge all parties to de-escalate following the events and Iran to take the opportunity to come in from the cold and pursue its legitimate interests in the region peacefully and with full respect for international rules. I would like to echo what the German representative said about recognition of Israel in this context. As demonstrated by the briefings we heard today, it is right the Security Council also remain engaged to resolve one of the longest-standing conflicts on its agenda, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We have made clear our concern over the situation on the ground, which, as the Secretary-General noted in his assessment last month (see S/2019/938), has deteriorated over the past three years, and the figures that the Under-Secretary- General cited are troubling and compelling. All sideshave a responsibility to arrest that deterioration and to create an atmosphere more conducive to peace. For Israel, that means, first, an immediate halt to settlement expansion. We condemn the Israeli Government's advancement this month of yet more plans for more than 1,900 housing units across the West Bank. It is the United Kingdom's long-standing position that settlements are illegal under international law and undermine the viability of the two-State solution. Secondly, Israel must avoid any suggestion that parts of the occupied Palestinian territories should be annexed. Such a move would be contrary to international law and damaging to peace efforts and could not pass unchallenged. Thirdly, there must be an immediate end to the demolition of Palestinian-owned homes and structures, as well as the eviction of Palestinians from their homes. The targeting of donor-funded structures in Area C is of particular concern. We call on the Israeli authorities to provide a clear and transparent route to construction for Palestinians in Area C. Turning to the responsibilities of the Palestinians, first, we unreservedly condemn the indiscriminate attacks against Israeli civilians by groups such as Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad. Such attacks are completely unacceptable and a violation of international law and need to cease immediately. Secondly, there should be renewed efforts towards Palestinian reconciliation. We encourage those involved in the reconciliation process to allow the Palestinian Authority to fully resume its Government functions in Gaza and ensure compliance with the Quartet principles. Thirdly, we call on the Palestinian Authority to set a date for free and fair elections in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and in Gaza as soon as possible. Genuine democratic national elections for all Palestinians are crucial to the establishment of a viable and sovereign Palestinian State. The Security Council has arole to play in identifying and containing future flashpoints in conflicts. The resumption of the Great March of Return protests in March is once such possible flashpoint. Hamas operatives have cynically exploited those protests in the past. The United Kingdom's commitment to Israel's security is unwavering. Any protests must adhere to the principle of non-violence. We reiterate our long- standing concerns about the manner in which the Israel Defense Forces police non-violent protests, including the use of live ammunition and excessive force, and we call on Israel to adhere to the principles of necessity and proportionality. Turning to the economic and humanitarian situation in Gaza, as we have heard, it remains dire. The United Kingdom will provide approximately $21 million in humanitarian assistance to Gaza in this financial year and, to help address the underlying causes, we are more than tripling our spending on economic development programming, providing some $75 million between 2018 and 2023. Ultimately, only peace, stability and the easing of movement and access restrictions will allow the necessary investments to be made in a sustainable way. We understand and share the deep frustration on all sides at the lack of progress on the Middle East peace process. A just and lasting resolution that ends the occupation and delivers peace for both Israelis and Palestinians is long overdue. We remain committed to achieving a two-State solution and our long-standing position is clear. We support a negotiated settlement recognized by all sides, leading to a safe and secure Israel living alongside a viable and sovereign Palestinian State, based on the 1967 borders, with agreed land swaps, Jerusalem as the shared capital of both States and a just, fair, agreed and realistic settlement for refugees. We look forward to working with colleagues to advance our shared objectives of peace and prosperity in the year ahead.
