Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Your presence among us here this morning,
Mr. Minister, underscores the importance ofthis meeting
and that which your country places in its current role
as President of the Security Council for April. I also
express my gratitude to Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo for
updating us not only on the current situation in Darfur,
but also with regard to the country and the events that
the Sudan is experiencing. We also thank Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, for
her informative briefing.
We are very concerned about the violence that is
negatively affecting the people in Darfur, especially
those in the internally displaced persons camps in the
aftermath of the overthrow of General Al-Bashir. With
regard to the current political situation, the Government
of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea is closely
following current political developments in Khartoum
following the removal of General Omer Al-Bashir, the
resignation of the Head of the Transitional Military
Council, Awad Mohamed Ahmed Bin Auf, and the
appointment of his replacement, General Abdel
Fattah Al-Burhan Abdelrahman, which we believe to
be actions taken for the benefit of the people and in
response to their demands. In that regard, my country
reminds the Transitional Military Council of its role
in safeguarding the security of citizens and listening
closely to their demands to ensure the stability of
the country. Moreover, we welcome the negotiations
under way between the Transitional Military Council
and the political parties on how to guide the Sudan
towards establishing a civilian Government. We
hope that the visit by the members of the Transitional
Military Council to the African Union in Addis
Ababa and the visit to Khartoum by the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission will contribute to a
complete normalization of the situation in the country.
Accordingly, we take note of and support the call of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union on
the Transitional Military Council urging it to transfer
power to a civilian Government.

We regret the slow progress in the political process
based on Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. In that
regard, increased support needs to be provided for the
political process, led by the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel. Equatorial Guinea continues
to believe that, in order to resolve land disputes
leading to violence, mediation and reconciliation
efforts are needed to prevent and end such conflicts.
We commend the efforts of African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in its
weapons collection campaign. Its full implementation
is of the utmost importance not only for preserving the
current peaceful situation in Darfur but also in view
of restoring lasting peace to that area, especially given
that this important programme is now being carried out
in the area of Jebel Marra.

Equatorial Guinea requests that, given the current
political situation in the Sudan, the international
community agree to confer the necessary level of
trust upon the Transitional Military Council so that
the prerequisite negotiations can be carried out among
all the political actors to establish a stable transitional
Government and lead to the holding of peaceful and
inclusive elections in the Sudan.

I warmly congratulate the Mr. Mamabolo, Joint
Special Representative of the African Union and
the Secretary-General for Darfur, and the entire
UNAMID team and urge them to continue their work
to improve the lives of the people of Darfur. I conclude
by expressing my hope that the situation in the Sudan
will be normalized as soon as possible with the actions
that the Transitional Military Council is taking, which
are likely to have a positive impact on the situation
in Darfur and end the violence that Mr. Mamabolo
mentioned earlier.

