Major General Ngondi: It is a great honour to
brief the Security Council on the need for an in-mission
assessment of pre-deployment training of United
Nations peacekeepers.

Troops selected for United Nations missions
undergo pre-deployment training that is administered
by the troop- contributing countries (TCCs), as part
of national preparations. The main purpose of the
pre-deployment training is to re-orientate the troops'
operational capabilities to operate in a specific
peacekeeping environment and situation. In addition,
the pre-deployment training period is used to organize
and equip troops in accordance with approved and
agreed operational requirements, as well as to establish
mechanisms for being able to self-sustain their

contingent and/or contingent-owned equipment in the
field.

The expectations are that troops deployed to a
peacekeeping operation will be mission-capable in
terms of knowledge, skills and attitudes; have the right
equipment and enablers, as asked for in the statement of
unit requirements by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations; will be covered for reimbursement
purposes by an agreed and signed memorandum of
understanding; and are expected to have a high state
of operational readiness which needs to be maintained
and sustained by the force throughout its deployment
period.

Prescribed induction-training and initial inspection
of contingent-owned equipment are conducted when
troops arrive in the mission area. This training focuses
on individual skills, not the collective ones, and
cannot therefore be relied upon to validate the entire
pre-deployment training. While both the training and
contingent-owned equipment inspections are valuable,
there is no assurance of mission-capable sustainability.

Basic guidance documents and policies are
available and continue to be produced to inform
and steer the TCCs in training their contingents on
mission-essential tasks to ensure that their troops have
mission-capable capacities. The documents, including
the generic TCC guidelines, also guide the TCCs on
how to conduct an evaluation of the training activities
undertaken. It is worth noting that, while the same
documents are a considerable source of information for
field commanders to ensure that their units conform
to United Nations operational standards, the force
headquarters does not have the means in the field to
ascertain the same.

The aim of this short briefing is to highlight the
need for an in-mission assessment of pre-deployment
training and the TCCs' capability to self-sustain in
accordance with the United Nations standard level
of contingents' operational readiness, with a view to
recommending the establishment of a mechanism
within force headquarters that will undertake the same.

I am fully aware that the TCCs are responsible
for pre-deployment training before deploying their
contingents into the mission area. This training
should be validated on arrival in the mission area in
order to assure the force leadership of the contingents'
operational readiness. Currently, force headquarters do
not have the capacity to conduct the validation.

Capability gaps may be established during the
in-mission assessment andrequire bridging orrectifying.
However, bridging can be done only through in-mission
training, and evaluation to ascertain the achievement
of the training objectives is necessary. For this reason,
force headquarters are required to have the capacity to
formulate training plans and training objectives, and
subsequently to evaluate the achievement of the same.

Over the years, it has been observed in the field that
some contingents encounter numerous challenges in
maintaining their equipment. Therefore there is a need
to assess the contingents' sustainability procedures and
policy to ensure that they meet the desired effectiveness
and United Nations standards. Timely interventions on
sustenance efforts will guarantee mission capability.
Force headquarters do not have the capacity to
evaluate the sustainability frameworks of the deployed
contingents.
Every mission is unique and has its own challenges.
There is a need to keep on analysing emerging trends
and challenges with a view to developing viable
intervention measures. Such measures include the
formulation of training plans and training objectives and
the conduct of training in order to impart the necessary
skills. That function requires a suitable arrangement in
the field. Additionally, force headquarters have several
staff functions that make the entire force effective.
Those functions also require monitoring and evaluation
to ensure that the headquarters operates at an optimal
level.

Owing to the aforesaid, I strongly recommend
the establishment of an evaluation team within force
headquarters that will assist the force leadership
in sustaining mission-capable troops as well as a
functional headquarters. The team would be invaluable
in evaluating contingents and the force headquarters
itself, and in drawing the attention of commanders to
areas requiring their intervention.

Lastly, the evaluation team should comprise experts
in all of the envisaged functional areas, which mainly
encompass mission essential tasks, staff functions and
sustainability. The team should be directly responsible
to the force leadership with respect to monitoring,
evaluating and sustaining the operational readiness of
the entire force.

