President Mkapa: This is one of the rare
moments when the Security Council is meeting at the
summit level, and I thank you very much, Madam
President, for organizing this historic meeting.

Terrorism, violence and conflict top the list of
current threats to international and regional peace and
security. Terrorism and conflicts undermine the social
and economic development of all States and threaten
global stability, security and prosperity.

It is important that the Security Council, as the
custodian of international peace and security, address
not only those threats, but also their underlying causes.
We must not only manage and resolve conflicts, but
also, and especially, we have to prevent conflicts and
terrorist acts.

Symptoms have their causes, and unless causes
are addressed and understood, symptoms will not go
away. When affected people do not see light at the end
of the tunnel, when they lose all hope, then poverty,
injustice and exclusion become fertile grounds for
crime, violence and, yes, even terrorism.

While we may not have a common definition and
understanding of terrorism, I do not think that we have
disagreements about its impact upon our societies.
However one defines it, terrorism and conflicts always
elicit, by design or in consequence, the common
characteristics of anxiety, suspense, fear, senselessness,
violence, destruction and the disruption of the social
and economic situation of our countries and peoples.

My country has experienced in practical terms the
negative impact of both terrorism and conflict. We
were the direct victims of terrorism when, in 1998, the
United States embassy in Dar es Salaam was attacked
by terrorists, resulting in the loss of Tanzanian lives,
human injuries and the destruction of property.

At the same time, my country is situated in a
neighbourhood that has a long history of deadly and
destabilizing conflicts. We know what such conflicts
can do to people. We have lived their spill-over effects;
we still are living them. As a country and a region, we
have tried our level best to address them, and we are
continuing to do so. The United Nations has been very
helpful to us in our efforts to resolve conflicts in the
Great Lakes Region. Its contribution was particularly
useful in the organization of the first International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region in Dar es
Salaam last year.

In the context of this regional development, we
fervently affirm that the focus on terrorism and conflict
is not misplaced. In the spirit of multilateralism, we
should use this opportunity to underline the importance
of strengthening the United Nations role in preventing
and combating terrorism and conflict. We need to agree
on and pursue an effective strategy that will
legitimately and comprehensively address the root
causes and underlying conditions of terrorism and
conflict. That calls for a holistic approach to
prevention, one that addresses and recognizes the
nexus of and the linkages between development and
security.

Terrorism is evil and despicable. There should be
no room for equivocation or inaction. Violent conflicts
are evil and preventable. Let us summon the will and
the resources to build an effective global partnership
between States and institutions that will work in unison
to prevent and combat terrorism and violent conflicts.

