Mr. O'Brien: Iamjoining the Security Council from
the offices of the International Maritime Organization
in London, and I would like to thank Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura for his briefing, whose contents
coincide with those contained in our presentation to the
European Parliament yesterday.

For over five years now, the United Nations and the
entire humanitarian community have raised the alarm
about the devastating impact of the conflict in Syria
on millions of ordinary men, women and children.
We have pleaded that the Security Council and the
international community come together to ensure that
both civilians and civilian infrastructure are protected
in accordance with basic humanitarian and international
obligations, that access be granted to provide lifesaving
humanitarian assistance and that all efforts be made to
reach a political solution to the conflict. Our calls, and
the requests, even the demands, of the Council have
largely gone ignored.

The parties to the conflict in Syria have shown,
time and again, that they are willing to take any action
or do any deed to secure military advantage, even if
it means killing, maiming or besieging civilians into
submission in the process. There are no limits or red
lines left to cross. The rules ofwar - sacrosanct notions
born out of generations of costly and painful lessons
and established more than 150 years ago, in 1864 to be
precise, in the First Geneva Convention - have been
systematically disregarded in Syria.

Nowhere has the cruelty of this war been more
grimly witnessed than in Aleppo. Aleppo, one of the
world's oldest continually inhabited cities and Syria's
manufacturing capital, has been recklessly destroyed
over the course of the past five years. We have all seen
the harrowing images of bombs and mortars raining
down in recent days, weeks and months on civilian
areas, residential houses, schools, medical facilities,
water and electric stations, and public markets. There
are constant, tormenting images of people murdered,
bloody, and exhausted. There is constant bombing and
shelling in plain sight, occurring night and day - day
in and day out. The noose of the siege has tightened,
and those civilians trapped are in desperate conditions.
Those attacks have not been limited to eastern Aleppo
but have also killed and injured civilians in western
Aleppo and damaged civilian infrastructure. As the
Council has heard me say before, Aleppo has become
the apex of what has become a catalogue of horrors in
Syria. Its people have been living in a long terrifying
nightmare-reality that no human being should have
to endure.

The intensity of attacks on eastern Aleppo
neighbourhoods over the past few days has forced
thousands of civilians to flee to other parts of the
city. In the past four days, numerous civilians have
reportedly been killed. Just today, we received a report
that scores of people were killed in a single air strike
this morning. It is estimated that up to 25,000 people
have been displaced from their homes in eastern
Aleppo since Saturday. That is the estimate that
Staffan de Mistura has just given, and I do not have
any further information other than that which were able
to get at approximately the same time yesterday. We
will keep the Council updated. That number includes
approximately 13,500 people 60 to 70 per cent of whom
are women and children in a collective centre and cotton
factory in Jibreen, a Government-held area to the east
of eastern Aleppo city; 500 with family members in
western Aleppo; 8,500 in collective shelters in Sheikh
Maqsoud, a Kurdish enclave north of eastern Aleppo
city; as well as tens of thousands displaced within
eastern Aleppo itself.

As the fighting continues unabated, the situation
is fluid and those statistics are indeed changing by
the hour and the day. It is likely that thousands more
will flee should fighting further spread and intensify
over the coming days. The Syrian Arab Red Crescent
(SARC) and local humanitarian partners supported
by the United Nations are responding to the needs
of internally displaced families in Jibreen, Sheikh
Maqsoud and elsewhere. That includes preparing
hot meals and bread to families, ensuring medical
assistance to the sick and injured, providing potable
water and distributing sanitation and hygiene kits, and
other basic relief items such as blankets and mattresses.

The United Nations has prepositioned stocks to
support the response including non-food items for
45,000 people; water, sanitation, hygiene and nutrition
supplies for 80,000 people; and food for 150,000 people.
Those stocks can be replenished within 48 hours
from the United Nations hub in Homs and elsewhere
as necessary. It is therefore absolutely vital that the
Government of Syria enable us to deploy in safety and
without undue restrictions all essential international
and national staff to Aleppo to increase our capacity to
respond effectively to those growing needs and address
protection concerns for civilians.

We must recognize that, even though some people
have been able to flee the fighting, many have gone
from one terrifying situation to what they consider to
be another. Aside from the dangers associated with
attempting to flee across active front lines, we have
received reports that non-State armed groups are
preventing civilians from leaving areas under their
control. There are also deep protection concerns that
upon reaching Government-controlled areas, civilians
perceived to have links or connections with non-State
armed groups, including humanitarian workers,
potentially face arbitrary arrests, detention or worse.
Trapped in Aleppo are also dozens of humanitarian
staff who have heroically assisted civilians and are now
also losing their lives. According to the World Health
Organization, three members of the health staff were
killed adding to the many other Syrian doctors, health
workers and civilians.

As we have seen before, across Syria and
throughout the conflict, men, women and children
have been routinely arrested at Government-controlled
checkpoints before being transferred to one of dozens of
official or secret Government-run detention facilities.
They are often held incommunicado and indefinitely
while facing the risk ofbeing subjected to torture and ill-
treatment, extrajudicial killings or being disappeared.

I call on all parties to the conflict to adhere to and
respect international humanitarian law. I remind all
parties to the conflict that civilians and those hors de
combat must be respected and protected at all times.
Any evacuation of civilians must be safe, voluntary,
and to a place of their choosing. Parties must allow
humanitarian organizations safe and unimpeded access
to bring life-saving help to those displaced and identify
and respond to protection threats. And finally, it is
imperative that all those displaced are allowed to return
voluntarily and in safety and dignity to their homes as
soon as the situation allows.

I am extremely concerned about the fate of the
remaining civilians in the besieged areas of eastern
Aleppo city. These people have been besieged for
nearly 150 days now and most, simply, do not have the
means to survive for much longer. Intensified fighting
and aerial bombardment continues to occur resulting in
civilian casualties and injuries. As of today, as a result
of the bombardment and shelling, all hospitals have
been directly hit several times, and there is no properly
functioning hospital in eastern Aleppo city except for
one trauma unit. All other primary medical facilities
are operating at minimum capacity and do not have
trauma-treatment capabilities, leaving most wounded
civilians unable to get the most basic treatment. With
few, if any, ambulances available, we are receiving
reports of wounded civilians being rushed to medical
facilities on vegetable carriages. Access to clean water
is scarce. People have resorted to scavenging as United
Nations humanitarian food stocks have been exhausted
while prices of scarce basic food and fuel supplies
have dramatically risen to levels that most remaining
civilians are unable to afford. People are trapped and
terrified. They are running out of time.

Just as we are ready to respond to all those displaced,
the United Nations and its partners also remain ready to
provide immediate assistance and medical evacuations
for civilians inside besieged parts of eastern Aleppo in
line with the United Nations humanitarian four-point
plan that we have been seeking to implement since early
November. Furthermore, truckloads of humanitarian
supplies stand ready to deliver humanitarian assistance
to eastern Aleppo from Turkey and western Aleppo.
For the sake of humanity, we call on and plead with the
parties and those with influence to do everything in
their power to protect civilians and enable access to the
besieged part of eastern Aleppo before it becomes one
giant graveyard.

Indiscriminate shelling also hits civilian-populated
areas of western Aleppo, killing and injuring civilians.
Civilian infrastructure, including schools and medical
facilities, has also been destroyed, as I reported to
the Council last week (see S/PV.7817). Since July,
approximately 70,000 people have been displaced
within western Aleppo as a result of fighting and
indiscriminate shelling. Overall, the United Nations
estimates that up to 400,000 internally displaced
persons (IDPs) now live in western Aleppo. The United
Nations, SARC and partners continue to respond to the
needs of pre-existing IDPs in western Aleppo, as well
as the wave of new displacement from eastern Aleppo
in recent days.

While the world is watching events in Aleppo,
another 700,000 people are in other besieged areas across
the country, mostly in rural Damascus surrounded by
Government forces. As winter approaches, they are
trapped and petrified, and as they watch the chilling
events in Aleppo unfold, they are asking: Will Ibe next?
It may be too late for many of the people of eastern
Aleppo, but surely the Council can come together, stop
the brutality and also prevent that a similar fate does
not befall other Syrians. What they and we need to see
above all is three things: first, real respect and protection
of civilians and civilian infrastructure; secondly, safe,
rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access; and thirdly,
an end to brutal sieges for once and for all.

These are neither new nor complicated demands,
but common threads of humankind that we all have a
responsibility to rally around. And those parties that
cannot or will not live up to their basic obligations
should know that they will one day be held accountable
for their actions. I should add that in all my points of
advocacy for the suffering people caught up in this
crisis, the overwhelming question that comes to me
from politicians, the affected people and journalists
is: "Why on Earth can the Security Council not come
together and unite to put a stop to this suffering?"

The people of Syria have suffered far too much and
for far too long. United Nations humanitarian agencies,
SARC and our non-governmental organization partners
are doing everything they can to meet those needs. But,
as we have repeatedly said, the solution to this crisis
does not rest with us. More than anything, I urge all
Council members for a political solution so that we can
give some semblance of hope to the many millions of
Syrian families who will in fact fail to be able to go to
sleep tonight, but they will be hungry and they will be
sick and they will be fearing for their lives.

