Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary- General Feltman for his valuable
briefing and Ms. Imam for sharing her thoughts.

It was six months ago, in a dusty internally
displaced person's camp in Maiduguri, that we heard
Ms. Imam's testimony, together with those of many
others. It really brought home to me, and probably to
several of us who were there, the human cost of the
crisis in the Lake Chad basin. It was therefore very
good to hear from Ms. Imam again today. It is vital that
the Security Council continue to hear from those most
affected by the issues on our agenda and continue to
use those analyses and from-the-heart interventions to
inform our decision-making.

Sadly, as both Ms. Imam and the Secretary-
General's report (S/2017/764) make clear, six months
on from our visit to the Lake Chad basin, the situation
remains deeply troubling. Boko Haram has indeed been
degraded and territory has indeed been reclaimed, but
Boko Haram is far from a spent force. It is down but not
out, shifting its tactics from land grabs to opportunistic
attacks. Maiduguri now faces weekly suicide attacks,
many from girls who are forced into suicide bombing.
Over 400 people have been killed since we visited. Boko
Haram's shameful and sickening abductions of young
women and girls continue unabated. Those who return
continue to face stigma and discrimination, which is
why the United Kingdom will host a ministerial event
here on 18 September, in order to launch a new set of
global principles to tackle such stigma.

The continuing barbarity is only exacerbating the
humanitarian crises. Since we visited, the number of
Nigerians seeking refuge in neighbouring countries
has only marginally decreased, with nearly 2 million
people still displaced in north-east Nigeria and over
8 million in need ofurgent, lifesaving assistance. While
the number of forced returns has fallen, we have seen
thousands of people pressured back into areas where
they do not feel safe. It is therefore clear that we should
all redouble our efforts to implement the commitments
that we made in resolution 2349 (2017).

The United Kingdom will play its part. We remain
committed to partnering with Nigeria and its neighbours
to degrade and defeatBoko Haram. We remain committed
to helping people in need in the region, having scaled
up our humanitarian support to $130 million this year.
We have announced an additional $260 million over
the next four years, as part of the north-east Nigeria
transition to development programme.

We all need to play our part. The Nigeria
Humanitarian Fund was launched in February with
an appeal for $1 billion this year. As of last month,
that appeal is less than half funded. As the Secretary-
General's report makes clear, insufficient funding from
the donor community continues to limit the provision
of food aid, development and recovery activities.

Just as the international community must act, so
too should Governments in the region. We look to
the Government of Nigeria and affected countries
to provide greater resources where they can and to
further prioritize the humanitarian response. We also
call on them to expedite all remaining registrations
for humanitarian organization in the region, as the
Secretary-General's report notes.

We welcome the increased civil-military coordination
in the humanitarian effort and urge that to continue.
However, we deeply regret the raid on the United
Nations red roof compound by the Nigerian military
last month. Nevertheless, we do welcome the swift
response by the authorities.

It is clear that a long-term solution will be found
only by addressing the root causes that led to Boko
Haram's emergence, which I think was the main lesson
for many of us on our visit. That search for longer-
term solutions and root causes requires a regional
plan to address the political, economic, governance,
transparency and accountability issues. If such an
effort is to succeed, it must respect human rights. The
ongoing reports of torture, arbitrary arrests and sexual
exploitation are deeply concerning and must stop. We
therefore support calls for greater funding to strengthen
the United Nations monitoring presence on the ground.

Finally, the role of women in the crisis cannot be
overlooked. We reiterate the Council's call for greater
engagement between regional Governments, the
Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF) and women's
civil society, as well as the deployment of a gender
adviser to the MNJTF.

In short, there is a lot more that all of us need to
do. Six months on from our Visit we cannot afford to
lose focus. I hope that through briefings like the one
we heard today from Ms. Imam and Mr. Feltman we
will all be reminded of what is at stake, just as we were
in Maiduguri.

