Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The conflict affecting
Syria goes far beyond its own borders and into the
arena of public opinion, which is one of its most active
battlegrounds, as we have seen in this Chamber. It has
been emphatically stated that the humanitarian crisis in
Syria is the greatest disaster of the twenty-first century.
Some have asked where the moral compass is of those
who defend the Syrian Government, and in that regard
call for there to be no impunity for what is happening
on the ground.

Unfortunately, the moral voices among us seem to
ignore what their actions led to in Iraq and Libya before
the conflict in Syria. We ask: What can the international
community do so that those who are responsible for
fuelling such conflicts are held accountable before
justice, in order to ensure that the interventionist
agendas that have caused such chaos, which merit
condemnation, are not repeated?

Our country is alarmed by the humanitarian
situation in Syria, as we have expressed on many
occasions. The Syrian people are victims of an armed
conflict that has been fuelled by foreign intervention
and specific geopolitical agendas, which have violated
the sovereignty of that country.

In that perverse dynamic, we should be conscious
of the fact that terrorism is the principle cause of the
conflict and its negative impacts. The Al-Nusra Front
has positioned itself in the east of the city, which has
caused true chaos, establishing links with the so-called
moderate opposition. That alliance, instead of looking
out for the security of civilians in eastern Aleppo, has
prevented them from leaving the area, even through the
use of force, as has been stated by many ofthe displaced
persons who have been able to leave the area.

If the 9 September agreement between the Russian
Federation and the United States had been implemented,
we would be facing a more encouraging scenario.
The lack of willingness from the relevant players to
distinguish the so-called moderate opposition from
the threat of the Al-Nusra Front and its other allies is
the real reason for the collapse of negotiations. That,
together with the deliberate bombing by the global
coalition against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria
(ISIS) on locations held by Syrian forces, has ended
up destroying all attempts to bring peace and stability
to Syria.

Our country is convinced that Syria has the right to
defend its sovereignty and territorial integrity against
attacks perpetrated by terrorist organizations. It is
important to point out that the Government of Syria is
making a very significant effort to counter the scourge
of terrorism in its territory. The recovery of every area
held by ISIS and Al-Qaida is a guarantee of peace and
stability in the region. Examples of that are the cities
that are under the control of the country's authorities.

We regret that humanitarian suffering is being used
to advance the specific agendas of other countries,
which in no way benefit the people of Syria. We reiterate
that this humanitarian crisis, caused by more than five
years of war and fuelled from abroad, must be analysed
in a balanced manner. We insist that the humanitarian
issue requires an approach that is balanced, objective
and impartial.

Recently, we have noted that more than 10,000
civilians have fled from areas controlled by terrorists
in search of housing, food and medicines, which they
were deprived of by the Al-Nusra Front and its allies.
We therefore believe that the United Nations should
provide humanitarian assistance to those areas that
have been liberated from the terrorists, so as to provide
more support to the Syrian population. We also agree
with the idea that both humanitarian groups and the
International Syria Support Group, which is working
on a cessation of hostilities, should continue their
work, since the participation of a larger number of
neighbouring countries, as well as the international
community, in finding a solution for the Syrian people
would be tremendously helpful.

In conclusion, we reiterate that a political and
peaceful solution is the only possible option to achieve
peace and stability in Syria. We therefore need to support
the diplomatic efforts under way by the Special Envoy
and his attempts to relaunch peace talks in Geneva.

