Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I
would like to start by thanking Special Representative
Yamamoto for his briefing and Ambassador Saikal for
his statement.

We also warmly welcome Ramiz Bakhtiar as the
first youth representative for Afghanistan, and thank
the United States presidency for inviting him. Ramiz
was elected in June as part of a joint initiative by
Afghanistan and the Kingdom of the Netherlands. We
are very pleased to see Ramiz here today to give Afghan
youth a voice and have it be heard on a global stage.
It is important that the Council fully take the youth
perspective into account, as we agreed in resolution
2419 (2018), on youth, peace and security. Let the
briefing of Ramiz be the start ofa new normal in which
we do not only talk about the future generation, but also
let the future generation participate in the talking.

Allow me to focus on three issues today: the
upcoming elections, Afghanistan's long-term reform
agenda and the importance of youth.

The importance of the Afghan parliamentary
elections on 20 October and presidential elections on
20 April next year cannot be overstated. It is absolutely
critical that the elections be free, transparent and
inclusive, and that they include the active involvement
of youth and women, both as voters and as candidates.
Afghanistan and the Independent Election Commission
will have to do their utmost to ensure that the elections
take place in an orderly and credible way. Political
actors from across the political spectrum have to remain
engaged with the political process in a constructive
and peaceful manner, while they uphold the highest
democratic standards. Threats of disengagement or
boycotts are not in the interest of the Afghan people.

For successful elections, it is also indispensable to
have a secure environment. We are deeply concerned
by the recent spike in violence, following the score of
tragic terrorist attacks and the unjustifiable offensives
of the Taliban. The displayed contempt for the lives of
innocent civilians is unacceptable, and we condemn it in
the strongest terms. We urge the Taliban to reciprocate
the offer of the Afghan Government to engage in
direct peace negotiations. There is no alternative to an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process.
My second point concerns Afghanistan's long-term
reform agenda. If Afghanistan is to enjoy durable peace
and prosperity, reliable and resilient public institutions
need to be in place. Afghanistan's transformation
decade will soon reach its halfway mark, and the
upcoming Geneva Ministerial Conference will provide
the opportunity to assess progress and to align priorities
for the coming period.

To achieve the agreed objectives, the Afghan
Government will need to step up its efforts to end
corruption, strengthen governance and the rule of
law, and guarantee respect for human rights, with
an important support role for the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), of
course. Such reforms will provide a new generation
with the opportunity to contribute to a more just,
stable and unified Afghanistan. We look forward to the
participation of all interested countries in the Geneva
Conference, expressing their full solidarity and support
for Afghanistan.

Allow me to zoom in on the importance ofinvolving
youth in the discussions that fundamentally shape their
future. Ramiz and so many of his Afghan peers are
determined to contribute to the future of Afghanistan.
That sends a very hopeful and powerful message. In a
country where more than 63 per cent of the population is
under 25, the ambition and commitment of young people
represent one of Afghanistan's greatest opportunities.
Their active involvement in addressing the challenges
that Afghanistan faces is key.

In conclusion, the voice of Afghanistan's people,
including its youth, is clear 4 we need a workable
peace deal. That will require political courage. It will
require perseverance. On the Council's side, it will
require continued unity in its support. Galvanizing the
momentum of the Afghan-owned peace process is our
collective responsibility. The briefings by the Special
Representative and Ramiz gave us important food for
thought in that regard, including by reminding us of the
significance of investing in Afghanistan's youth on the
road to peace and stability.

Finally, I want to thank the Special Representative
and his team for their tremendous efforts in assisting
Afghanistan, often in difficult circumstances. They
deserve our full support.

