The Secretary-General: I thank New Zealand for
convening today's debate, and I welcome Mr. Peter
Maurer, President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC), and Ms. Joanne Liu, International
President of Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF). ICRC
and MSF play a critical role in providing health care in
the most difficult and dangerous circumstances. I pay
tribute to their staff and all medical personnel under
fire for their dedication and professionalism.

This morning, we awoke to reports of strikes on two
more hospitals in Aleppo. Let us be clear - those using
ever-more destructive weapons know exactly what
they are doing. They know they are committing war
crimes. We can only imagine the destruction - people
with limbs blown off; children in terrible pain with no
relief, infected, suffering and dying, with nowhere to
go and no end in sight. Let us imagine a slaughterhouse.
This is worse. Even a slaughterhouse is more humane.
Hospitals, clinics, ambulances and medical staff in
Aleppo are under attack around the clock.

According to Physicians for Human Rights, 95 per
cent of medical personnel who were in Aleppo before
the war have fled, been detained or killed. This is a
war against Syria's health workers. One medical
professional spoke of how he endured the difficulty and
the dangers. "This is Aleppo", he said. "We do not have
time to be scared. We are being crushed like bugs daily,
and the world has abandoned us."

The global public does not distinguish between
Member States, the Security Council and the Secretary-
General. They know only one thing - the world has
let them down. We have let them down. There must
be action. There must be accountability. International
law is clear - medical workers, facilities and
transports must be protected. The wounded and sick,
civilians and fighters alike, must be spared. Deliberate
attacks on hospitals are war crimes. Denying people
access to essential health care violates international
humanitarian law.

On 3 May, the Council adopted resolution 2286
(2016) on the protection of medical care in armed
conflict around the world. Since May, there has been
no let-up. In Hajjah, Yemen, 19 people were killed last
month in an attack on a hospital run by Medecins Sans
Frontieres. This forced the organization to evacuate
its staff from six hospitals in the area, with untold
consequences for sick and injured women, children and
men. In Pakistan, more than 70 people were killed in
a suicide attack on Sandeman Provincial hospital on
8 August. And in Syria, the carnage continues and no
one is spared.

The World Humanitarian Summit and the Agenda
for Humanity reaffirmed that safeguarding humanity
in armed conflict must be a priority. The Council
has a unique responsibility and influence in that
area. Resolution 2286 (2016) urges parties to armed
conflict and Member States to take concrete action.
The recommendations I have submitted to the Council
provide detailed steps to improve the protection of
medical staff and facilities, as well as the wounded
and sick.

First is prevention. Member States should do
all they can to promote respect for medical care
in armed conflict; align national legislation with
international humanitarian law; establish dialogue
among medical personnel, civil society organizations
and the authorities; train all those involved in the laws
and standards that apply; and ensure that decisions on
foreign policy, including those involving weapons sales
and transfers, respect the provision of medical care
in conflict.

Second is protection. Member States and parties
to conflict must take precautions to safeguard
medical facilities and personnel when they plan and
conduct military operations. My recommendations
cover military orders, the location of targets, visible
military presence in and around medical facilities, the
issuing of advance warnings and evacuations, among
other aspects.

Third is accountability. Member States and parties
to conflict should ensure that those responsible for
violations are prosecuted and punished. They should
also provide reparations and support to people and
communities affected by such attacks. That will mean
conducting systematic and impartial investigations into
specific incidents and collecting and analysing better
and more extensive data.

Attacks and access restrictions on medical care are
signs of a broader erosion of respect for international
humanitarian law. Failure to act is an affront to our
shared humanity. It undermines States' legal obligations
and the multilateral system as a whole. Building on
pledges made at the World Humanitarian Summit, we
need a global effort to enhance respect for the laws that
safeguard humanity.

The Council has a key role to play. I call on
members to take decisive steps so that protecting health
care facilities and personnel during conflict moves
from aspiration to reality. More than this, I urge them to
overcome their divisions and meet their responsibilities
in Syria and around the world.

