Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Madam, for having convened this
open debate on the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction - an issue of great importance for
all Member States, including the Kyrgyz Republic. We
welcome the statement by the President of the Security
Council adopted this morning (S/PRST/2014/7) on the
occasion of the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004).

The commitment to the non-proliferation of
weapons ofmass destruction is a fundamental principle
of the foreign and domestic policy of my country.
Kyrgyzstan does not possess nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons or their means of delivery. It
undertakes effective measures to bolster the national
export control regime and to strengthen oversight and
monitoring of the flow of materials and equipment
used in the development and manufacture of weapons
of mass destruction.

Kyrgyzstan has ratified the primary international
agreements on non-proliferation and regards international
safeguards and the physical protection of nuclear
materials and facilities as the first line of defence
against nuclear terrorism. The Kyrgyz Republic also
supports efforts to strengthen the Convention on
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material in order to
address the proliferation challenges posed by non-State
actors. We welcome the practical measures identified
in the communiques ofthe 2010, 2012 and 2014 Nuclear
Security Summits. Fully recognizing the dangers
that the possession of weapons of mass destruction
by terrorist groups would pose, the Kyrgyz Republic
signed the International Convention for the Suppression
of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.

Resolution 1540 (2004) is an international legal and
political instrument of great significance that has the
real potential to prevent the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. The Kyrgyz Republic is taking
consistent measures to effectively implement it. My
country is among the 172 Member States that have
presented their implementation reports so far. Pursuant
to paragraph four of the resolution, Kyrgyzstan has
submitted its initial report and additional information
three times, in 2004, 2006 and 2008.

Furthermore, on 2 April 2013, the Kyrgyz Republic
submitted its national plan of action on implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). The plan was developed
by the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic with
the support of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs. Civil society
also played an active role in preparing the plan. It
includes specific measures and concrete actions for
the implementation the resolution and identifies the
State agencies responsible for implementing them in a
specific timeframe.

I would like to underline that the national action
plan was developed on the basis ofthe idea that countries
with the appropriate capacities may provide assistance
to other States that need help in implementing the
resolution. In this regard, Kyrgyzstan has submitted
to the 1540 Committee a request for technical and
financial assistance. I take this opportunity to thank
those countries and organizations that have offered
their assistance in implementing the national action
plan and express our readiness for further cooperation
in this sphere.

One of the most promising approaches to
disarmament and non-proliferation is the creation
of nuclear-weapon-free zones. The Kyrgyz Republic
takes pride in the entry into force in 2009 of the Treaty
on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia.
Kyrgyzstan, as the depositary country of the Treaty,
welcomes the signing by the nuclear-weapon States
of the protocol on negative security assurances. We
call for its early ratification by the nuclear five. It will
mark an important milestone for strengthening both
regional security in Central Asia and the global nuclear
non-proliferation regime.

Kyrgyzstan attaches great importance to the
issue of mitigating the environmental consequences
of uranium mining and associated nuclear fuel cycle
activities in the production of nuclear weapons. In
this regard, I would like to refer to General Assembly
resolution 68/218 of December 2013, entitled "The role
of the international community in averting the radiation
threat in Central Asia". It calls on the international
community to continue the active sharing of experience
and knowledge so as to effectively resolve the problems
of uranium and other radioactive and toxic tailings in
Central Asia.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that Kyrgyzstan
supports the full implementation resolution 1540
(2004) and remains firmly committed to the global
non-proliferation and disarmament architecture.

