Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this morning's
debate, especially following the recent publication of
the Quartet report. As we meet today to deliberate on
the issue of Israel, Palestine and the Middle East, the
international community is increasingly losing faith in
its commitment to the two-State solution. We therefore
thank the Secretary-General for his frank briefing to
the Council, following his very fruitful visit to the
region, especially to Palestine.

We are constantly seized with reports of Israel
demolishing Palestinian homes and advancing plans
to build new houses for Israeli settlers, conducting
daily military raids on Palestinian areas, arrests and
detentions, and imposing severe restrictions, among
others, on human rights. The recent decision of Israel
to move forward with new construction in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem is a clear demonstration of
its disregard for the Council's decisions. We call on
the Israeli authorities to reconsider the long-term
implications of that strategy in the interests of peace and
of ajust final status agreement with the Palestinians.

While firmly condemning terrorist acts and attacks
against Israeli citizens, we are of the View that the basic
motivation for such acts results from the protracted
occupation and the ensuing policies applied in the
Palestinian territories, from which derives the main
issue of Israel's security. The moving narratives that
we heard this morning from the representatives of
Palestine and of Israel should encourage the Council to
move away from the business-as-usual treatment and
approach to the question. The cost of that is too high.

In a revealing opinion piece published on 3 July
by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the Palestinian Authority, he
mentions that:

"[t]he Quartet report sounds an alarm bell that we

are on a dangerous slope towards a one-State reality

that is incompatible with the national aspirations of
both peoples".

In the search for a solution to the dangerous and
painful conflict, after the failure of multiple attempts
by the international community to broker direct
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations, it is clear that a simple
adoption of a Security Council resolution will not be
realistic at the present time or have any real influence
on the peoples facing this grim reality on a daily basis.

In our View, we should push for the practical steps
that both sides need to take to de-escalate tensions
and start the slow process of rebuilding trust, which is
essential to an eventual return to direct negotiations.
In that regard, Angola welcomes the recent Visit by
the Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs to Israel
to re-engage with that country. We also continue to
look forward to the conference that is being organized
in Paris precisely to re-engage the international
community, it is hoped, on a different path towards the
implementation of the Vision that we very much would
like to see implemented, namely, the two-State solution.

No party can decide for the Israelis or the
Palestinians what compromises to make and what risks
to take for peace, and none of us can convince them to
trust each other. However, the international community
must be coherent and avoid continuing to take decisions
that systematically allow for the violation of obligations
by the parties, especially Israel. The support and
incentives provided by international and regional
stakeholders must be aimed not at perpetuating the
status quo, but rather at providing incentives leading to
the implementation of the mutual commitments already
made, as well as, among others, resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973).

If the political leaders on both sides are skeptical
about the two-State solution and the possibility of that
outcome being implemented any time soon, with a View
to de-escalating tensions in that extremely volatile
region, we call upon the Israelis and the Palestinians to
begin applying confidence-building recommendations
in the expectation that they will lead to negotiations
for resolving all permanent status issues and meet
the Palestinian aspirations to statehood and Israeli
security needs.

