Mrs. Nufiez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): Cuba is addressing the Security Council
today to denounce and strongly condemn the definitive
release of the notorious international terrorist Luis
Posada Carriles.

Our country has regularly participated in these
meetings on the work of the subsidiary bodies in
charge of fighting terrorism. On each and every
occasion, we have raised the alarm about the
possibility of Posada Carriles being released in the
United States. Over the past few months, our
Government has issued several alert statements and
communiques that have been circulated as official
documents of the General Assembly and the Security
Council. The Counter-Terrorism Committee was
informed in a timely and detailed manner, and we have
repeatedly requested the adoption of concrete measures
to prevent such a condemnable action from being
carried out.

On 20 April, the 118 States members of the
Non-Aligned Movement adopted a categorical
declaration expressing their concern over the release of
the terrorist, on bail at that time, and reiterating their
support for the extradition request presented by the
Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on 15 June 2005. Unfortunately, nothing was done and,
on 8 May, Posada Carriles was released and all charges
against him were withdrawn, despite protests by
hundreds of solidarity movements and political forces
worldwide and within the United States itself
demanding that the terrorist be brought to justice.

Once again, Cuba denounces the complicity and
absolute responsibility of the Government of the
United States for the release of that person, who is
liable for countless terrorist acts against Cuba and
other countries, including the mid-air bombing of a
Cuban airliner claiming 73 lives, and the death of the
young Italian Fabio di Celmo, after terrorists trained,
coordinated and paid by Posada Carriles and the
Cuban-American National Foundation bombed several
hotels in Havana in 1997. The United States
Government is well aware and has all the evidence of
the countless terrorist acts committed by Posada
Carriles.

The decision to charge him with petty
immigration crimes after allowing his release leaves no
doubt that the United States Government's intention
was always to prevent Posada Carriles from exposing
to the public details of his terrorist actions against
Cuba, Venezuela and other countries while he followed
the orders of the Central Intelligence Agency for more
than 25 years. By releasing the terrorist, the United
States Government has acted counter to several
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 1373 (2001). It has also violated
the treaties on terrorism to which it is party, including
the International Convention for the Suppression of
Terrorist Bombings and the Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of
Civil Aviation.

While that confessed and unscrupulous terrorist is
free, the United States Government holds hostage in
high-security jails five Cuban young men who were
only trying, with deep altruism and courage, to obtain
information on the Miami-based terrorist groups to
prevent their violent actions and to save the lives of
Cuban and United States citizens.

It is impossible to eliminate terrorism if some
terrorist acts are condemned while others are silenced,
tolerated or justified, or while the issue is simply
manipulated in order to promote some political
interests.

On the basis of the aforementioned grave events,
Cuba reiterates the pressing need for the Security
Council and the Counter-Terrorism Committee to pay
urgent attention to the detailed information on this case
with which they have been provided and to take all the
necessary steps in accordance with the relevant
resolutions. Double standards must not prevail. The
Security Council must not maintain its conspiratorial
silence before that barefaced affront to the world's
victims of terrorism.

