Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today's open debate. We also appreciate
the insightful briefings we received this morning.

Regional organizations can be instrumental in
addressing issues of international peace and security,
in particular those pertaining to their own region.
After all, the challenges and issues of a region are
best understood by the people of that region. Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations serves as an
acknowledgement of that fact. In fact, Article 52 of the
Charter encourages regional organizations to play their
roles in the pacific settlement of disputes.At the same
time, under Article 53 regional organizations rely upon
authorization by the Security Council for enforcement
actions, barring some exceptions. Therefore, in the
area of international peace and security, the Charter
of the United Nations envisages an interdependent
relationship and close coordination between regional
organizations and the United Nations.

The Security Council's visit to Africa last week and
its informal consultations with the African Union Peace
and Security Council yesterday manifest its continuing
commitment to cooperation and collaboration with
regional players on issues of peace and security in
Africa.

United Nations-African Union (AU) peace and
security cooperation has evolved over the years
and seeks strengthened responses and reactions to
challenges in the face of increasing conflicts in the
African continent. With over 80 per cent of United
Nations peacekeeping missions based in Africa, it is
imperative that the United Nations and the AU maintain
close cooperation for a deeper understanding of the
nature of conflicts, which in turn can deliver effective
responses. We believe that the complexity of the
emerging threats to peace and security has increased
the need for a better understanding of the nature of
threats and a greater degree of responsiveness.

The AU forms a critical link between its subregions
and the United Nations. That link can be utilized and
reinforced through a strategic partnership between the
two organizations.

We know that effective conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding require rapid and
appropriate responses and effective strategies, with
matching financial, human and logistical support.
That puts greater demands on African peacekeeping
missions. New African troop-contributing and
police-contributing countries must therefore be assisted
in strengthening their capacities and resources. Their
voices and those of other troop-contributing countries
must also be taken on board in developing mandates.

As one of the largest troop-contributing countries,
Pakistan is ready to explore avenues of cooperation
with the AU, to assist in capacity-building and to help
individual African countries. Pakistan has a long-
standing commitment to United Nations peacekeeping.
Currently, we contribute over 7,000 personnel, the
overwhelming majority of whom are deployed in
Africa. We are proud of our role in some of the notable
successes of peacekeeping in Sierra Leone and Liberia.
We have observed that non-permanent members of
the Council from Africa use their presidency to highlight
regional priorities in the Council. Last year, Nigeria
organized a debate on the role of regional organizations
(see S/PV.7505), while Egypt has gone a step further by
focusing the debate on the African Union itself. That
is what is called responsiveness and responsibility to
the region and to the countries that have supported
one's tenure in the Council through the election
process. That is what we believe must be strengthened
in the Council - democracy, representativeness and
accountability. Pakistan therefore supports expanding
the number ofAfrican seats on the Council on a basis of
periodic elections and a fixed rotation. We believe that
will boost United Nations-African Union cooperation on
matters of international peace and security, particularly
those concerning the African region itself.

