Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I thank
the presidency of the United States for organizing this
debate on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes region. The peoples of the
region and our entire continent attach great importance
to this high-level meeting aimed at consolidating the
peace dynamic arising from the Framework Agreement
of 24 February. We welcome the presence of United
States Secretary of State Kerry and the participation of
Ministers representing Council members and the States
ofthe region, as well as the participation ofthe President
of the World Bank. Finally, on behalf of Morocco I
commend the leadership, vision and commitment of
Ms. Robinson, as well as her unwavering commitment
and for her efforts to assist the full implementation of
Agreement of 24 February.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo has
suffered a succession of crises in recent decades that
have harmed its national cohesion and threatened its
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity. Behind
the criminal acts committed in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo by armed militias and other
armed groups, such as the Mouvement du 23 mars, the
Forces democratiques de libe'ration du Rwanda and the
Lord's Resistance Army, lies a tragic humanitarian
crisis that has impacted millions of lives and violated
the fundamental rights of innocent civilians, especially
women and children. The perpetrators of these crimes
must be brought to justice.

The impact of the Congolese crisis also has a
regional dimension. The entire Great Lakes region
and Central Africa have been affected by the crisis in
humanitarian, security and economic terms. They all
have a historical responsibility to end it definitively and
irreversbly.

The signing on 24 February of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes Region
opened up real prospects for peace. The agreement,
which is innovative in its approach, offers true hope
for a sustainable end to instability in the region and
a settlement of a crisis that has lasted too long. This
opening has been supplemented by measures taken by
the Council to adapt mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilisation Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo's (MONUSCO) to the realities
on the ground, including with the adoption of resolution
2098 (2013).

Regionally, the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region also put in place important
mechanisms that are contributing to the stabilization
and verification efforts. Finally, the joiny visit of the
Secretary-General, the President of the World Bank
and Ms. Robinson made it possible to graft onto the
dynamics in the field an economic development
dimension aimed at boosting economic exchanges,
reduce vulnerabilities, and promote economic regional
integration, especially through the reactivation of the
Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries
(CEPGL) in favour of peace.

We welcome this approach, which is being
coordinated by the Secretary-General and the President
of the World Bank, inaugurated in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and planned for next autumn in
the Sahel. We hope that this approach will be taken up
in other crisis situations where the correlation between
peace and development is so critical.

Never have so many efforts been undertaken to
resolve the Congolese crisis, and we must applaud
that. Yet this important dynamic for peace cannot bear
fruits uneless all signatories honour their commitments
and build mutual confidence by building together a
lasting peace and common prosperity. In that context,
we welcome the commendable efforts undertaken
by the Democratic Republic of the Congo to fulfil
its obligations and to fully play its role in the peace
process. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo solemnly renewed
that commitment this morning.

That having been said, the path ahead remains
long and the bilateral partners and the United
Nations system are all called upon to fully support
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in restoring
its authority throughout its national territory and in
successfully achieving institutional reform, national
reconciliation and human development. The countries
of the region must quickly, fully and in good faith
implement their respective commitments under the
Framework Agreement, especially those relating to the
strict respect of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We therefore
encourage Special Envoy Robinson, in conjunction
with and supported by the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to continue to support, coordinate and evaluate
the implementation of those commitments.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo ococupies
a special place in the heart of the African continent.
It holds enormous economic and human potential.
Its stability and prosperity directly impact all its
neighbours. The current process augurs well to ensure
both the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Great Lakes region the stability they long for and to
free up the energies of that vast country and the entire
region.

Morocco, which has stood by the side of the
Congolose people through the most difficult moments
oftheir history and which has participated in all United
Nations peacekeeping operations in that country, will
maintain its commitment to their national unity and
territorial integrity and to the stability of the entire
Great Lakes region.

