Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): It is my honour to address the Security
Council at this important meeting under the presidency
of friendly Nigeria. I would like to thank Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, the Under-Secretary-General, for his important
briefing to us this morning.

My delegation thanks you, Madam President, for
convening this open debate, which comes at a very
critical and dangerous time for the Middle East, when
opportunities for peace and stability are receding and
opportunities for threats, war and aggression are on the
rise. All of this is a result of Israel's feverish race
against time in its efforts to erode all that remains of
the hopes of resuming the peace process. Israel
continues to work for the Judaization of Jerusalem, to
build a racist separation wall on occupied Palestinian
territory, to intensify settlement activity there, to
occupy the Syrian Golan and to blockade Gaza. It has
attacked the freedom flotilla ships and murdered the
international peace activists they carried, in flagrant
defiance of the international community and in
violation of international law and the basic values and
principles of humanity and civilization.
This meeting is being held in the sixth year since
the International Court of Justice adopted its advisory
opinion confirming the illegitimacy of the separation
wall, and long decades since Israel first occupied Arab
territory. That is indeed the crux and the fundamental
reason for the Arab-Israeli conflict. It is by its nature a
provocative, unjust offence whereby Israel has violated
all relevant rules and international resolutions and
committed every kind of war crime against the
Palestinian people: killing women and children;
violating the sanctity of places of worship; inflicting
collective punishment; closing border crossings;
detaining tens of thousands of civilians and
democratically elected Palestinian officials; and
pursuing a racist, expansionist occupation accompanied
by cancerous, declared and undeclared settlements in
the occupied Arab territories, especially Jerusalem, in a
manner that targets the very existence of that city and
its Islamic and Christian character.

Such settlements have devoured around 42 per
cent of the lands of the West Bank, according to reports
by the Israeli organization B'Tselem, in clear violation
of international law. We should recall that Israel
continued to pursue these policies until a few days ago.
After the meeting between President Obama and Israeli
Prime Minister Netanyahu, Israel announced the
construction of 32 new settlement units in East
Jerusalem.

Syria, along with other Arab countries, has
worked, through the adoption of the 2002 Arab Peace
Initiative, to achieve peace and all that peace entails:
the restoration of all Arab rights, including Israel's
total withdrawal from all occupied territories to the
line of 4 June 1967, and the settlement of Palestinian
refugees as set forth in General Assembly resolution
194 (III) of 1948.

The Israelis' rejection of this is clear; they
disdain all such decisions. Committing crimes against
the Palestinian people is not enough; their crimes have
extended to peace activists of other nationalities who
tried to deliver humanitarian assistance to Gaza on the
freedom flotilla. Israel's terrorist aggression killed nine
civilians whose only crime was to try to help the
people under blockade and whose suffering could not
be alleviated by all the resolutions and decisions
adopted by the international community.

That was Israel's true response to the proposals
for peace in the Middle East, a response that we have
10-45934
sought to remind the world of throughout the decades
since Israel first occupied our lands. Israel defies not
only international law, but its own bilateral relations
with important countries within and outside the region,
in a manner that threatens the region's stability and
embarrasses its closest allies.

Around two months ago, this Council adopted a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/9) in which it
called for a prompt, impartial, credible and transparent
investigation conforming to international standards; for
the immediate release of the convoy ships; and for the
delivery of their humanitarian assistance to besieged
Gaza. Today more than ever, the Security Council must
move beyond the mere condemnation of such acts; it
should translate its resolutions into practical steps
commensurate with Israel's terrible actions, so that
they do not meet the fate of other, previous resolutions
on Israel that remain dead letters.

I would like to note here that Mr. John Ging, the
Director of Operations in Gaza of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), stated today that all Israeli
claims to have reduced the effects of the blockade and
allowed the entry of some basic goods into Gaza are
totally incorrect. We also recall that the General
Assembly has approved the recommendations of the
Goldstone report (A/HRC/ 12/48), which included
conclusive evidence concerning Israel's violations of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
international humanitarian law during its aggression
against Gaza. Such violations are tantamount to war
crimes and perhaps even to crimes against humanity.
Every United Nations body has called for the
implementation of the report's recommendations.

Thus, we call today on the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibility to hold Israel's officials
responsible for their acts and to punish them for their
crimes in Gaza. We also call on the Council to press for
the immediate lifting of the unjust blockade imposed
on the Palestinian people in Gaza, to open all
crossings, and to begin to reconstruct Gaza, which was
destroyed by Israel's aggression.

After 43 years of Israel's unjust occupation of the
Syrian Golan Heights - and despite all the resolutions
concerning its international illegitimacy, including
resolution 497 (1981), and the call by a majority of the
countries of the world to put an end to that occupation,
as well as their condemnation of Israel's oppressive
practices and violation of so many laws and resolutions -
Israel still refuses to accept these appeals or to
implement any resolutions. On the contrary, after
occupying the Syrian Golan, Israel declared its
annexation, in clear violation of the principles of
international law and its obligations under the Geneva
Conventions of 1949. Since that occupation, Israel has
employed every possible means to attempt to expel the
citizens of the area, impose colonizing settlements on
them and import foreign settlers, preferring them over
the indigenous people of the Golan, whom they have
incarcerated in detention.

Recent Israeli military exercises in the Golan
Heights have destroyed 5,000 dunums of fertile land.
On 12 July, Israeli forces used force to enter the home
of a Syrian citizen in the village of Mejdel Shams.
When villagers attempted to face them, some
25 persons, including women and children, were hurt
as a result of the tear gas munitions used by the Israeli
forces, and some were hit by rubber bullets. Mr. Lynn
Pascoe referred to this incident today.

My country's Minister for Foreign Affairs, in
identical letters dated 4 January 2010 addressed to the
President of the Security Council and to the Secretary-
General (S/2010/4, annex), referred to Israeli violations
in the occupied Syrian Golan Heights, where Israel is
planning to Judaize and control even more Syrian
territory in the Golan, in steps that send a provocative
message to Syria and other States that are seeking
peace in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions. And, yet, in flagrant defiance of the will of
the international community, the Israeli Knesset, just a
few days ago, on 9 July, adopted, after a first reading, a
resolution stating that any agreement on withdrawal
from East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights should be
subject to a referendum requiring the support of 80 per
cent of Israelis. This decision is in clear defiance of the
entire world and a rejection of peace. All that has been
said by Israeli Government representatives is just
manoeuvring and manipulation: there is no real Israeli
partner for peace. The clear reality, as His Excellency
President Bashar Al-Assad has said, is that peace has
never been an obsession of Israel; Israel's obsession
has always been its own security, in the narrowest
sense. This can be realized only at our cost in terms of
peace and rights.

It is illogical and unacceptable that we, the Arabs,
should be required to continue proving our sincere
desire for peace, even though we have declared it
repeatedly, especially since the Madrid Conference in
1991. It is for the Israelis to prove that they want peace
and to manifest in a pragmatic and realistic way that
they are seeking peace and justice. They have to try to
convince us, the Arabs, that they want peace. It is they
who occupy our land. It is they who attack our people.
It is they who displace millions of our people. It is not
the other way around. It is they who commit all of
these actions, and yet they call for protection and
guarantees, resorting to false pretexts to engage in
blackmail and gain further concessions.

The representative of Israel referred to the
alleged smuggling of arms to the Lebanese resistance.
She forgets that Israel has been mentioned hundreds of
times in United Nations reports - reports of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, reports of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) and reports by the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General to Lebanon. All of
these reports mention, hundreds of times, that it is
Israel that violates resolution 1701 (2006) and violates
the sovereignty of Lebanon around the clock. She
forgets that Israel is the most heavily armed of the
parties, with conventional as well as nuclear weapons:
Israel is armed to the teeth. Since 1950, certain
countries have assured Israel of its military superiority
over all its Arab neighbours combined. She is also
oblivious to the fact that Israel uses that military
arsenal to perpetuate its occupation of our land, to
continue committing its acts of aggression and to
commit acts of piracy against the activists of the peace
flotilla. Indeed, Israel deploys submarines capable of
carrying weapons to the Red Sea and the Arabian Sea,
and issues threats of war every day. It violates
international law, international humanitarian law and
the Charter of the United Nations all at once on a daily
basis. Israel is known to be one of the largest importers
of weapons in the world. It is also the world's fourth
largest weapons exporter.

The problem with Israel's representative here and
its policymakers and decision-makers is that they have
not yet understood that occupation is one of the worst
crimes of aggression, as defined in General Assembly
resolution 3314 (XXIX). They have not yet grasped
that they have exhausted this Organization after hours -
years - of meetings on how to bring their occupation
of our land to an end.

One solution could be for the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR) to
organize a conference or special training session for
the representative of Israel and Israeli decision-makers
to help them understand the definition of aggression as
stipulated in the Charter and in United Nations
resolutions. The lecturers should, preferably, be the
special rapporteurs on human rights and those who
have chaired the many inspection teams and fact-
finding missions formed since 1948 to investigate the
repeated crimes of Israel. It would do them no harm to
recall the spirit of Count Bernadotte and to attend such
a training session.

