Mr. Heusgen (Germany): We heard earlier that this was the thirty-third briefing on Yemen and the humanitarian situation, and I think that we have never had a more sombre briefing than we had today. I have hardly ever heard Martin Griffiths, who is the eternal optimist, as down and frustrated as he was today. Mark Lowcock described the humanitarian situation as very dramatic. We must not get used to these kinds of briefings. On the political process, we offer full support to what Mr. Griffiths has been trying to do. We fully support his call for re-engagement in the political process. I also commend him for his approach to the involvement of women. That is key for us. We believe that the joint declaration and the Riyadh agreement processes must be inclusive and that the voices of women and marginalized people have to feature in them. Germany supports the political process. As Ambassador Allen mentioned earlier, we will co-host a conference with the involvement of the Secretary- General on Thursday to find a way forward from the political impasse. Let me concentrate on the humanitarian situation. The violation of international humanitarian law and human rights by all parties is appalling. We have heard about the harassment of aid workers, the blocking of food and fuel imports and the closure of the Sana'a airport for humanitarian aid. How negative can one get? I appeal to the Iranians for once to do something positive and put pressure on the Houthis to allow humanitarian aid in, open the Sana'a airport and finally allow an inspection and work to be done on the FSO SAFER tanker. There continues to be sexual and gender-based violence. We continue to witness the repression of journalists, members of the judiciary and human rights activists. There are ongoing air strikes, which are disproportionate with regard to their impact on civilians. I listened carefully to what Mr. Lowcock said about last month being the worst this year with regard to the killing of civilians. With regard to the humanitarian funding gap - and Mr. Lowcock said this very clearly - there is a serious risk of famine. Germany pledged an _ additional $150 million as part of its $450 million in humanitarian aid to the country in 2020. We have disbursed 90 per cent of that $450 million. I am appalled at what Mr. Lowcock very frankly said, namely, that members of the coalition - the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia - have not honoured their pledges. How cynical can one be, just to quote Mr. Lowcock, to promise money and then dash hopes? Continuing to hold this money back is issuing a death penalty for civilians, to quote Mr. Lowcock again. Therefore, I would like to end my short intervention by appealing to those countries that have not honoured their pledges to do so and urgently get the money to the humanitarian aid organizations so that they can help the people of Yemen, including those whose messages Mr. Lowcock conveyed to us today.
