Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank you,
Mr. President, for responding positively to the request
of the Non-Aligned Movement in convening this
meeting in the face of the enormous tragedy that seems
to be in the making.

The fundamental question upon which we should
premise our debate is whether we need to persevere in
upholding the rule of law at the international level and
pursue the question of Iraq's compliance within the
parameters of international law, or whether we can
afford to give a free hand to those whose possible
actions would result in undermining international law
in exchange for short-sighted gains, or whatever other
reasons, plausible or not.

We believe that all States have a clear interest, as
well as a clear responsibility, to defend the integrity of
international law and order. Thus, any arbitrary
unilateral approach outside international law that may
endanger the fragile international security system and
set a destructive precedent with far-reaching
consequences should be resisted. Taking on Iraq
unilaterally and outside international law would
amount to short-sighted actions that may resolve a part
of the problem, but will undoubtedly shake the
foundations of the international security system
predicated on the rule of law.
Here, I specifically refer to concepts, such as
"regime change" and "pre-emptive strike", which are
completely alien to and in conflict with international
law. The former runs counter to peoples' right to self-
determination, denying in this context the right of the
Iraqi people to decide who should rule them. And the
latter distorts, inter alia, the conventional
understanding of the right of self-defence as clearly
enshrined in customary international law and codified
in the United Nations Charter. We caution each and
every member of the Council against any decision that
may, in one way or another, be interpreted as
underwriting, promoting or endorsing such
unprecedented and erroneous concepts as the ones I
referred to earlier.

On the other hand and in view of recent
developments and the unpleasant experience of the
19905, the onus now rests on the Iraqi Government to
efface every doubt about its intention to allow
unfettered weapons inspections everywhere in the
country. We call upon Iraq to take every necessary step
to avert catastrophe, for the sake of its own people, all
peoples in the region and international peace and the
rule of law.

My country, as a State that suffered enormously
in the 19805 as a result of the use of chemical weapons
against its servicemen and civilians, attaches particular
importance to the eradication of weapons of mass
destruction in the entire region. This is the basis of my
Government's steady call for the full implementation of
Security Council resolutions on the disarmament of
Iraq.

The decision by the Iraqi Government to allow
the return of the United Nations weapons inspectors,
which was welcomed by the international community,
including my Government, was a necessary step in the
right direction. That decision should now avert the
cursory resort to military means and provide an
opportunity for diplomacy to work. It should further
open the way for full implementation of all Security
Council resolutions on Iraq - including those on the
release of prisoners of war and against the harbouring
of terrorists. That implementation should lead to the
lifting of sanctions, which the international community,
including my Government, has steadily sought. Such a
diplomatic approach, as presented, should be fully
explored. Should the diplomatic path prove fruitless,
any other measures would have to be contemplated by
the Council alone.

The United Nations should be given the
opportunity, and should be empowered, to address this
crisis effectively and in a timely manner. Any
alternative to this approach would risk increasing
uncertainty and bring about long-term instability in the
region, a region already plagued with endemic
problems.

The United Nations, as the universal Organization
charged with the task of maintaining international
peace and security, is legally competent and inherently
capable of resolving the current crisis, which originated
from actions taken by the Iraqi leadership in the 19805
and 19905. We believe that the appropriate
international mechanisms and relevant Security
Council resolutions provide the necessary legal basis
for international action aimed at making sure that Iraq
ceases to pose a threat to regional stability and the
security ofits neighbours.

Moreover, the Council is in a position to adopt
any new and realistic procedures it may deem
necessary to ensure the smooth and complete
implementation of the disarmament process. My
delegation also believes that unity in the Council in the
face of this crisis is of great importance to reaching a
viable and lasting solution. Undoubtedly, the unified
will of the international community, which sooner or
later will find its expression through the Council,
would be the best guarantee for the proper completion
of this process. Therefore, any consideration given to
unilateral action might only arouse further suspicion on
the possible existence of a hidden agenda beyond the
disarmament of Iraq, thus further charging and
complicating the situation in the Middle East.

Attacking Iraq, and the enormous and predictable
suffering that the Iraqi people would be subject to, will
inevitably fuel further resentment everywhere, and not
just in Iraq. It will sow seeds of new hatred that will
feed instability for years to come. This dangerous
situation is further exacerbated by the immunity and
impunity that Israel has been guaranteed, despite its
actual commission of the very same, if not more
serious, acts of which Iraq has been accused. Some of
those acts include non-compliance with, and even
outright rejection of, numerous Security Council
resolutions; seeking to acquire, and even possessing,
weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear
weapons; and practising, and even declaring a policy
of, State terrorism. Ideologues whose intimate relations
with Israel are a matter of public record and who seek
to further their own aims and want to remake the world
in their own peculiar image, should understand
beforehand that they, and they alone, would be
responsible for any eventual adverse consequences.

We believe that the hassle-free entry of the
weapons inspectors into Iraqi territory and the
commencement of their work as soon as possible
would be the next essential step in helping to silence
the beating of war drums. Ultimately, a final peaceful
resolution of this crisis would enhance the rule of law
at the international level and demonstrate the ability of
the United Nations and of multilateral diplomacy to
defuse disputes and crisis situations. Undoubtedly, such
an outcome, coupled with a real commitment by the
Iraqi Government to live in peace with its neighbours,
will greatly serve the cause of peace and stability in
our region.

In closing, allow me to quote Secretary-General
Kofi Annan who, in opening the general debate of the
fifty-seventh session of the General Assembly, wisely
set the tone by strongly reaffirming the indispensable
necessity and enduring relevance of multilateralism
and multilateral institutions in efforts to maintain
international peace, security and freedom for all. He
further reiterated that every Government that is
committed to the rule of law at home must also be
committed to the rule of law abroad.

