Mr. Gnehm (United States of America): May I join
our colleagues in the Council in welcoming you, Sir, to the
presidency and congratulating you on your assumption of
the responsibilities.

I should also like to ask the Nigerian delegation to
please convey to Ambassador Gambari on our behalf our
great appreciation for the guidance and the effective
leadership which he gave to this Council during his tenure.

This is a time of hope for the former Yugoslavia. The
Presidents of the three Republics in the region have begun
proximity talks in Dayton, Ohio, under the chairmanship of
Assistant Secretary Holbrooke, Russian Deputy Foreign
Minister Ivanov and the European Union's negotiator,
Mr. Bildt. We congratulate the parties for this major step
towards peace. We hope that these talks will lead to a true
peace that would allow all the States in the region the
opportunity to concentrate on providing a better life for
their people.
The recent exchange of prisoners between the Bosnian
Serb side and the Bosnian Government also gives us reason
to hope. The United States is proud that the persistent
efforts of Assistant Secretary of State John Shattuck helped
bring about this humanitarian breakthrough - but more
needs to be done.

The resolution before us tonight is one which my
Government regrets is necessary, but of which it is proud
to be a co-sponsor. It brings us back to the stark reality
of the conflict in the former Yugoslavia. It reaffirms the
reason why an international tribunal is so necessary to
bringing to justice the criminals who are responsible for
committing crimes against humanity.

When this Council adopted resolution 1010 (1995)
in August, just after the fall of the "safe areas" of
Srebrenica and Zepa, Ambassador Albright warned that
the story was not over and had not been fully told. At that
time, there were reasons to believe that many innocent
Bosnians had been beaten, raped and killed. Now the
evidence makes clear that this was the fate of thousands,
who were forced from the enclaves by Bosnian Serb
forces.

As the resolution we have just adopted clearly states,
available evidence demonstrates that Bosnian Serb forces
committed mass murder. What happened in Srebrenica is
a war crime of historic proportions. It reminds us all of
events in Europe of 50 years ago, and we cannot allow
these crimes to go unpunished.

The Bosnian Serb side must allow the International
Tribunal access to the sites and individuals which the
Tribunal deems important for its investigations. In order
to make its own assessment the International Tribunal
must see and hear the evidence available. The Bosnian
Serbs must allow international agencies to have access to
the refugees displaced from the regions and ensure their
safety. The authorities in Belgrade should also reverse
their previous decision and allow the Tribunal to establish
an office in Belgrade.

This resolution also rightfully addresses the incidents
which occurred in the Krajina after the Croatian offensive
of September. My Government strongly believes that the
Croatian Government must take steps to ensure that the
rights of all its citizens are respected, whether they are
Croats or Serbs.

My Government recognizes that all violations of
human rights are deplorable. However, we must also
recognize the differences in circumstances and the
magnitude of the crimes. The murder of large numbers of
civilians by Bosnian Serb forces was not the act of a few
individuals acting alone. The systematic and apparently

 

planned nature of the atrocities is evidence of an active and
astonishingly brutal Bosnian Serb policy.

We owe the dead and missing of Bosnia everything
we can do to ensure that the guilty are brought to justice.
We must also show the living that the world cares about
what happened in Srebrenica and that war criminals will be
caught and punished. By uncovering the truth and
demonstrating that individuals will be held to account for
their actions, we can restore the faith of the people of the
former Yugoslavia in justice and promote the cause of
peace.

