Ms. Page: I thank you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Security Council for the opportunity
to present our findings here today. I am Kathleen Page,
a physician and faculty member at the Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine. The findings that
I am presenting today were published last week by
Human Rights Watch, together with the Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health.

Our report concludes that the combination of
severe medicine, health supplies and food shortages
in Venezuela, together with the spread of epidemics
within and across the country's borders, has resulted in
a breakdown of Venezuela's health system. The crisis in
Venezuela fits the definition of a complex humanitarian
emergency, and Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
should formally declare it as such and lead a full-scale
United Nations-led response that is neutral, independent
and impartial.

We conducted research at the borders of Venezuela
in Colombia and Brazil, where we interviewed more
than 150 health professionals, humanitarian actors,
United Nations officials and local authorities, as well as
dozens of Venezuelans who had crossed the border. We
also reviewed data from the Venezuelan Government,
international organizations, Venezuelan hospitals and
other local actors.

The health data that we analysed show a health
system that is not functioning, with increasing mortality
and morbidity. The recent nationwide blackouts have
further undermined the ability of public hospitals
to respond to the medical needs of Venezuelans. The
latest statistics from the Venezuelan Ministry of Health
indicate that, from 2015 to 2016, maternal mortality
rose by 65 per cent, and infant mortality by 30 per
cent. Venezuela is the only country in the region where
infant mortality is rising and has returned to levels last
seen in the 1990s.

Infectious diseases are increasing and spreading at
an alarming rate. From 2008 to 2016, only a single case
of measles was recorded. Since 2017, there have been
more than 9,300 cases in Venezuela, and an additional
10,000 in Brazil, mostly in border areas. Since 2016,
there have been more than 2,500 suspected cases of
diphtheria, whereas there was none in the preceding
decade. The number of cases of malaria has increased
in recent years from fewer than 36,000 cases in 2009
to more than 414,000 in 2017 - the highest rate of
increase in the world. The number of tuberculosis
cases increased from 6,000 in 2014 to 13,000 in 2017,
resulting in the highest tuberculosis incidence rate in 40
years. In 2018, nearly nine out of 10 Venezuelans living
with HIV were not receiving antiretroviral therapy.

Although Venezuelan authorities stopped
publishing statistics on nutrition in 2007, available
evidence indicates that hunger, malnutrition and
severe food shortages are widespread. From 2015 to
2017, nearly 12 per cent of Venezuelans - 3.7 million
people - were undernourished. National surveys show
that 80 per cent of Venezuelan households are food
insecure, and, in some locations, acute malnutrition
among children surpasses crisis thresholds. Hospitals
across the country are reporting increases in paediatric
admissions and mortality due to acute malnutrition.

Venezuelan authorities also no longer publish
official health information. They have threatened and
retaliated against health-care workers who collect data,
report deaths or speak out about medicine shortages.
Objective and verifiable data are critical to assess
the situation, follow trends and develop an effective
humanitarian response. While more international aid
has started to enter the country, the response to date
has been insufficient, and there have been obstacles
to implementation. While Venezuelan authorities
are within their rights to reject particular offers of
assistance, they are responsible for fully addressing the
country's urgent humanitarian needs.

In order to protect the rights to health and food ofthe
Venezuelan people, we recommend that the Secretary-
General declare that Venezuela is facing a complex
humanitarian emergency and acknowledge the severity
of the situation. The crisis should be a top priority
that requires United Nations system-wide, full-scale
mobilization of humanitarian relief. The Secretary-
General should request that Venezuelan authorities
grant United Nations agencies full access to health,
nutrition and food security data, and allow them to
undertake a nationwide comprehensive humanitarian-
needs assessment. The response we are calling for
would be credible, neutral, independent and impartial,
as it would be under the auspices of the United Nations.

Furthermore, the Security Council should regularly
meet to address the humanitarian crisis in Venezuela,
as well as its regional impact, given that more than
3.4 million Venezuelans have left the country in recent
years. We call on the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights to document violations to the rights
to health and food in her upcoming report on the
situation in Venezuela. Finally, we call on the Human
Rights Council to continue to monitor the humanitarian
situation in Venezuela and adopt a draft resolution
to create an international commission of inquiry to
investigate violations of the rights to health and food.

