Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): First of all, I should like to thank you, Mr.
President, for the condolences you expressed to the
Government and the people of the Russian Federation in
connection with the death of Russian citizens as a result of
the tragic incident involving a helicopter of the United
Nations Mission in Haiti. I should also like to join you in
expressing condolences to the Governments and the people
of the United States of America and of Argentina.

Moving on to the subject of today's discussion, I
should firstly like to welcome the Minister for Human
Rights of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. She
Okitundu, to our meeting today. The Russian delegation
shares the serious concern expressed at the ongoing conflict
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which represents
a serious threat to regional peace and security. Russia has
constantly advocated achieving a peaceful political
settlement of the crisis while preserving the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We are certain that acts of violence will not make
it possible to achieve a long-term resolution of the conflict.
We have consistently supported the efforts of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) and individual regional
leaders to explore ways of finding a peaceful way out of
the conflict.

We believe that it is important to emphasize once
again the need for all States to abide by the principles of
non-intervention in the internal affairs of other countries
and the non-use of force, in accordance with the Charter
and the aims of the United Nations. We believe that the
basis for regulating the protracted conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should be the approach
suggested by the countries of the subregion, based on a
ceasefire agreement, the withdrawal of foreign troops from
the territory and guarantees of peace and security along its
borders with contiguous States. One of the key provisions
of such a settlement should be ensuring the territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In this
context, we believe that the desirability and the modalities
of involving the rebels in the regional negotiating process
should be determined by the regional mediators, together
with the legitimate Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

As a matter of principle, however, it is quite obvious
that lasting peace and security in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo cannot be achieved unless the Congolese
themselves organize a nationwide dialogue with the
participation of all segments of Congolese society, as
contemplated in the regional settlement scheme. We are
convinced that at this stage efforts should be focused first
and foremost on speedily achieving a ceasefire agreement.
Otherwise, it will be impossible to set in motion the
machinery for a peace settlement. Continuing the
stalemate in the negotiating process and opting for a
military resolution of the conflict would be likely to
worsen the situation and lead to a large-scale
humanitarian catastrophe and further destabilize the
situation throughout the region, and we cannot rule out
the possibility that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
will disintegrate.

Our delegation cannot fail to be concerned at news
of the mass atrocities perpetrated against the civilian
population throughout Congolese territory and of human
rights violations and persecution on ethnic grounds. We
support the need for a careful and speedy investigation of
these communications.

The Russian delegation actively supports the policy
of strengthening the coordination of the activities of the
United Nations, the OAU and SADC in order to reach a
political settlement of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We believe that the initiative of
the Secretary-General to send a special envoy to the
region is a timely one.

The possibility of the future deployment of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as well as the desirability and
modalities of such an operation can be determined only
after a stable cease-fire has been achieved. The Security
Council's decision on this matter should necessarily be
preceded by a very careful and thorough analysis of the
situation, both in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in the region.

The Russian delegation supports the idea of holding,
in due course and under the auspices of the United
Nations and the OAU, an international conference on
peace and security in the Great Lakes region. We are
convinced that this will be possible only if consensus is
achieved among the participating States regarding the
purposes of such a forum.

Russia will continue to help to promote the
peacekeeping process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in the spirit of the recommendations of the
Security Council, making use of its contacts with the
OAU, the SADC, the States of the region and other
interested countries.

 

