Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
also are gratified to see you preside over the Security
Council, Mr. President, and we commend Kazakhstan
for its exceptional work during its presidency. My
delegation welcomes the timely convening of this
high-level debate on confidence-building measures
needed to ensure the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, and we thank President Nursultan
Nazarbayev for his participation. We likewise note
Kazakhstan's leadership in setting a bold example for the
international community on nuclear disarmament. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his salient briefing.

As expressed in the document entitled "Manifesto:
the world, the twenty-first century", endorsed by
President of Kazakhstan, nothing can be further from
the objectives of peace, security and development than
the grave threat of the proliferation of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons and their means of delivery. We
agree with that Vision and would like to share three
comments accordingly.

First, Peru is committed to disarmament and
the non-proliferation regimes on weapons of mass
destruction. We believe that ensuring international
peace and security means eliminating the risk posed
by such weapons. There is no better means to do that
than to guarantee their non-existence. As such, we must
promote disarmament. Thanks to the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and
the Caribbean, agreed at Tlatelolco, we are part of the
first nuclear-weapon-free zone in a densely populated
region of the world. In line with such commitments,
we call for the universalization of international
instruments, such as the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty and the recent Treaty on the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons, which establishes the illegality of
the use and possession of such weapons.

Secondly, Peru believes that the challenges
faced by the nuclear non-proliferation regime are
the gravest threats to peace and security worldwide
today. Consequently, ensuring a united Council so
as to enable an effective and consistent response to
such challenges is, in our View, a priority. From our
perspective, that requires first addressing the challenge
posed by the nuclear and ballistic programme of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The nuclear
non-proliferation regime must also be enforced through
the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action on the Iranian nuclear programme - a prime
example of the implementation of confidence-building
measures as monitored by the International Atomic
Energy Agency. We also want to highlight the
importance of preserving the commitment of the
Council with regard to the unacceptable use of chemical
weapons in Syria, with a view to fully investigating the
facts and punishing the parties responsible.

Thirdly, in this complex context, Peru agrees that
we must go beyond the imposition of sanctions. We must
promote preventive diplomacy and build the necessary

trust to safeguard the non-proliferation regimes through
a more comprehensive approach. Indeed, in many
cases, distrust generates a perception of insecurity
that, in turn, leads to increasing stockpiling of arms.
We must address that perception in order to counter
proliferation and arms stockpiling, particularly in the
nuclear arena. In order to do so, creating open channels
of communication and mutual understanding, devising
open and transparent processes, setting up monitoring
and verification mechanisms and crisis control
protocols are, inter alia, confidence-building measures
that make up a basic foundation for cooperation that
will help mitigate the risk of escalation or accidents that
could have grave consequences.

Today, as Peru has the privilege of receiving a
visit by Pope Francis, we would like to conclude by
recalling the message that His Holiness delivered on
25 September 2015 before the General Assembly with
regard to the topic that bring us here today:

"A system of ethics and laws based on the threat of
mutual destruction, and possibly the destruction of
all humankind, is a contradiction in terms and an
affront to the entire edifice of the United Nations,
which would become a group of nations united by
fear and distrust." (A/70/PV3, p. 5)

