The President: As this is the first formal meeting
of the Security Council under the United Kingdom
presidency this month, it gives me pleasure to follow
the tradition of paying a very warm compliment to our
predecessors for their excellent leadership of the
Council during the month of March. I say "our
predecessors" because we had two Presidents for the
price of one during the course of March. We were very
impressed by the seamless interchange between
Ambassador Kuchynski and Ambassador Yel'chenko
and by the sensitive and good-humoured handling of
our intensive business during the month of March. I
would like to express, on behalf of the whole Council,
our warm gratitude to Ukraine for its presidency.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in East Timor

The President: Members of the Council are
expecting me to handle this meeting in a relaxed
manner. We are bringing into the open Chamber - to
non-members of the Security Council, our partners in
the United Nations - our style of informal
consultations, because the Council wishes to increase
the transparency of its business and to share more of it
with non-members of the Council and the media when
there is no reason of discretion or confidentiality for
being in the other room. Members should therefore
expect this meeting to be presided over in that relaxed
manner.

At this meeting, in the absence of objection, we
are extending an invitation under rule 39 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Hedi
Annabi, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Annabi to take a seat at the Council
table.

Before I ask Mr. Annabi to speak, may I remind
Council members that we are not keeping a list of
speakers. I shall call speakers as they apply to the
President or the Secretariat, in the normal way of our
informal consultations. I would like to have an
interactive discussion. If participants raise questions, I
may turn to Mr. Annabi to answer those questions as
they come up, and not necessarily leave them to be
answered at the end. I am glad, too, that non-members
of the Council, in participating in this meeting, have
been encouraged to pose any questions that they may
have about East Timor through members of the
Council. They may do that during the course of the
discussion. If they have points that they would like to
raise, they can ask a friendly member of the Council to
raise those questions.

I now give the floor to Mr. He'di Annabi for his
briefing of the Council.


