Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
thanks the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Luis Moreno-Ocampo, for presenting the
tenth report of the ICC to the Security Council on the
situation in Darfur, pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1593 (2005).

Almost five years have passed since that
resolution was adopted, and the situation in Darfur
continues to be grave, because of the enormous
challenges that continue to be posed by violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law. And,
with every passing day, impunity for those violations
continues to prevail.

The conflict in Darfur constantly reveals murder,
violations, forced displacement and child recruitment
for participation in the hostilities, among other crimes
that result from attacks against civilian populations.
Those populations not only face a climate of violence
but also suffer from restrictions on access to
humanitarian relief and are under constant threat.

Among the three cases that the Prosecutor's
Office has filed relating to the situation in Darfur, the
only positive element that we can take from the tenth
report is the voluntary appearance before the Court in
May and October 2009 of the rebel leader Bahr Idriss
Abu Garda, suspected of war crimes in the attack
against the African Union base in Haskanita.

As for the other two cases, once again, we see
that cooperation by the Government of the Sudan with
the International Criminal Court is non-existent,
especially on the execution of outstanding arrest
warrants. Nor have national procedures been
established in the Sudan to investigate and try the
perpetrators of crimes documented by the Prosecutor's
Office.

The Government of the Sudan is obliged to
investigate and prosecute the perpetrators of
international crimes committed within its jurisdiction.
That is a basic principle of international criminal law
and a premise of the system created by the Rome
Statute. Events since the adoption of resolution 1593
(2005) show that, faced with the Government's
inaction, the International Criminal Court should
exercise its jurisdiction; all the other parties to the
Darfur conflict should cooperate with it. Therefore, we
need to recall that the total lack of cooperation of the
Government of Sudan is a challenge not only to the

work of the Court, but also to the authority of the
Security Council.

The Prosecutor's report provides us with a wide-
ranging perspective on the nature of the conflict, the
pattern of violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law and the role being played by relevant
international actors. Here, we acknowledge that one very
important aspect is the interaction between the
Prosecutor's Office and the independent African Union
High-level Panel on Darfur. Several times in the Council,
Mexico has stressed the importance of the role of
regional actors in seeking a comprehensive solution to
the situation in Darfur and has pointed out that Africa
should be the main architect ofa solution to the crisis.

The African Union Panel has identified deep-
rooted challenges to justice such as the lack of trust in
local institutions and the impunity that obviously
prevails in this part of the Sudan because of weak
institutional structures incapable of delivering justice,
assigning responsibility or guaranteeing basic rights
and providing redress to victims. We call for the
Panel's course of action to be pursued and that the aims
of promoting peace and reconciliation and combating
impunity in Sudan be achieved. The Panel's
recommendations, especially those related to justice
and impunity, have been well received by the
international community, in particular by the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union and the ICC
Prosecutor's Office. We hope for the same when, in a
few days, the Security Council considers the report
(S/2009/599, annex I). Even within the Sudan, they
have been well received by some sectors that see them
as a useful vehicle for combating impunity. We hope
that the Government of the Sudan will use these
reactions to build agreements favourable to achieving
the aforementioned objectives.

In this context full and comprehensive
compliance with the recommendations is critical in the
short and medium term. In such a multifaceted conflict
as that in Darfur, there is a risk that by only
encouraging one of objectives we achieve neither
peace nor justice. For that reason, we would like to
stress the importance of dialogue and cooperation
between the African Union's Panel of Experts and the
Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court. We hope that through joint work the
recommendations will be implemented and produce
results very shortly. It is therefore fundamental that the
Government of the Sudan genuinely cooperate with the
international community and satisfactorily comply with
its international obligations.

The international community and the Security
Council cannot remain passive in the face of situations
such as that in Darfur, which to date has led to 300,000
deaths and at least 2.5 million displaced people.
Mexico therefore reiterates its call to the Security
Council to demand that the Government of the Sudan
fully comply with resolution 1593 (2005), that it
cooperate without delay with the International
Criminal Court, that it undertake concrete actions to
put an end to the escalation of violence and impunity in
Darfur, and that it adopt the necessary decisions to
guarantee the full protection of the civilian population.

