Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland): Let me, too, thank the
Prosecutor for his report on the situation in Libya.
Libya is getting back on its feet. Civil society is
flourishing and the economy is restarting with the
approval of a national budget and the reopening of the
stock market. Registration programmes for
revolutionary fighters are being rolled out. The
determination and sacrifice of the Libyan people have
brought the prospect of the first democratic elections in
more than a generation. The international community
continues to play a role supporting the political
transition, providing technical assistance to meet
Libya's needs.

The Transitional Government and the National
Transitional Council are leading the process of
building a new, peaceful and prosperous Libya. Libya's
leaders have consistently made clear their commitment
to upholding the rule of law and human rights as part
of a peaceful Libya, the wealth of which is shared
among its people. We urge the Libyan authorities to
ensure that they meet those public commitments.

In that regard, we welcome their close
cooperation with the Commission of Inquiry of the
United Nations Human Rights Council and the
progress towards bringing detention facilities under
Government control. To make further progress, the
Libyan authorities should continue to screen all
detainees and release those who are held without due
cause. They should investigate and hold to account all
those guilty of abuses and press forward with the
implementation of the Commission of Inquiry's
recommendations.

The international community recognizes the
constraints on Libyan Government action after
42 years during which Al-Qadhafi hollowed out State
institutions. We stand ready to provide assistance,
including through the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya.

As we have said before, the developments in
Libya should give all Governments reason to pause
before using violence against their own people. The
international community will ensure that responsible
individuals within such Governments are held to
account, either in their own courts or international
courts such as the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Impunity is no longer tolerable.

The United Kingdom is a strong supporter of the
ICC. We note the detailed work of the Prosecutor and
his Office during visits to Libya over the past six
months and thank him and his staff. Their efforts have
played an important part in challenging impunity and
bringing accountability to a country where it has been
sadly lacking for some time.

We welcome Libya's continued cooperation with
the ICC in relation to the arrest warrant issued against
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi for suspected crimes against
humanity. We note that the Libyan authorities have
submitted an admissibility challenge setting out the
ongoing Libyan investigations into his alleged crimes.
We note with interest, as set out in the Prosecutor's
report, the Libyan actions taken to investigate Saif's
case. He must face justice before an independent court
of law.

With regard to NATO, we emphasize the
demonstrable lengths that NATO went to in order
minimize the risk of civilian casualties, as recognized
by both the Prosecutor's report and the report
(A/HRC/19/68) of the Commission of Inquiry of
8 March. All NATO airstrikes were meticulously
planned, including using precision guided munitions
and intelligence surveillance and reconnaissance to
strike legitimate military targets. NATO cooperated
fully with the Commission of Inquiry report and has
looked into each credible allegation of harm against
civilians that has been brought to its attention.

The authorities of the United Kingdom have
played a part in the ICC's investigation so far by
providing the fullest support to the Prosecutor and his
team of investigators, as and when requested. We
would encourage Libya's neighbours to continue to
cooperate with the ICC, including with regard to
Abdullah Al-Senussi, who is being held in Mauritania.

