Mr. Wali (Nigeria): I would like to congratulate
the Algerian delegation for its handling of the current
month's presidency of the Council and to thank the
Algerian Minister for Foreign Affairs and the
Permanent Representative for initiating our debate on
this all-important issue.

My delegation welcomes the debate on this
important issue of protection of civilians in armed
conflict, especially at a time of escalating conflicts
around the world. We welcome the comprehensive
report of the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs on an enhanced monitoring and
reporting framework for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

In spite of internationally acknowledged
conventions and protocols that guarantee the safety and
protection of non-combatants, civilians are
increasingly the first casualties during armed conflicts.
It is, therefore, the belief of my delegation that this
open debate will help the international community to
refocus its attention on the urgent task of protecting
and safeguarding civilians wherever conflicts erupt.
We should examine the mechanisms and frameworks
for the protection of civilians in armed conflict, with a
view to strengthening them in the light of recent lapses
and abuses.

The African continent has the unenviable record
of playing host to the highest number of conflicts
today. These conflicts, many of which are internal,
have adversely affected the social, cultural and
economic lives of millions of people, especially the
aged, women, children and youth - people who are
neither combatants nor parties to the conflict. The
impunity of parties to conflicts to seize upon unarmed
civilians and to mete out collective punishment to
harmless populations continues to be of serious
concern to my delegation. Civilians are all too often
caught up in the struggle for power and control of
resources, thus becoming pawns in a deadly game that
has neither rules nor respect for the dignity of persons.

Nigeria believes, however, that the first step in
protecting civilians in armed conflict is the prevention
of conflicts. In this regard, Nigeria has intensified
efforts to find lasting solutions to conflict situations in
the West African subregion, in particular, and across
Africa in general, including the Great Lakes region and
the Sudan. President Obasanjo has, since coming to
office in 1999, committed himself to a peaceful
resolution of conflicts in Africa, mindful of the
disruptive nature of conflicts, not only to the
immediate communities in which they occur, but also
to surrounding States, and their potential for depriving
the continent of the capacity to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals. No meaningful development can
take place in an atmosphere of insecurity and chaos. It
is for this reason that my delegation calls on the
international community to redouble its efforts towards
the resolution of the diverse conflicts now raging in
Africa and to assist countries emerging from conflict to
rebuild their shattered economies and infrastructure.

For its part, the African Union has increased its
capacity to forestall and resolve armed conflicts, and to
protect civilians in armed conflict through its Peace
and Security Council. What is required of the
international community is a firm commitment to assist
the African Union and other regional organizations to
strengthen their capacities to contain armed conflicts,
in particular through provision of essential logistical
support. In this regard, we welcome the recent
extension of logistical support from the United States
and the European Union for the African Union's
peacekeeping operations in the Darfur region of the
Sudan.

Nigeria believes that an essential aspect of
prevention of armed conflicts must include the
strengthening of the rule of law, and within that, the
protection of civilians through constitutional,
legislative, judicial and electoral reform. The alarming
increase of civilians caught up in armed conflict is
cause for serious concern to the international
community. Many have been killed or subjected to
extreme human rights violations, including rape and
sexual violence. Civilians have been displaced from
their ancestral homes and left to struggle for existence
in hostile and often unfamiliar territories. The
international community must rise with one voice
against the perpetrators of those despicable acts against
innocent civilians. We should collectively express our
resolve to punish those responsible for deliberate acts
of violence and punishment against civilians in the
name of war.

My delegation is concerned by the diminishing
line between civilians and combatants in many conflict
situations around the world. Combatants often live or
seek shelter in villages and sometimes use civilians,
including women and children, as human shields. This
unfortunate development provides an excuse for
meting out collective punishment to innocent civilians,
including the systematic destruction of whole
communities and their means of survival. Accordingly,
Nigeria calls for the strengthening of mechanisms for
monitoring the conduct of parties to conflicts.

It is gratifying to note that, during the past
decade, the international legal framework has been
expanded to address some of the particular crimes
against civilians in armed conflict, especially in
relation to the most vulnerable members of the
society - that is, women, children and the aged. The
expansion of the scope and definition of war crimes
and crimes against humanity to include rape, enforced
prostitution, trafficking and enslavement, as well as
torture, has resulted in an increase in the number of
persons brought before the International Tribunals for
acts committed against civilians in the course of armed
conflicts.

There should be continued efforts to mainstream
civilian protection into United Nations, regional and
national peacekeeping operations. More importantly,
however, my delegation believes that the best way of
protecting and safeguarding civilians in armed
conflicts is to tackle the root causes of these conflicts
in an open and inclusive manner, and to respect the
cultural, historical and spiritual diversity of peoples.
Furthermore, my delegation is convinced that a fair
distribution of infrastructure and an even pattern of
development are critical elements that could reduce the
necessity to resort to war as a means of redressing
perceived injustices and marginalization.

Thus, my delegation calls for a two-pronged
approach to the issue of protecting civilians in armed
conflict. The first is to encourage the spirit of
compromise, fairness and even-handed development
that would greatly reduce or remove the need for war.
The second and complementary approach would be to
stand firm against violators of the rights of civilians in
armed conflict, through the strengthening of legal
frameworks and mechanisms for monitoring and
reporting attacks against civilians, by State and non-
State actors, in a transparent and non-selective way,
and to bring such perpetrators to justice.

