Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this quarterly open debate on the Middle East. As the situation in the Middle East continues to unfold, we should always bear in mind that long-term political stability and economic prosperity are mutually reinforcing. We encourage the international community to work as one towards strategies that create economic opportunities that translate into tangible improvements in people's lives in the region. Only then, will lasting stability be achieved. Brazil is following with great concern the developments in Iraq. We join others in calling on all parties involved to work towards achieving a peaceful solution to the situation. Further escalation must be avoided at all costs, for it could have potentially devastating consequences, in particular for the most vulnerable populations in the region. Turning to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, Brazil wishes to reiterate its support for the negotiation of a peaceful and creative solution to the conflict, with Israelis and Palestinians living side by side in peace and security. Brazil encourages all parties to seek a constructive political environment conducive to a return to meaningful negotiations. The humanitarian situation in Gaza remains extremely fragile and serves to highlight the need for a fair, just and mutually agreeable political solution to the conflict. In this spirit, Brazil encourages all parties involved to engage in new diplomatic efforts with an open mind in order to reach a just and comprehensive settlement. Brazil points out that the constantly changing dynamics of the reality on the ground in the region calls for a clear response by the international community under the aegis of international law, international humanitarian law and international human rights law. Regarding the situation in Syria, Brazil remains concerned about the escalation of violence throughout the northern part of the country. We reiterate the obligation of all parties to comply with humanitarian law and strongly condemn any attack impacting civilians, including those on medical facilities and workers, who must be protected at all times. We urge the parties concerned to ensure safe and unimpeded access to humanitarian aid in the region. In that regard, we acknowledge the extension of the authorization for the cross-border aid delivery mechanism by the Security Council, while regretting that two of the border crossings were not renewed, which might hamper humanitarian activities in the country. Brazil once again underscores its support for the work of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and encourages the members of the Constitutional Committee to bridge their differences in order to maintain progress on the political track. We remain convinced that only a Syrian- owned and Syrian-led United Nations-facilitated political process with due regard for the preservation of Syria's territorial integrity will bring about lastingpeace and allow for the relief of the humanitarian suffering of the Syrian population. Brazil remains deeply concerned about the worsening of the humanitarian crisis in Yemen, currently regarded as the gravest in the world. We call on the parties to refrain from any action that might lead to a further increase in hostilities and to take the necessary steps towards the full implementation of the Stockholm Agreement. We also encourage the Yemeni Government and the Southern Transitional Council to find common ground and implement the terms of the Riyadh agreement. Furthermore, we urge the parties to continue to work with Special Envoy Martin Griffiths with regard to reaching a comprehensive political solution to the conflict and the provision of continued and unimpeded humanitarian assistance. Confidence-building measures, such as the release of prisoners announced at the end of 2019, are also welcome initiatives, as they contribute to fostering dialogue. Brazil welcomes the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement, for which we have agreed to deploy Brazilian military and police officers, and reiterates the importance of maintaining adequate conditions for the fulfilment of its mandate. Finally, Brazil strongly condemns the recent military escalation in Libya, including the 4 January attack against the Hadaba Military College, as well as the indiscriminate shelling of civilians and civilian buildings in Tripoli. We call on all parties to the conflict to protect civilians and comply with the provisions spelled out in the Geneva Conventions. We are also following with concern the rising prospect of further foreign intervention in the country. Brazil reiterates that there is no military solution to address Libya's pressing political, security and humanitarian challenges. We encourage all the relevant parties to comply with the ceasefire agreement announced on 12 January and welcome the peace efforts recently carried out through the convening of the Berlin conference. We support the work undertaken by Special Representative Ghassan Salame towards a comprehensive political solution to the conflict, based on the implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement signed in Skhirat and the relevant United Nations resolutions. We maintain our hope that the Libyan national conference will be held at the earliest possible opportunity.
