Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Madam President, it is an
honour to have you here presiding over this important
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. My delegation would also
like to welcome Her Excellency the State Secretary
of the Federal Foreign Office of Germany, who has
contributed to this debate.

We wish also to thank Special Coordinator
Mladenov for his comprehensive briefing. We agree
with many of the points he made, in particular the
importance of prioritizing preventive diplomacy.

Indonesia takes this opportunity to reiterate once
again its unequivocal support for the Palestinian cause,
the same support that Indonesia, together with other
members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
reaffirmed a couple of days ago at the Movement's
Summit, held in Baku. As many speakers have stated
this morning, this issue has been one of the longest
standing ones on the Council's agenda. The question
was asked as to how many more debates we need. We
agree that there is a need to have closure on this issue,
but so long as there is no independence for the people
of Palestine, we will continue to raise our voice, loudly.

It is a matter of great significance that this
morning's debate follows disturbing new Israeli threats
of the formal annexation of Palestinian lands in the
occupied territory, including East Jerusalem. This is a
serious and clear threat to the two-State solution. With

that in mind, allow me to make the following points.

First, Israel must be held accountable for its illegal
actions. Indonesia condemns the continued expansion of
illegal Israeli settlements and the intended annexation
of the occupied Palestinian territory. A recent report
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs stated that 547 Palestinians have lost their
homes this year alone to demolitions in the West Bank.
Furthermore, 443 structures have been targeted in more
than 80 communities in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem; that is a 43 per cent increase compared with
the same period in 2018.

Also of grave concern to us are the continuous
provocations by Israeli settlers and security personnel
at the holy sites. These actions constitute a flagrant
violation of international law and the relevant United
Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016),
and a great obstacle to a peaceful resolution ofthe issue.
I reiterate Indonesia's persistent call on the Council to
stand by its obligation to hold Israel accountable.

Secondly, sustaining humanitarian assistance is
crucial. The blockade of Gaza, alongside the relentless
expansion of settlements, Violence and demolition of
property in the West Bank, have, sadly, continued to
degrade the humanitarian situation of Palestinians. The
Gaza blockade represents a collective punishment of
all Palestinians. It is unjust and does not contribute to
resolving the conflict. It must be lifted.

Let me also draw attention to the serious financial
situation that continues to confront the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), hampering the organization's
ability to perform its vital mandate. Indonesia once
again stresses that UNRWA's role is critical, not only
as a lifeline but also as a safeguard for the Palestinian
right of return. We thus need to reinforce our support
for the Palestinian people, including through ensuring
continuation of the work of UNRWA.

Thirdly, there is a need to consolidate our efforts
to reverse the negative trends. As each day passes, the
prevailing negative trends in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict continue to increase the threats to international
peace and security. These trends have to be stopped and
reversed. We cannot afford inaction. Our failure to act
will have great repercussions not only for the prospects
of a peaceful and lasting solution to the Israeli-

Palestinian conflict, but also for peace and stability in
the whole region.

In this regard, I wish to reiterate Indonesia's
profound commitment to, and support for, all efforts
to bring the peace process back on track, based on the
internationally agreed parameters, the relevant United
Nations resolutions and previous agreements.

Convinced that unity and reconciliation are
of paramount importance, we again encourage
all Palestinian factions to work harder towards
reconciliation, for in unity lies strength.

To conclude, there is no viable solution to the
conflict other than the two-State vision. Renouncing
this vision can only lead to an endless cycle of violence
and instability in the region and beyond, with the
threat of a humanitarian catastrophe. We can and must
do much better than that. We as the Council have the
power, the duty and the moral obligation to do the right
thing for the sake of the Palestinian people.

