Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would first like to congratulate Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
on her appointment and to wish her every success with
her mandate. We hope that she, too, will be able to
leave her own mark in fulfilling that mandate, and that
it will be very different from the style adopted by her
predecessor.
We have noted with concern the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
in the document before us (S/2012/261), due to
the misinformation that it contains, submitted by
the outgoing Special Representative, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy. In our View, this is not a professional
report and does not provide an accurate reflection of
the facts. Apparently, the author was motivated by a
desire to harm Syria and to tarnish its reputation,
questioning its international commitments concerning
the protection of children and ending violence against
children in situations of armed conflict.

We therefore entirely reject all the allegations in
the report about Syria and denounce the politicization
of this important humanitarian issue, which is chiefly
concerned with the safety and security of children
in my country. Before they drafted this report, we
should have preferred that its authors substantiate their
information, rather than basing it solely on allegations
that have appeared in the media and that can be
attributed to hostile propaganda efforts being waged
against Syria. We would have preferred that the authors
at least acquaint themselves with the views of the
Syrian Government, which we sought to communicate
to Ms. Coomaraswamy from the very onset of these
events.

The author of the report has imputed the entire
responsibility for the acts of violence perpetrated
against children to the Syrian armed forces, accusing
them of bombing schools and killing and maiming
children, thus deliberately contradicting dozens of other
political and media reports, as well as the eyewitness
accounts of non-governmental parties, which provide
evidence of armed groups' use and recruitment of
children by forcing them to take up arms, participate
in terrorist activities, and obey orders given by the
leaders of terrorist groups to kill and vandalize private
and public goods and property. These are facts about
acts on the ground that even the Secretary-General has
been unable to deny in the report, due to the fact that
they cite credible allegations that armed groups are
recruiting children.

The latest report of the international commission
of inquiry on the situation in Syria also underscores
the fact that anti-Government armed groups have
recruited children under the age of 18 to participate in
combat or provide support by helping to evacuate the
wounded or act as messengers for the armed groups.
In that context, I recall that the Syrian Arab Republic
is not only a party to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, but since 2003 has also been a party to its
Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in
armed conflict. As always, we remain committed to
upholding our obligations under these international
conventions.

We should also have preferred that the Special
Representative include in the paragraphs concerning
Syria the acts that have been perpetrated by armed
terrorist groups that have been supported and financed
by foreign parties. Those groups have burned or
destroyed more than 2,600 schools, nurseries and
kindergartens, and targeted health centres. These acts
have been detailed in UNICEF reports. In fact, it is those
armed groups that are violating the rights of the child in
Syria and hindering the evacuation of the wounded, the
sick, children and disabled from certain areas, where
they have been taken as hostages, as was the case in
the city of Homs, confirmed by the representative of
the International Committee of the Red Cross. As a
gift to the children on their return for the first day of
school, the armed groups bombed a primary school
near Damascus, causing dozens of injuries among
the students. In spite of this, none of the advocates of
children's rights or education rights have intervened. It
seems strange to us that, as usual, the forces oflaw and
order are being accused of these very actions.

In her statement today, the Special Representative
stated that she had asked me to convey to the Syrian
armed forces her appeal to evacuate the schools.
However, she omitted to include my response to her
appeal, and I would therefore like to convey what
I said to her regarding the situation of schools in
Syria. This reply was prepared at the fifth meeting
of the humanitarian forum on Syria, which took
place in Geneva under the aegis of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on 7 September.

At the end of that meeting, a communique was
issued. I shall quote one of its paragraphs, the same
paragraph that I had brought to the attention of the
Special Representative:

(spoke in English)

"The Regional Humanitarian Coordinator,
who is, as is well known, based in Damascus
and who works for OCHA, briefed on the rapidly
deteriorating humanitarian situation resulting from
the recent escalation of violence, said that the local
community's ability to support people who have
fled their homes has been largely exhausted. Of the
1.2 million people displaced, more than 1 million
are sheltering in 470 schools and other public
buildings. The need to find alternative shelter
is urgent, particularly as the new school term is
scheduled to start on 16 September."

(spoke in Arabic)

In other words, the OCHA Coordinator in
Damascus explained to the Special Representative that
schools in Syria served as places ofrefuge for displaced
families and were not being used as emplacements
for Government forces. Again, this is an eyewitness
account from the Coordinator.

Moreover, the Special Representative has received
reports and documents concerning a phenomenon
that has been noted in certain Arab States and which
is known as halal, or authorized, sexual jihad, which
allows the targeting of Syrian girl children living
in refugee camps in Turkey and Jordan. That type of
jihad authorizes marriage to such girl children, aged
14 to 16, in exchange for a modest sum. The Special
Representative also confirmed 86 documented reports
of rape that occurred in Turkish refugee camps.

We would have also preferred that the report make
mention of the illegal unilateral economic measures
that have been imposed on Syrian children, who are
their primary victims because of the difficulty in
transferring funds resulting from the blockade imposed
on the national banks, which has seriously hampered
the provision of vaccines and medications to children.

We were equally taken aback to find that the report
devotes eight paragraphs to Syria while failing entirely
to mention the suffering endured by Syrian children
under the decades-long Israeli occupation of the Syrian

Golan. Those children, too, suffer on a daily basis as a
result of the crimes committed by the Israeli occupiers
and daily Violations of their most basic rights: the
right to life, education, food and water. That is not to
mention the continuing suffering resulting from the
antipersonnel mines laid by Israel in the territory of
the occupied Golan. Such mines have led to the deaths
of 202 Syrian children and have caused 329 others to
suffer from permanent disabilities. For years, on dozens
of occasions, we drew Ms. Coomaraswamy's attention
to the need to focus in particular on this matter in her
reports. However, she consistently ignored that request.

Although the suffering of children in situations of
armed conflict has been brought to light as a result ofthe
work of the Special Representative, her statement was
devoid of any mention of the suffering of Palestinian
children living under Israeli occupation. Here I would
simply like to remind the Special Representative
of the fact that Israel, since 29 September 2000, has
killed more than 1,500 Palestinian children. It would
be equally appropriate to mention the Iraqi and Libyan
children who also lost their lives as a result ofthe NATO
military interventions in those two countries. We wish
also to recall the anniversary of Sabra and Shatila.

The Syrian Government reaffirms its right to
protect its citizens and, on the basis of the ethical norms
of the Security Council and in keeping with the Charter
of the United Nations, my country calls on the members
of the Security Council once again to bring pressure to
bear on those countries that are funding terrorism in
Syria, so that they desist from supporting those terrorist
groups and refrain from arming or financing them or
facilitating their operations, in keeping with Security
Council resolutions on the combat against terrorism.

My country also calls for greater emphasis to be
placed on the need to repeal the unethical and illegal
sanctions that have been imposed on my country, Syria.

