Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's meeting.

November has proved to be a very busy month.
The Council has adopted resolutions extending the
mandates of the United Nations Mission in the Republic
of South Sudan (resolution 2187 (2014)) and the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau (resolution 2186 (2014)); on fighting piracy
off the Somali coast (resolution 2182 (2014)); and on
the stabilization forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(resolution 2183 (2014)). The Council also adopted
resolution 2185 (2014) on United Nations policing, and
issued presidential statements on the Ebola outbreak
in West Africa (S/PRST/2014/24), counter-terrorism
(S/PRST/2014/23) and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (S/PRST/2014/22). China commends the
Australian presidency for its successful conduct of the
work of the Council for this month.
With regard to the Council's work for November, I
wish to stress the following three points.

First, on the situation in the Middle East,
24 November was the International Day of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People. This day reminds the
international community once again of the urgent need
to find a solution to the question of Palestine. Recently,
tension has been growing between Palestine and Israel
which China finds very worrisome. We call upon the
partiesto exerciserestraintandurgelsraelto immediately
stop the construction of settlements and treat seriously
the legitimate concerns of Palestine, the Arab States
and the Islamic world with respect to the religious
sanctuary in East Jerusalem and avoid any words or
actions that might further escalate the situation. The
relevant parties, working on behalf of the international
community, should strengthen coordination and work
in synergy to bring the parties back to the right path of
talks and negotiations. It is imperative that the Council
take the required responsibility; inaction can no longer
be an option. China calls for swift Council action
towards holding consultations on the draft resolution
submitted by Jordan on behalf of the Arab States so
as to respond to their legitimate demands and those of
Palestine. China joins the international community in
continuing to work constructively towards a solution
for the question of Palestine.

Secondly, on the question of Burundi, the mandate
of the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi
(BINUB) is coming to an end at the end of next
month. During the past few years, BINUB has worked
actively to help the Government of Burundi to carry
out peacebuilding, reconstruction and economic and
social development efforts. We hope that BINUB will
strengthen its coordination with the Government so as
to achieve a successful transition from the Integrated
Office to the United Nations country team. At the
same time, we call upon the international community
to continue to provide assistance to Burundi in
preparation for next year's general election on the basis
of full respect for Burundi's sovereignty.
Thirdly, this month the Council held an open debate
on the question of counter-terrorism (see S/PV.7316)
and adopted a presidential statement at the end of the
meeting. China commends Australia for that initiative
and for the efforts it has carried out in that connection.
At present, the international counter-terrorism
landscape remains very grim. The means of recruiting
and financing terrorist organizations have become more
internationalized, with young peoplejoining their ranks
and a greater reliance on digital technology. China calls
upon the international community to abandon double
standards in fighting terrorism, observe the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and
respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the countries concerned.

It is vital that the United Nations and the Security
Council play a leading role and undertake effective
measures to prevent terrorist organizations from
using the Internet to broadcast terrorist and violent
audiovisual materials, spread extremist ideology,
recruit new members, raise funds, instigate plans
and execute terrorist actions. China supports the
international community's efforts in strengthening
exchanges of information and intelligence, sharing
effective practices, enhancing capacity-building and
taking joint actions in order to maintain international
peace and security.

Finally, I wish to express my best wishes to Chad
for its assumption of the presidency for the month of
December.

