Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her update
on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as on the implementation of the political
agreement of 31 December 2016 and the country's
preparations for elections.

We have taken note of the Secretary-General's
latest report on the development of events in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2018/655) and
we definitely share his opinion that ensuring that the
elections scheduled for 23 December are held on time
will help to reduce the tensions in Congolese society. In
that regard, we would like to draw attention to President
Kabila's recent address to the National Assembly, in
which the leader of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo once again affirmed his determination to abide
by the Constitution, which we see as an appropriate and
timely sign. We would like to see the opposition forces
reject their negative agenda too.

We note the importance of working to ensure that
the Independent National Electoral Commission's
electoral calendar and revised voting dates are
adhered to. That will require support for the electoral
process from the international community, including
by using the logistical capabilities of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
We note the measures that Kinshasa has taken with
regard to the technical and legislative preparations
for voting, including the timely enactment of laws on
the distribution of seats in the provincial legislatures
and local councils and the publication of a definitive
list of the political parties and associations permitted
to participate in the elections. It is important that the
process of auditing the voter register is being conducted
under the auspices of the International Organization of
la Francophonie, and in our view the fact that half of
the country's political parties have signed the electoral
code of conduct is a positive development.

However, we would urge our colleagues on the
Security Council not to make an issue of the decision
taken by the National Electoral Commission to use
electronic voting machines. This is not about an
electronic vote count, as many have mistakenly said.
The equipment is to be used only to make preparing
and printing the ballot papers considerably easier,
while the vote count will still be done manually, as our
colleagues from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have assured us more than once. We agree that in order
to avoid problems, Kinshasa should provide stable
financing for the election preparations and strengthen
the coordination of its work with MONUSCO.

We do not deny the importance of ensuring that the
authorities mobilize to implement confidence-building
measures, including on the emblematic cases referred
to in the political agreement regarding political actors
who are outside the country. However, we urge all the
country's opposition forces to cooperate with Kinshasa
and the Electoral Commission and to avoid any
demonstrations of violence. We also consider it crucial
to ensure respect for the sovereignty and legislature of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We believe that the role of the United Nations
Mission in the organization and conduct of elections
should not go beyond the framework of the mandate
outlined in resolution 2409 (2018). The protection
of civilians in the context of the elections should be
carried out with full respect for the basic principles
of peacekeeping and without any interference in
Kinshasa's internal affairs. In particular, under no
circumstances should MONUSCO take any action that
could be interpreted as support for a specific Congolese
party. We believe that the citizens of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must decide their own destiny,
whie the international community's job is to assist them
in areas where their help is genuinely solicited. It is also
important to remember that the elections themselves are
no panacea. It is vital not to lose sight of the importance
of resolving the underlying causes of the crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

