Mr. Kolby (Norway): First of all, I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council and to express my
delegation's gratitude to the Russian delegation for its
handling of the presidency last month.

Norway welcomes the lifting of the siege on
President Arafat and the headquarters of the Palestinian
Authority in Ramallah. It proves that diplomacy and
negotiations on the ground, and not military action and
violence, are the measures by which this conflict must
be resolved. Norway also urges the parties to find a
non-violent end to the current stand-off at the Church
of the Nativity in Bethlehem.

The initiative to establish a fact-finding team for
Jenin was endorsed by a unanimously adopted
resolution of the Council. Norway deeply regrets the
continued lack of willingness of the Government of
Israel to cooperate with the fact-finding team. Because
of the Israeli position, the Secretary-General was
forced to disband the team. Norway understands the
decision of the Secretary-General. However, we still
believe that it would be in the interests of all parties -
Palestinians, Israelis and the international
community - to obtain information that is as accurate
as possible on what happened in the refugee camp in
Jenin.

Norway supports the three-pronged approach that
has received wide endorsement internationally. We
need to work in parallel on the political, security and
economic tracks. We are pleased to note that a meeting
of the international donors in Norway a week ago
produced strong and concrete commitments to the
rebuilding of Palestinian society. Norway also strongly
supports the efforts of the United States and the
"quartet" to promote peace in the region.

The immediate challenges now are to rebuild the
institutions of the Palestinian Authority, including its
security apparatus. We expect President Arafat to
exercise real leadership, to do his utmost to prevent
further acts of terrorism and to carry out his
responsibilities as the elected leader of the Palestinian
people. At the same time, we expect Israel to halt all
military operations against the Palestinian Authority,
and we urge Israel to withdraw fully from all
reoccupied Palestinian areas.

In the belief that it will be a substantial
contribution to reaching our common aim of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security within internationally recognized borders,
Norway supports the initiative of the United States to
convene an international peace conference on the
Middle East.

The role of this Council at this critical time must
be to join forces in pursuit of a resumed political
process.

