Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I
would like first of all to thank Mr. Schwarz-Schilling
for his briefing and, in particular, to commend him for
his work as High Representative in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I would also like to welcome Mr. Spirie,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

The Permanent Representative of Germany will
soon make a statement on behalf of the European
Union, with which I fully align myself. For my part, I
would like to make the following comments.

The political and security situation described by
the High Representative reminds us that it is necessary
for the international community to remain vigilant in
order to ensure the stability of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is vital for the international community
to remain mobilized and united in order to face both
the internal tensions - and I am thinking here of the
effects of the heightened political polarization since the
October 2006 elections and the difficulties linked to
the police reform process - and those related to a
regional environment that is still uncertain. It is also
vital to remind the Bosnian political actors of the need
for responsible conduct. Initiatives which could
threaten the stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina will
not be accepted.

In this context, it is proper to maintain a robust
international framework for the political and reform
processes in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is for this
reason that the Peace Implementation Council decided
to extend the mandate of the Office of the High
Representative beyond June 2007. I welcome the
appointment as future High Representative Mr.
Miroslav Lajcak, an experienced diplomat who is very
familiar with the region. He will enjoy our full support
and, I am sure, that of the Security Council.

I would like to recall our commitment to the
European perspective of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which should be enshrined in the signing of a
stabilization and association agreement. That will not
be possible until the police and mass media reforms
have been implemented. We expect that the federal
authorities and the federated entities will fulfil the
commitments that they have made.

Furthermore, France will be particularly attentive
to ensuring that the efforts to cooperate fully with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) will be continued and stepped up.

The arrest and the transfer to The Hague of all
fugitives remains essential, both to meet Bosnia and
Herzegovina's international obligations and to
complete the necessary reconciliation process.

The High Representative referred to the issue of
the non-decertification by the International Police Task
Force of Bosnian police officers. We welcome the fact
that a solution acceptable to all parties was found on
the basis of the recommendations made by
Mr. Schwarz-Schilling. It is now up to the Bosnian
authorities to act within the framework of the letter
sent by the President of the Security Council to the
High Representative.

Our objective is to move as soon as possible
towards a transfer of all powers to Bosnian authorities
and, hence, the removal of the international
stewardship. The pace of that process will depend to a
large extent on Bosnia and Herzegovina's success in
the reform process. It is in that spirit that we view the
extension of the High Representative's mandate.

