Ms. Landgren: Nepal's peace process is at a
delicate and critical moment, as negotiators work to
resolve the current stand-off between Maoist
supporters and the Government, primarily over Maoist
demands for a national unity Government. As the
general strike in Nepal enters its fifth day, negotiations
among the major parties are dealing squarely with the
major and contentious governance and other peace
process issues that have long been side-stepped,
including critical constitutional questions concerning
Nepal's proposed federal structure and form of
governance and the integration and rehabilitation of
Maoist army personnel.

Soon after the 2008 election, the Interim
Constitution, which emphasized the importance of
governing through consensus, was amended to permit
an opposition, eliminating a vital element in managing
Nepal's post-conflict transition. For much of the past
year, the major parties have identified the
establishment of a consensus Government as the path
to greater confidence, and thereby to the conclusion of
the peace process.

As part of a possible package agreement, the
parties are also discussing a handful of other long-
standing issues, including ending the paramilitary
function and activities of the Maoist Young Communist
League and the return by the Maoists of all seized
property, both of which were addressed by earlier
agreements but never implemented. Extending the
imminent deadline of the Constituent Assembly is also
under discussion. All the elements of a solution to this
impasse are acknowledged by the major parties. The
main stumbling blocks in the negotiations are,
reportedly, the timing and leadership of a proposed
new national unity Government and the modalities for
the integration and rehabilitation of Maoist army
personnel. If crisis is averted through a deal in the
coming days, it will be vital to put in place effective
machinery for its monitoring and oversight.

The United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN)
has long warned of the dangerous slide in the peace
process. The process remains marked by profound
10-34793
mutual mistrust, with majority Governments having
reinforced the divisions between the Maoist and
non-Maoist parties for nearly two years. In that
polarized climate, the Maoists - the largest political
party - have remained in opposition for the past year.
Other parties have challenged the Maoists'
commitment to multiparty democracy and the rule of
law and have called on them to abandon recourse to
violence. The Maoists, for their part, have expressed
doubts about the commitment of other major parties to
the socio-political changes foreseen by the peace
agreements, to the new constitution and to the fresh
elections that would follow. Several other current risks
to the peace process are touched on in the report before
the Council (8/2010/214), including the looming
deadline for the promulgation of a new constitution.

Tensions have worsened since my last report to
the Council in January (see S/PV.6260). Since early
March, clashes among political parties, especially their
youth wings, have increased. Localities began
reporting renewed extortion or forced donations by the
Unified Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (UCPN-M),
calling to mind wartime practices. According to
reliable reports, Maoist cadres were told to prepare for
revolt. Meanwhile, the Defence Ministry announced
that fresh recruitment to the Nepal Army would begin,
in breach of the peace agreements. Overt challenges
have grown to the federal, secular and republican basis
of the Interim Constitution. Madheshi leaders have
expressed deep frustration at their sense of exclusion
from the centre of policymaking and from the high-
level political mechanism. The security situation in the
Terai remains a concern, and across the country chief
district officers feel increasingly beleaguered.

Those events, combined with the lack of decisive
progress on the constitution and on the integration and
rehabilitation of Maoist army personnel, have stoked
public unease over a possible return to open conflict or
of an autocratic pre-emption of Nepal's democratic
transition. The death of Nepali Congress President
Girija Prasad Koirala has prompted a tripartite
leadership struggle within the party. Along with
continued deep factionalism within the Communist
Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist-Leninist) (UML), has
exacerbated the political stalemate.

Last July, G. P. Koirala proposed the
establishment of the high-level political mechanism to
break that stalemate. The initiative itself became the
subject of numerous preconditions, but the mechanism
10-34793

was finally established in January and met a few times
before Mr. Koirala's death on 20 March. The high-level
political mechanism was a step towards addressing one
of the long-term deficits of the peace process, namely,
the weak architecture of negotiation, consultation and
monitoring of the implementation of past agreements.
But it may turn out to have been too little and too late.
In recent days, the Government and the Maoists have
accused one another of actual or imminent breaches of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, a reminder that
no overall monitoring mechanism exists.

The Maoists brought large numbers of supporters
to Kathmandu for May Day, followed by an indefinite
general strike, from 2 May, calling on the Government
of Madhav Kumar Nepal to step down and pave the
way for a Government of national unity. The Prime
Minister has rejected calls for his immediate
resignation, but has said that he will not be an obstacle
if an understanding is reached among the parties.

UNMIN has warned of the grave risks to the
peace process should the stand-off persist. The
Government has said that the Nepal Army will
intervene if the Maoist protest should turn violent, and
has placed the national security forces on high alert.
The Maoists have insisted that their protest will remain
peaceful. However, one member of the Maoist army
was found in possession of a hand grenade while
travelling on a public bus, a reckless act which
UNMIN immediately condemned; and Maoist
supporters were arrested in Kathmandu with five
homemade socket bombs. Ingredients used in the
manufacture of improvised explosive devices were
reportedly seized from a Kathmandu hotel.

By the conclusion of the fourth day of the general
strike, several clashes had occurred between Maoists
and local residents in different localities, and there are
reports that counter-campaigns may be organized, which
can be expected to exacerbate tensions. Economic losses
from the strike are significant. Party workers have
started to suffer from waterborne diseases, and
temperatures are high in Kathmandu and the Terai. The
UCPN-M. has reportedly seized a few Nepal Army
officers in civilian dress and handed them over to the
security forces while publicly accusing them of spying.

The overall level of control and restraint shown
by the Government and the Maoists is commendable.
All the same, the risks grow from one day to the next.
This situation should not be allowed to continue, and
3
all encouragement is needed for both sides to deepen
their discussion, come to agreement and resolve the
crisis speedily.

In 10 days, UNMIN will conclude its current
mandate, extended at the requested of the Government
of Nepal in January on the basis that the Mission's
remaining activities would be completed at least two
weeks before 28 May, the date on which Nepal's new
constitution was to be promulgated, according to the
Interim Constitution.

Although the drafting of a new federal
constitution was the primary task of the Constituent
Assembly, the parties have not agreed on either the
appropriate federal structure for Nepal or the future
form of Government. In mid-April, the leaders of the
governing coalition parties - the Nepali Congress and
the Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist- Leninist) - said that the constitution could not be
drafted by the deadline. In response to widespread
alarm over a political vacuum being created on 29 May,
the Speaker of the Constituent Assembly, Subas
Nembang, recently advised that there is no legal or
constitutional impediment to extending the tenure of
the Constituent Assembly, as all provisions of the
Interim Constitution can be amended except those on
Nepal's republican and federal nature. Extending the
term of the Constituent Assembly is among the issues
now under negotiation.

Also under negotiation is how to resolve the future
of nearly 20,000 Maoist army personnel, which lies at
the heart of the peace process. Under the peace
agreements, they are to be integrated into the security
forces or rehabilitated. The question of how many might
be integrated has only recently become the subject of
open discussion and negotiation among the parties.

At the initial stages, the Government proposed
that 3,000, or some 15 per cent of the verified total
Maoist army personnel, be brought into the country's
security forces, while the UCPN-M. asserted that all
their members should be accommodated. The Technical
Committee has undertaken some planning for
rehabilitation packages, including a cash component,
for the remainder. Since March, however, the Maoist
members have not taken part in meetings of the Special
Committee. Negotiators in the present impasse report
that the Nepali Congress and UML are pressing for an
agreement on the numbers to be integrated, while
UCPN-M. wishes first to agree on the modalities for
integration.

The former Maoist combatants urgently need
solutions, as individuals and as a key to the peace
process of Nepal. As the recent experience of
discharging the disqualified personnel shows on a far
smaller scale, the integration and rehabilitation of the
larger number of verified personnel requires a carefully
planned and managed process, with details worked out
well in advance of implementation. Poorly-executed
social rehabilitation or an excessive reliance on cash
packages can sow the seeds of future problems. Earlier
in the year, Nepali commentators voiced concern at the
discharge of disqualified personnel with training and
educational possibilities that are strictly optional. I urge
the parties to invest adequately in the planning, design,
implementation, monitoring and oversight of all phases
of the integration and rehabilitation exercise, with
which the United Nations remains available to assist.

Resolution 1909 (2010) of last January called on
UNMIN, working with the parties, to make
arrangements for its withdrawal and for the handing-
over of its residual monitoring responsibilities. As the
report before the Council notes, UNMIN proceeded to
conduct extensive consultations with the parties, both
bilaterally and jointly.

In response to our expectations of a detailed
discussion of options that would permit the transfer of
monitoring, the parties designated senior members
familiar with the peace process and with the role of
UNMIN. Five of the six participants were current or
former ministers, three are members of the Special
Committee on integration and rehabilitation, and three
had either been part of the original peace process
negotiating teams or otherwise engaged in peace
initiatives. Four of the six are now part of the task
force seeking to resolve the current crisis.

Between 14 March and 26 April, we engaged in
some 12 hours of collective discussion during three
review meetings, considering alternatives to UNMIN
and the expectations the major political actors hold of
the Mission. Conducting the discussions under
Chatham House rules contributed to frank and
productive debate. In accordance with the request of
the Security Council, UNMIN proposed several options
that would reduce or eliminate entirely our monitoring
role, including its replacement or supplementation by a
mixed military body, by a national civilian body, or by
10-34793
consolidating cantonments or weapons storage
containers, making clear that our suggestions were not
exhaustive.

The parties conveyed unanimously that UNMIN's
departure at this point in the peace process would not
be beneficial. They also conveyed that alternative
monitoring arrangements were not feasible. They
recommended that UNMIN's role be relevant to the
current state of the peace process and, in particular,
that UNMIN assist the Special Committee on the
planning and implementation of integration and
rehabilitation. The group also asked that UNMIN be
ready to facilitate other aspects of the peace process, as
might be requested. Disagreement emerged over the
nature of UNMIN monitoring, with some suggesting
that UNMIN should no longer monitor the Nepal Army
due to changed circumstances, but focus exclusively on
the Maoist army, while others proposed that UNMIN
monitor the integration process itself, as well as the
democratization of the Nepal Army.

In successive letters requesting the extension of
UNMIN'S mandate, the Government of Nepal has
referred to the important role played by UNMIN in
providing support and facilitation within its mandate to
Nepal's nationally-driven peace process. As the report
now before the Council notes, the issues on which the
parties expressed agreement in our consultations are
also issues to which UNMIN can strengthen support
within its existing mandate. There is manifest logic in
linking the departure of UNMIN to the resolution of
the matter of the Maoist army personnel. And, in a
separate development, UNMIN recently facilitated a
high-level but low-key resolution of a disagreement
between the Maoists and the Government on the issue
of payments to Maoist army personnel in the
cantonments.

As the Council is well aware, UNMIN is set up to
operate in an environment of relative confidence and
relative compliance by the parties with the agreements
they themselves have negotiated. The Agreement on
the Monitoring of the Management of Arms and
Armies, which placed restrictions on both armies and
assigned to UNMIN a light monitoring role, was
foreseen as a short-term arrangement. Between the
April 2008 election and January 2009, the number of
arms monitors was reduced from 186 to 90, and then to
73, the minimum requirement, which also presupposed
that the need for UNMIN monitoring would soon come
to an end.
10-34793

Through the many challenges of Nepal's peace
process, the Security Council has often underlined its
understanding and support. The process has progressed
with relative speed, notably in its early stages, but also
with dramatic setbacks. It is a year today since the
Council met to the news of the resignation of then-
Prime Minister Prachanda, following his unsuccessful
attempt to sack the Chief of Army Staff. Despite a
number of fragile moments, the parties have kept the
peace. It is imperative that their commitment to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement be reinforced, as
there is considerable distance still to travel.

The political parties speak of the logical
conclusion of the peace process in the near term as
being attained when the Maoist army personnel are
integrated and rehabilitated, or when the new
constitution is adopted. But this process is ultimately
about resolving long-term underlying causes of the
conflict. Serious challenges remain, such as the
exclusion of marginalized groups, the lack of basic
services and adequate security for all, and the search
for justice, as is particularly evident in the consistent
impunity granted to Maoist and Government actors
alike for past and current human rights violations.

Many Nepalese are disappointed, their
expectations of the peace process still unfulfilled.
There is no room in this peace process for violence,
and addressing the role of armed actors is a high
priority and a cornerstone of a sustained peace. The
parties, too, can demonstrate greater seriousness in
monitoring and being held to their prior commitments.
During his visit to Nepal in March, Under-Secretary-
General Lynn Pascoe warned that fully half of all peace
processes fail within a decade. With the strong
encouragement of all supporters of the peace process,
Nepal's political parties can and must pull the process
back from its present disarray and animosity.

