Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my gratitude to the
Senegalese presidency for holding such an important
debate on the role of peacekeeping operations in
confronting asymmetric threats. The changing security
environment and the changing nature of conflicts
in which United Nations missions are deployed
compel us to continuously review the peacekeeping
operations. Such review would enable the missions to
keep up with the security requirements imposed on the
international community.

The mandates of United Nations missions have
evolved from monitoring peace agreements between
international parties to dealing with internal conflicts.
The parties to such conflicts are made up of armed
groups that resort to asymmetric attacks against
civilians and peacekeeping operations and forces.
We must therefore review the ability of peacekeeping
operations to carry out their mandates in the light of
such dangers, and we must also review their existing
capabilities that would enable them to confront those
asymmetric dangers, whose nature and cause we must
seek to understand.

There are some similarities in the methods that
are used by the various armed groups, terrorists and
extremist organizations, such as the use of improvised
explosive devices. However, the desired objectives of
those groups often differ. In most cases, armed groups
are parties to a conflict of a political nature; their
aggressive attacks target uniformed forces, whether
those of the State or those ofthe United Nations. On the
other hand, operations carried out by terrorist groups or
organizations are considered criminal and motivated by
ideology, and they mainly target civilians. It is therefore
necessary, in addressing such attacks, to use a strategic
and comprehensive approach that includes countering
extremist and terrorist ideologies. With that in mind,
I would like to make the following specific points on
peace operations facing asymmetric threats.

First, peacekeeping operations are not charged
with executing counter-terrorism operations. Their
role in that regard is limited to enhancing the capacity
of States to regain security control, which they do
by supporting reform processes targeted at security
and judicial institutions. They assist in building the
necessary framework needed to promote the rule of law
so as to counter the extremism that leads to terrorism. In
addition, they implement disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes, pursuant to the mandate
entrusted to the particular mission.

Secondly, we must enhance the security procedures
of peacekeeping operations and ensure that they are
equipped and prepared to protect personnel against
any danger that might arise. We should also ensure
that United Nations missions have adequate medical
capacities, most importantly the ability to conduct
medical evacuations. Such preparations must be
taken into consideration during the initial stages of
establishing a mandate. We must reinforce training and
security measures in order to address such dangers,
as well as prepare and organize refresher training,
including simulations, at the headquarters of United
Nations missions.

Thirdly, confronting armed groups and attacks
and enhancing safety and security measures is not a
pretext for the use of force in an active or aggressive
manner, nor is it a justification for the use of certain
controversial methods that do not enjoy consensus
among Member States in peacekeeping operations,
such as the use of intelligence methods or modern
technology to gather information.

Fourthly, it is important to promote coordination
between the various United Nations agencies and
departments, especially between the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Political Affairs, as well as between peacekeeping
operations and United Nations offices around the
world, while also respecting the mandates entrusted to
each entity. Coordinated efforts must therefore rely on
the comparative advantage of each agency, ensuring the
effectiveness of the entire Organization. It is therefore
imperative to design peacekeeping mandates with a
view to contributing to settling the conflict politically
and not just managing it in the absence of a long-term
political horizon.

The added value of peacekeeping operations does
not lie in military action or managing the risks of
conflicts. Instead, it lies in establishing a strategic and
comprehensive approach to addressing the crisis - an
approach that ensures sustained peace. The only way
to ensure that United Nations forces are not targeted
or exposed to asymmetric attacks is to uphold the
neutrality of the United Nations and its peacekeeping
operations, while communicating with the parties
concerned so as to create common ground that can lead
to a peaceful settlement of disputes.

