Mr. Minah (Sierra Leone): Let me warmly
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of October and
to convey my delegation's sincere appreciation to you
for organizing this debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding. May I also assure you of my
delegation's support for your successful conduct of the
work of the Council throughout your tenure. My
delegation also wishes to convey its gratitude for the
work of Ambassador Takasu and for his comprehensive
report.

I would like to pay a special tribute to the former
Assistant Secretary-General, Ms. Carolyn McAskie, for
her significant contribution to making the
Peacebuilding Commission a force for good. Indeed,
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Fund
undoubtedly required the experience and sterling
organizational qualities of Ms. McAskie to survive its
formative years. By the same token, let me also
congratulate and welcome the current Assistant
Secretary-General, Ms. Jane Holl Lute, whose
background and exceptional track record make her a
worthy successor to take the Peacebuilding Support
Office and United Nations peacebuilding endeavours to
the next level.

We deeply appreciate this debate because it
provides yet another opportunity to take stock of the
progress made by the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Peacebuilding Fund in delivering on their mandate
to consolidate peace in countries emerging from
conflict by addressing critical gaps in their recovery
efforts. In this respect, we are constantly confronted
with the need to ascertain the extent to which the
Commission has been successful in garnering sustained
international attention and the necessary strategic
commitment to mobilize resources to implement the
compacts with countries on the agenda of the
Commission.

As one of the pioneer beneficiaries, Sierra Leone
has witnessed a significant evolution in United Nations
peacebuilding in the very short time the Peacebuilding
Commission has been at work. The evolution of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
into the United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra
Leone (UNIOSIL) and now into the United Nations

Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL) is evidence of the country's contribution to
this endeavour. Similarly, the Peacebuilding
Commission's engagement in Sierra Leone has had a
positive impact on the Government's peacebuilding
efforts. As a Government, we recognize the
contribution of the quick-impact projects implemented
within the key priority areas for cooperation. The range
of bilateral and multilateral interventions targeted at
supporting projects aimed at promoting democracy,
good governance, justice and security reform, together
with youth employment and energy sector initiatives,
continues to show promising signs of consolidating
peace in Sierra Leone.

Despite these advances in the peacebuilding
process in Sierra Leone, the problem of resource
unpredictability remains a critical issue. For instance,
the Secretary-General's initial allocation in March
2007 of $35 million from the Peacebuilding Fund to
Sierra Leone has been completely exhausted. I wish to
reiterate our recent appeal to our partners, launched at
High-Level Stakeholders Consultation in May, to scale
up their assistance. That would be useful to expedite
the implementation of the Sierra Leone Peacebuilding
Cooperation Framework. The challenge for all of us is
to sustain the fragile peace.

Peacebuilding work cannot be successfully
implemented without the much-needed resources to
advance the process. These human and financial
resources are key to building a lasting peace,
establishing national reconciliation and combating
poverty. In our experience, when the weapons of war
go silent, post-conflict societies are more often than
not left with the scars of massive devastation and the
flight of their limited skilled work force. It is therefore
necessary to continue to emphasize the enormous
demand for human, technical and financial resources
for post-conflict State building.

In this regard, Sierra Leone is encouraged by the
recent catalytic support provided by the Secretary-
General from the Peace Building Fund to the Central
African Republic, cote d'Ivoire and Guinea-Bissau to
kick-start critical peacebuilding interventions in those
countries. That effort clearly underscores the
preventive approach Sierra Leone has since been
advocating. The dilemma, however, is that, in
comparative terms, while hundreds of millions of
dollars are dedicated to peacekeeping efforts, the
crucial beneficial measure of conflict prevention
remains woefully underfunded. That phenomenon
clearly begs for a serious rethinking of the
international community's and the United Nations
approach to the maintenance of international peace and
security. Additional financial resources and technical
assistance are key to the effective and meaningful
implementation of the Cooperation Framework.
Indeed, if we are to accelerate the process of helping
countries emerging from conflict get on track for the
attainment of the Millennium Development Goals, it is
logical to provide them with much-needed support in
their post-conflict reconstruction efforts.

We fully concur with the Secretary-General's
appeal for support for the Peacebuilding Commission
in order to establish and operationalize a capacity-
building fund and a youth basket fund, to establish a
national youth commission and to elaborate a
comprehensive national youth policy.

Concerned about the security implications of the
scarcity and the rising price of food, His Excellency
Dr. Ernest Bai Koroma, President of Sierra Leone, in
his address to the sixty-third session of the General
Assembly, reiterated his Government's appeal for
agriculture to be urgently considered as a priority for
collaboration with Sierra Leone. On 25 September, he
asserted that Africa must increase food productivity
and achieve food self-sufficiency, that massive
investment in agriculture was the key to a long-term
solution and that Sierra Leone was suitably positioned
to benefit from such investment.

For the Peacebuilding Commission's engagement
with post-conflict societies to be meaningful, the
principles of national ownership, coherence and
coordination, particularly in the setting of priorities,
should be the guide posts for cooperation between
those countries, the United Nations and the
international community.

My Government is doing everything within its
power to expedite the finalization of the second
generation Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper. We count
on the continued support of the Peacebuilding
Commission to provide critical assistance to my
Government to develop and prepare a national aid
policy and ensure greater coherence and coordination
among our international partners in achieving our
peacebuilding and national recovery efforts. To this
end, I would like to express the sincere gratitude of my
delegation to all our bilateral and multilateral partners

for their targeted interventions in the implementation
of programmes and institutional capacity-building. On
behalf of my Government, I wish in particular to
extend our profound appreciation to the Government of
the Kingdom of the Netherlands for their unwavering
commitment to fostering peace, stability and
development in Sierra Leone.

I would be remiss in my duty if I failed to
conclude my statement by reiterating the statement of
Sierra Leone's Minister for Foreign Affairs during her
address to the Security Council on 20 May, in which
she stated:

"Delivering sustainable peace is not only an act
of enlightened self-interest, but also a public
good for all of mankind and humanity.
Experience has proven that conflict and social
instability breed poverty, flagrant Violations of
human rights and human dignity, socio-economic
disparity and social and political disintegration.
The causes of conflict are like their effects:
poverty, low economic growth, ethnic and
cultural intolerance, and the mugging of
democracy, social justice and human dignity.
Wrestling with this vicious cycle of instability
and underdevelopment in our present global
reality is, therefore, clearly not an act of charity."
(S/PV.5895, p. 5)

