Mr. Lauber: Iwould like to thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council from
the perspective of the Chair of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). As usual,
my statement has been subject to consultation with,
and approval by, the members of the configuration,
including the country concerned, Burundi.

Let me start by welcoming the two appointments
just mentioned by the Assistant Secretary-General:
those of Mr. Michel Kafando as Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General and of Mr. Garry Conille as
United Nations Resident Coordinator in Burundi.
We also acknowledge the rapid accreditation by the
Government of Burundi. We furthermore welcome
Mr. Kafando's visit to Burundi, scheduled for the end
of the month, to make the first contact with the national
authorities in Bujumbura. I very much look forward to
the cooperation between Mr. Kafando, Mr. Conille and
the configuration.

One of the key events that marked the period
since the previous Council briefing on Burundi (see S/PV.7895) was, as the Assistant Secretary-Generaljust
mentioned, the East African Community (EAC) Heads
of State Summit on 20 May in Dar-es-Salaam. The
Summit demonstrated once again the importance of
regional engagement. Mr. Yoweri Museveni, President
of Uganda, now assumes the chairmanship of the EAC,
and he reiterated his personal commitment to the EAC-
led Burundi mediation. He also called for a resumption
of socioeconomic cooperation with Burundi.

Furthermore, the Summit provided clarity about
the direction of the mediation process. Mr. Benjamin
Mkapa, EAC Facilitator and former President of
Tanzania, presented a proposal on the way forward
that outlines a series of steps towards overcoming
the current situation and creating the necessary
preconditions for peaceful and democratic elections in
2020. The EAC Heads of State welcomed that proposal,
and I hear similar positive reactions from Burundi's
major socioeconomic partners.

Political dialogue, security and human rights,
as well as socioeconomic development, are closely
interlinked, and it is important to see progress in all
three areas. In the political area, the plan outlined by
President Mkapa, and endorsed by the EAC Summit
on 20 May, offers a clear pathway towards progress.
The inter-Burundian dialogue, led by the Commission
nationale de dialogue inter-Burundais, as well as
recent initiatives by the Ombudsman, should evolve in
synchronization with the EAC-led process. A greater
international presence can considerably contribute to
improvements in the area of human rights and security.
Whereas the Government of Burundi has signalled its
readiness to accept a continued presence of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) in Burundi, the modalities of the
cooperation between the Government and OHCHR
remain to be agreed. I furthermore hope that the rest
of the 200 agreed military and human rights observers
of the African Union (AU) can soon be deployed to
Burundi and complement those AU observers who are
already in the country. The monitoring and reporting
of both institutions, in cooperation with the host
Government, have the potential to contribute to a
further stabilization of the situation.

Besides these two areas, we must not neglect the
socioeconomic and humanitarian situation. In recent
months, the PBC Burundi configuration focused in
particular on socioeconomic development, which was a
key aspect in the consultations that I held in Burundi and
Tanzania from 27 to 31 March. A written report on the
outcome of that visit was submitted to the PBC and the
Security Council in April. During the visit, I co-hosted a
socioeconomic meeting in Bujumbura together with His
Excellency Alain Aime Nyamitwe, Burundi's Minister
of External Relations and International Cooperation,
and Mr. Bo Viktor Nylund, the then United Nations
Resident Coordinator ad interim.

On the one hand, this working lunch provided for
an open exchange on the current socioeconomic and
humanitarian challenges and on the ongoing national
and international responses in the three priority
sectors - food security, health and education-that had
been identified during the socioeconomic consultations
in Geneva in November 2016. On the other hand, the
meeting was an opportunity for the Government and its
United Nations partners to jointly reflect on modalities
of cooperation.

At the end of that meeting, I agreed with the
Foreign Minister and the United Nations Resident
Coordinator ad interim to continue the socioeconomic
dialogue in the format of a joint retreat to be held with
the Government and its main international partners in
Bujumbura in July.

On 21 April, I travelled to Washington, DC,
where I met Burundi's Minister of Finance, Budget and
Privatization, as well as representatives of the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund. They
updated me on the current socioeconomic situation
and all welcomed the idea of organizing a retreat
between the Government and key multilateral partners
in Bujumbura.

The PBC Burundi configuration has now started
to prepare that socioeconomic retreat, which is
tentatively scheduled for 11 July. The retreat will allow
the Government and its international partners to share
updated macroeconomic and socioeconomic data,
inform one another about ongoing humanitarian and
socioeconomic assistance, and discuss the modalities
of cooperation. We hope that the participants will agree
on concrete steps to make cooperation more efficient
and overcome existing obstacles.

I am glad that Burundi's major bilateral partners,
EAC Facilitator President Mkapa and the representatives
of the EAC member States, also see value in continuing
the socioeconomic dialogue. Of course, and as
mentioned before, this dialogue cannot take place in
a vacuum. The political dialogue in Arusha and the
socioeconomic conversations are complementary. The
socioeconomic track can inform the Arusha process,
and vice versa.

The PBC Burundi configuration remains a platform
where actors from all three areas - political dialogue,
human rights and security, and the socioeconomic
situation - can compare notes and exchange
information on and assessments of the developments in
Burundi as we jointly, together with the Government
of Burundi, strive for progress in all three areas. I
will gladly inform the Council about the outcome of
the planned socioeconomic retreat and the further
engagement of the configuration.

