The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in which she requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Booto
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council welcomes the
announcement by the Supreme Court of Justice
on 27 November of the formal results of the
second round of the presidential election in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

"The Security Council congratulates
President Joseph Kabila on his election and
commends once again the Congolese people,
whose determination and sense of civic
responsibility enabled the first democratic
elections to be held in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in more than 40 years.

"The Security Council welcomes Mr. Jean-
Pierre Bemba's commitment, in his statement on
28 November 2006, to continue to participate
actively in Congolese politics within the
framework of the institutions of the Republic.
"The Security Council looks forward to the
completion of the electoral process, and reiterates
the need for all political parties to act responsibly
after the elections within the framework of
democratic institutions and the rule of law. The
Security Council attaches great importance to the
fact that the democratically elected Government
should work side by side with all Congolese
people and political actors to address the many
reconstruction and security challenges facing the
country and ensure the long-term peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of Congo.

"The Security Council expresses its sincere
appreciation for the central role played by the
Independent Electoral Commission and the
Congolese National Police in, respectively,
organizing the elections and providing security
during the electoral process. It commends the
invaluable support provided for the holding of the
elections by the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), the EUFOR operation and by all the
regional and international partners, in particular
the African Union, South Africa and the European
Union. The Security Council also recalls the Vital
roles that the International Committee of Eminent
Persons and the International Committee in
Support of the Transition (ICST) have been
playing throughout the electoral process.

"The Security Council pays tribute to the
donor community for the assistance they have
provided to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in particular to the electoral process, and
encourages the international community as a
whole to continue to assist the Democratic
Republic of the Congo during the process of
peace consolidation, reconstruction and recovery.

"The Security Council expresses its serious
concern at the recent hostilities launched by non-
integrated army units in Sake, in the North Kivu
province, and at the impact that these actions
have had on the civilian population including
women, children and the elderly. It calls on these
units to cease their hostilities, return without
delay to their initial positions and submit
themselves to the army integration or
demobilization processes.
06-64492
"The Security Council encourages
MONUC, in accordance with its mandate, to
continue to address with determination such
security challenges, and supports the steps it has
taken recently in this regard, particularly in the
district of Ituri and the North Kivu province."
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2006/50.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

