Mr. Gillerman (Israel): Mr. President, allow me
at the outset to commend you on your leadership of the
Council and to wish you success for the duration of
your tenure. I would also like to thank Mr. Alvaro de
Soto for his briefing and for being here with us today.

Let me start with a reminder. The international
community has clearly determined that any Palestinian
Government must fully adopt the following three
conditions: first, recognition of the State of Israel;
secondly, a halt to, and the disavowal of, terrorist
activities; and, thirdly, acceptance and implementation
of the agreements that have been previously signed
with Israel, including acceptance of the Road Map.

Those are firm principles, not paltry
recommendations. They cannot be bypassed, masked or
circumvented. They are the prerequisites for peace, and
they are not negotiable. That position was rightly
reiterated by the Quartet in its meeting on 2 February
and in a press statement this past Friday. As such, the
published agreement on a so-called unity government
does not address the reality on the ground. We have
been fooled by a piece of paper before, with tragic
consequences. I hope the world has learned its lesson.

Palestinian acts of terror, including the firing of
Qassam rockets and the smuggling of weapons into the
Gaza Strip, continue. In the past two days alone, five
Qassam rockets have been fired by Palestinians in the
Gaza Strip at the western Negev city of Sderot. That
adds up to more than 37 terrorist rocket attacks in the
past three weeks alone, as just pointed out by Mr. De
Soto, and over 140 since the ceasefire was agreed to at
the end of November - a ceasefire which Israel is
respecting and the Palestinians are consistently
violating. All the while, the abducted soldier Gilad
Shalit, held by Hamas, has yet to be released.

Two weeks ago, on Monday, 30 January, a 21-
year-old Palestinian from the Gaza Strip blew himself
up inside a bakery in the southern city of Eilat, killing
three Israelis. Islamic Jihad, the terrorists who claimed
responsibility for sending that young man to carry out a
suicide attack and murder Israelis in cold blood,
praised the terrorist attack, saying:

"This operation, which was carried out by the
heroes of the resistance in the lands of 1948, is
coming as an initiative of a different kind to wake
up consciences and to re-aim the rifles at the
enemy".

This so-called initiative of a different kind is,
sadly, not so different at all. It is the continuation of
the policy of the Palestinian leadership to wage a war
of terror against the State of Israel rather than put its
people on the road to statehood.

It is important for us to understand that the only
reason Hamas has sought a so-called unity Government
is precisely because the international pressure placed
on it was working.

By displaying a united front, the international
community, the Quartet and, indeed, the Council made
it clear to Hamas that it would not be recognized or
engaged until it meets the world's demands.

Hamas must now be made to understand that it
cannot bypass these conditions by creating a facade of
unity. The proof of the pudding is in the eating, and
Hamas and this new entity will be judged by their
actions, not just their words.

So far, however, Hamas has not even said the
right words. On the contrary, the words its leaders have
spoken carry a very different message. Ismail Radwan,
a Hamas spokesman, said:

"The agreement reached in Mecca does not mean
recognition of the Israeli entity it is a non-
recognition of the legitimacy of the Zionist
movement".
There cannot be a process so long as one side
refuses to acknowledge the existence of the other.

The Mecca agreement does not condemn violence
and terrorism either. How can there be a peace process
when one side is under the threat of constant terror and
violence? Previous agreements reached between Israel
and the Palestinians must be fulfilled before the unity
Government can be addressed. Previous agreements are
not part of a menu from which Hamas can pick and
choose only those elements it wants to fulfil.

The reality of the situation in Jerusalem has,
unfortunately, been blown so far out of proportion that
we must revisit the basic facts in order to understand
what is actually going on. I refer the Council to my
letter dated 7 February 2007, in which the details of the
salvage work were addressed. Because the reality has
been distorted and grossly politicized, it is also
worthwhile to reiterate those main points.

Since 1967, the Mughrabi gate has been the
access bridge to the Temple Mount for all non-
Muslims - Jews, Christians, tourists and others. Only
Muslims can enter through the other gates. Israel has
consistently respected the sanctity of the area and
shown the utmost sensitivity when dealing with the
various religious authorities. During the winter of
2004, part of the ramp leading up to the Mughrabi Gate
collapsed due to erosion caused by a snowstorm and an
earthquake. Following the collapse, a temporary
wooden bridge was constructed, as the ramp to the
Mughrabi gate was considered a dangerous structure.
By law, the debris must be removed or the collapsed
part rebuilt. As such, the salvage work under way in
the Jerusalem Archeological Park is for the sole
purpose of erecting support pillars for a permanent
access ramp, to replace a pre-existing ramp. This
bridge is for the benefit and safety of visitors to the
area. Just imagine the outcry around the world, from
Muslims and others, if that bridge were to be allowed
to collapse.

The work is taking place in sovereign Israeli
territory and outside the very sensitive area of the
Temple Mount. Israel is acting fully within its rights
and jurisdiction. The digging is being conducted with
full transparency, in accordance with the various
antiquities laws and under the auspices of leading
experts and professionals in the field, in coordination
with the various religious authorities. Israel has no
intention of affecting the Temple Mount during this
repair work or of causing any damage to it. Let me
assure you, Mr. President, and the members of the
Council that this delicate matter will continue to be
handled in a most courteous and sensitive way.

In contrast to the situation in Jerusalem, the
situation in Lebanon is a very real and substantial
matter of pressing concern that requires urgent action.

Last week, on Monday, 5 February, Israeli
soldiers discovered explosive devices in the north in a
situation that reminded many of the incident of 12 July
2006 which provoked last summer's war with
Hizbollah. Later in the week, Israeli soldiers were shot
at by the Lebanese army while looking for similar
explosive devices in the same area, north of the
technical fence and south of the Blue Line - all in
sovereign Israeli territory.

That incident, however, was just a small preview
of the real violations, which should concern and alarm
us all. The real violations unfolded on Friday, when the
Lebanese army, acting as it should, confiscated a
truckload of arms on its way to Hizbollah. As I have
told the Council previously, Hizbollah is rearming
through the trafficking of arms and munitions across
the Syrian-Lebanese border. This must be stopped and
the embargo enforced, as called for by resolution 1701
(2006). It is our belief that the Council should have
addressed that incident, which shed light on a
phenomenon that is widespread throughout Lebanon, in
particular the violation of resolutions 1559 (2004) and
1701 (2006).

May I also remind this Council that our boys Udi
Goldwasser and Eldad Regev, kidnapped seven months
ago, have still not been released. We have not even
received a sign of life. In voting for resolution 1701
(2006), the Council pledged to see their unconditional
release. I urge the Council today to follow through on
that commitment.

Hizbollah's rearming and what we saw in
Lebanon this morning - innocent people killed and
many others injured by bombings on public buses -
are the real situation in the Middle East and the real
issues which should be of great concern to all of us.
This bombing, coming on the eve of the second
anniversary of the assassination of Prime Minister
Rafik Hariri, no less - an event this Council is still
investigating - is a sobering reminder of the reality in
our region.

A disturbing trend is emerging whereby some
within the international community wish to advocate
concessions, coddle the extremists and prematurely
declare success. Those pronouncements do not serve
the interests of peace. They only embolden the
extremists, and send them a message that the
international community does not mean what it says.

The international community must send an
unequivocal message to the forces of extremism - to
Hamas and Hizbollah, and to their puppet masters Iran
and Syria, whose tentacles exert a destabilizing
influence - that it will no longer permit their
villainous meddling in our region.

Hope for our region, however, has not been lost.
In order to lay the groundwork for peace, Israel is
willing to work with the moderates, strengthen their
ability to fight terror, assist them in their efforts to
meet economic and humanitarian needs and help with
the development of their political agenda. In order for
those endeavours to be successful, however, our
neighbours need to make the right choices, and
moderation must prevail over extremism. If they do,
they will be surprised to learn how far Israel is willing
to go, together with them, to secure the reality of a
peaceful Middle East.

