Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): As those
who have spoken before me have done, I too would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized
this meeting to jointly hear the briefings of the
Chairpersons of the three Committees.

Together, the Committees provide a response to a
broad range of the acute threats of terrorism and
proliferation. In establishing them, the Security
Council began the patient work of improving the
capacity of all members of the international community
to combat terrorism. The Council should continue to
closely follow the work of the three Committees and to
encourage proper cooperation and exchange of
experiences among them in line with their respective
mandates. We are pleased with the specific progress
reported in that connection.

The three Security Council Committees and their
groups of experts should also continue to participate
actively in the work of the special team established to
promote the implementation of the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, which was adopted by the General
Assembly in September 2006. This undertaking is
contributing to greater coherence in the mobilization of
the United Nations, which France believes continues to
be essential.

While we fully endorse the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the presidency of the European
Union, I should like to underscore a few points.

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) plays an important part in our operations
to counter terrorism and proliferation. France hopes
that it will achieve all the goals set out in its
programme of work. As set out in Ambassador Burian's
briefing, significant progress has been made this year:
new national reports have been received, matrices have
been transmitted to States and there is a very clear
trend towards intensifying communication and
assistance efforts. However, much remains to be done.

Fifty-four States have yet to submit their national
reports, and almost 40 States have provided only one
report - and that perhaps two or three years ago. We
are therefore far off the mark. No effort should be
spared in assisting States to meet their obligations and
provide information to the Committee. In that regard,
we must make progress in establishing individual
dialogue with those States, identifying best practices
and developing working relationships with other
organizations such as the IAEA, the European Union
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. The 1540 Committee has a key role to play in
establishing a link between the supply of and demand
for assistance.

France hopes that we will be able to make
progress in those areas with a View to renewing the
Committee's mandate next April.

With Ambassador Verbeke, we welcome the
progress made by the 1267 Committee since the
beginning of the year to improve the effectiveness of
the sanctions regime.

First of all, my country, which was one of the
originators of the concept, would like to welcome the
Secretary-General's establishment of a focal point. We
also welcome the tailoring of guidelines for the various
sanctions Committees initiated by the 1267 Committee.
The focal point is now operational, and requests for
de-listing have been submitted to several sanctions
Committees through it. That is major progress for
sanctions regimes, beginning with the regime under the
1267 Committee, whose list includes several hundred
persons.

The 1267 Committee has made efforts to improve
the quality of its consolidated list by including several
new identifying indicators. We have made our
contribution in that regard and would like to thank all
Member States who have provided such information.
That will play a crucial role in the actual
implementation of sanctions. This effort must continue
to be a priority of the 1267 Committee.

But that will not be helpful if the consolidated list
remains static. In resolution 1735 (2006), the Council
said that it is vital to continually adapt the List to the
reality of the threat posed by Al-Qaida, the Taliban and
their associates. Adapting the section of the List
relating to the Taliban appears to us to be a priority.

Finally, we welcome the adoption by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, chaired by Ambassador Arias, of
the first Preliminary Implementation Assessments
(PIAs) for about 50 Member States pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001). This required a great deal of
work by the CTED and the experts of the three

subcommittees. This effort must continue, so that the
Committee can adopt as soon as possible a PIA for
each State and will then be able, on that basis, to
pursue a dialogue tailored to each respective State.

In order to strengthen the follow-up to the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), the
Committee will also, between now and the end of the
year, need to complete its report on overall
implementation. We hope that this study will show us
where we are going and allow us to set priorities.

Almost six years after the adoption of this
fundamental resolution, the Security Council should be
in a position to conduct an intermediate review. That is
why we are going through this exercise, which is at the
heart of the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
importance of questions raised by the representative of
Congo. There will be no international action that is
effective without collective ownership of the campaign
to combat terrorism and proliferation, which requires,
of course, the strengthening of cooperation with States
that need international assistance in order to meet their
obligations. We also serve for that purpose.

