Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): First of all, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this emergency
meeting of the Security Council in accordance with the
understanding reached within the Council.

I thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing. We also
welcome our brother, Riad Al-Malki, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Palestinian National Authority.

As I said at a previous special meeting of the
Council, I believe that there is a need to focus on the
Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48). That is because the
Palestinian issue, including the occupation, in spite of its
complexity, is sometimes summarized superficially -
for example, by stating that it mainly concerns the
settlements.

That is not so. The cause of the crisis and the
source of all the Violence and tension in the region over
the past six decades is the ongoing Israeli occupation.
The inhuman practices of the Israeli authorities, in

particular the blockade that is still in effect, the
expansion of settlements, the building of the racist
separation wall despite the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice, the daily systematic
humiliation of the Palestinian people at checkpoints
and in prisons, 11,000 detainees, including women and
children, the destruction of their homes, the attempts to
Judaize Jerusalem, the attacks on the Al-Aqsa mosque
and the ongoing attacks by racist settlers on Palestinian
citizens - the ongoing occupation is the main reason
for all these violations of international humanitarian
law and of the human rights of the Palestinian people.

Despite the adoption of resolution 1860 (2009),
despite the outcome of the donors conference held in
Sharm el-Sheikh on the reconstruction of Gaza and
despite the most recent initiative of the Secretary-
General aimed at lifting the blockade, the occupying
authorities have stubbornly maintained their blockade.
As the Israeli authorities are the occupying authorities,
this is considered a blatant violation of their obligations
under the Fourth Geneva Convention. They do this
because they are convinced - indeed, assured - of
their allies' support. That means that Israel no longer
has to abide by any laws.

The international community and the Security
Council in particular are still unable to refrain from
using double standards in dealing with Israel. The
international community is still not able to force Israel
to respect international law and international
humanitarian law or to implement Security Council
resolutions, despite all the reports from the various
United Nations bodies, agencies and commissions.

The most recent report is that of the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict,
better known as the Goldstone report. That report
reiterates that the occupying authorities have
committed grave violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law and that those acts
constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity.

The Goldstone report is not the first on this issue.
There were a number of previous reports, in particular
the report by Archbishop Desmond Tutu on the Beit
Hanoun massacre, the report of the international
alliance for the defence of the victims of aggression
and the report of the Board of Inquiry set up by the
Secretary-General. All of them have concluded that the
Israel army carried out direct and deliberate attacks
against United Nations headquarters despite the
Organization's immunity. That has resulted in a great
many deaths and injuries among those who sought
shelter there, including United Nations staff members.

That report called for an independent inquiry to
be held. However, the immunity that Israel enjoys
meant that that report experienced the same fate as
previous reports. This reinforces Israel's belief that it
cannot be touched, that it is above all laws. It
encourages Israel to continue to commit crimes.

However, the scale of the crimes committed
against Gaza, as described in the Goldstone report, is a
wake-up call for the international community and the
various international organizations. We must warn that
if we disregard what is contained in this report, we will
be losing ground in the progress made on human rights
since the adoption of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. That would make the concept and
ideals of human rights mere empty words, a tool to be
used by certain States for their own political purposes.
Violations of international law must be dealt with
firmly when committed by a party allied with big
Powers.

Before I address the issue of the Goldstone
report, I would like to respond to those who say that it
is not objective or fair. The Goldstone mission gathered
facts in the following ways. Reports from various
sources were considered. Interviews were conducted
with victims and individuals who had confirmed
information at their disposal. There were visits on the
ground. Video footage and photographs were analysed,
and satellite images were examined. Medical reports
were considered. The reports of forensic scientists were
analysed. Weapons were examined. There were calls
for written information to be provided. Public hearings
were held, and 188 individual interviews were held.
Over 300 pieces of information, reports and documents
were analysed.

Regardless of the nature of this information, this
amounts to over 10,000 pages, 30 videos and 1,200
photographs. Of course, the Government of Israel
simply refused to cooperate with the Mission.

We are aware of some of the procedures engaged
in by international organizations, but this clearly shows
that war crimes and crimes against humanity have been
committed. This is more important than the rules of
procedure, which cannot simply sail on seas of blood,
far removed from the Violence and destruction taking
place. They cannot mask the horrifying disabilities that
have been visited upon women, children and the
elderly.

The report reiterated more than once that the
Israeli authorities have committed war crimes and
crimes against humanity. It reaffirmed that the Israeli
blockade of the Gaza Strip was a policy of collective
punishment and a Violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention. The fact that the Security Council did not
speak out about this simply means that it accepts that
this should continue. The report lists the great number
of crimes committed by the Israeli army and the Israeli
Government against the Palestinian people. For
example:

"The Mission investigated several incidents
in which the Israeli armed forces used local
Palestinian residents to enter houses which might
be booby-trapped or harbour enemy combatants"
(A/HRC/12/48, para. 1925).

During those searches, the men were handcuffed and
blindfolded. The use of these individuals as human
shields constitutes a war crime.

The report also indicates a number of attacks that
were carried out, in particular the destruction of the
only flour mill in the Gaza Strip, the attempted
destruction of the water supply system and the
destruction of a poultry processing plant. All of these
are violations of international law and are considered
war crimes.

Israel has masked its true intentions since the
beginning of the war against Gaza, within the
framework of its Operation Cast Lead, an operation
carried out against a besieged people, a people on the
brink of famine, an occupied, besieged people who
have nothing left but their readiness to face up to the
occupation. That is exactly what Mr. Goldstone stated.
The Mission carried out a detailed investigation and
included in its report statements by Israeli political and
military leaders that they would target the
infrastructure of the Hamas movement. Hamas is the
freely and democratically elected authority of the
Palestinian people.
If this is what passes for a legitimate military
target - despite the fact that it constitutes a violation
of international humanitarian law built up over the past
century - that would make civilians and civilian
infrastructure legitimate targets. We can therefore
affirm that these attacks represent instances of
vengeance and collective punishment. And that
constitutes war crimes.

The report reaffirms in paragraph 1883 that the
Israeli army targeted all the inhabitants of Gaza and did
not distinguish between combatants and civilians, and
that this was the result of clear orders given to the
soldiers. These were not blunders. That is affirmed in
paragraph 1889. The report also clearly represents that
Palestinians were the targets of ongoing, systematic ill-
treatment and subject to humiliating and degrading
treatment, which violates the principles of international
law and human rights law. The Fact-Finding Mission
again concludes that such conduct represents collective
punishment of civilians. In other words, it violates the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Times of War and thus constitutes a
war crime.

The attack on Gaza was unprecedented in terms
of both its violence and ferocity and of the extent to
which it flouted basic tenets of international law and
human rights. The Israeli army knowingly targeted
hospitals, ambulances, mosques and United Nations
installations. Paragraph 36 states that the Fact-Finding
Mission found no proof of Israeli allegations that
Palestinian militants had used these buildings as
shields for military purposes.

The Security Council did not fulfil its
responsibility to protect civilians in the Gaza strip.
That is reaffirmed in paragraph 1916 of the report. The
report reiterates that the Mission noted that the
international community remained silent. The Security
Council did not take action to protect civilians in the
Gaza strip and the occupied Palestinian territory in
general. That makes it amply clear that the Security
Council did not adequately respond to the Gaza
blockade and its consequences. It would have been be
wise for the Council, given its responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security, to adopt
the report and to invite the Human Rights Council to
debate it in order to ensure that it did not suffer the
same fate as previous reports.

The Israeli position on the peace process has been
made very clear by declarations issued by the Israeli
authorities. They do not hesitate for one moment to
state that they will grant the Palestinians nothing. They
call for a racist Jewish State. They want to expel the
Palestinians who lived there before 1948. Special
emissaries to Israel return empty-handed again and
again, revealing the peace process as a simple
absurdity that will lead to nothing. Proof of this lies in
the fact that nothing has been done or achieved to lift
the blockade on Gaza and to end its colonization.

It is time to end the culture of impunity in the
region that has prevailed for so long and led to yet
another crisis. As Justice Goldstone has very rightly
said, it undermines all hopes and aspirations for peace
in the region. It is necessary to bring the criminals to
justice and to compensate victims of Israeli crimes in
order to move forward the peace process forward.
Israel's ongoing settlement activity, collective
punishment and humiliation of the Palestinian people
will only lead to an escalation of violence, death and
suffering.

I conclude by referring once more to the
Goldstone report. The commitments of the Israeli
Government to the Israeli people in no way justify the
policy of collective punishment against an occupied
people. Nothing can justify the fact that the Palestinian
people have been deprived by the disastrous operations
in Gaza of their right to live in dignity. This will lead
to succeeding generations growing up in a culture of
hatred and enmity and in a future offering very little
hope.

