Mr. Dejammet (France): The French delegation
appreciates the initiative of the Russian Federation and the
other delegations that called for a public Security Council
debate on the situation in Afghanistan. The recent
developments in the situation in that country justify the
Security Council holding such a debate. On several
occasions, in particular in the presidential statements of
15 February and 28 September 1996, the Security Council
has set out the principles for achieving a peaceful
settlement of the conflict. The Council demanded that the
Afghan parties put an end to the hostilities, put aside their
differences and cooperate with the United Nations Special
Mission. The Council called upon all States to refrain from
interfering in the internal affairs of Afghanistan and
requested those in a position to do so to take all steps to
promote peace and stability in that country. The Council
reaffirmed its commitment to the full sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan.

 

The situation in Afghanistan today shows that the
Council's appeals have not been heard. Today, as in the
past, war has descended upon this country, a war of
attrition in which offensives alternate with
counter-offensives. This war endangers peace and stability
in the entire region, hence the initiative taken by the
countries of the region. France does not intend to take the
side of any of the forces in this conflict. It calls for a
ceasefire and for dialogue with a view to national
reconciliation. It hopes to see, as many others have
already stated here, the formation of a Government of
national unity. The alternation of alliances and counter-
alliances in Afghanistan, which was described a few
minutes ago as a "kaleidoscope" (supra, p. 95), confirms
that this conflict cannot be resolved through weapons but
only through a political settlement based on an equitable
understanding that respects the interests of all. This
requires that all interference cease.

France's relationship with Afghanistan is a
long-standing one. It is a deep and rich relationship,
particularly in the cultural area. This is where my country
ardently hopes to contribute to achieving the goal of
reconciliation and to a political solution to this conflict.
We respect the energy and courage of the Afghan people.
My country supports the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and his efforts to help bring about a
ceasefire and the commencement of negotiations between
the Afghan parties, and I echo the praise of the efforts
already carried out by the United Nations in this field.
The continuation of the conflict in Afghanistan, as
we are well aware, is creating fertile soil for terrorist
activities. This is yet another reason for the international
community to intensify its efforts towards a settlement of
this issue.

France expresses its concern regarding respect for
human rights in Afghanistan, particularly, as others have
stated here this morning, regarding the treatment of
women both in education and in professional activities.

However, it is the Afghan population that remains
the primary victim of the fighting. France is among the
major suppliers of humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan
and intends to continue its assistance in this field. For this
purpose we are in constant contact with the French
non-governmental organizations which have remained on
site, as they have, with great courage, during the worst
hours of the history of Afghanistan. The French
delegation hopes that the activities of these
non- governmental organizations will continue unhindered,

 

as these organizations have carried out in the past and
continue to carry out an indispensable humanitarian role in
Afghanistan.

