Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): I also thank the Generals for
their informative briefings. Peacekeeping is a matter of
great interest in Nigeria. Our contingents have served
in various peacekeeping missions around the globe
since our attainment of independent status, and will
continue to do so. We therefore welcome the exchange
of ideas on this very important subject.

The changing nature of conflict has required that
peacekeeping operations evolve to meet the complex
demands they face. Those complexities are often linked
to factors such as the need to deploy adequate resources
to protect civilians in harsh conditions. Peacekeeping
missions are operating with partners that may lack the
capacity or will to do their part. There are often high
expectations for the protection of civilians at all times,
and missions operate in dynamic environments where
security situations can change very quickly.

Since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), the
protection of civilians has remained a top priority in
the context of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
However, experience has shown that mandates for
protecting civilians must be strategically, realistically
and holistically approached by peacekeeping
stakeholders, ensuring that they are clearly defined
from the beginning. Indeed, background knowledge
of the root causes of the conflict and the parties to
it is essential to a clear understanding of its nature,
and will help determine the appropriate strategy for
intervention. Proper coordination among the relevant
peacekeeping stakeholders is also fundamental to
facilitating the protection of civilians. The challenges
involved in protecting civilians are more daunting in
situations where large numbers have been displaced by
fighting among armed groups. Recently we have seen
civilians taking refuge in mission bases that were not
designed for accommodating large numbers ofrefugees.
We have also seen such bases coming under attack from
armed groups, a new dimension that calls for careful
assessment of the options available to peacekeeping
missions.

Concerning expectations from military contingents
on such altered security environments, we note that
with the changing nature of conflicts in recent years,
the traditional role of United Nations peacekeeping,
which used to focus strictly on monitoring ceasefires,
has given way to much more complex operations
with multiple tasks. Today peacekeeping has become
multidimensional, requiring a proportionate level
of response in order to maximize its effectiveness.
It is pertinent here to emphasize that peacekeeping
contingents should respond to the prevailing security
situation depending on an assessment ofthe seriousness
of the threats they face; they should be expected to
assume a robust posture in situations where the threat
level is high and maintain a standard operating mode
when they are not threatened.

In order to achieve speedy transitions for military
operations, military contingents should adapt rapidly to
their changing security challenges. The Council must
be prepared to review mandates from time to time to
help them to do so. The use of enablers is also crucial
in helping to keep the peace, help missions meet the
security challenges in their environment and improve
situational awareness and intelligence gathering. They
are also essential to enabling peacekeeping missions
to stay one step ahead of spoilers and other elements
whose activities pose serious threats to peace and
security.

In terms of fulfilling traditional mandates in a
changed political and military environment, we note
that this is another of the current challenges that
peacekeeping missions face. Traditional mandates
have emphasized ceasefire observations and neutrality.
In some situations, however, circumstances change
rapidly, so that peacekeepers who are merely observing
a ceasefire may find themselves in the line of fire.
That can have an impact on a peacekeeping mission's
effective discharge of its duties, and can also compel
a mission to change its posture. Drastic changes in
political and military environments therefore affect
peacekeeping missions' ability to fulfil traditional
mandates. The recent experience of the United Nations
Interim Disengagement Force underscores that point.

Before concluding, I would like to pose some
questions. The need for new planning and guidance
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali in the face of the
changing nature of the threats in Mali was highlighted
in Major General Kazura's briefing. We would like to
hear his views on what kind of planning and guidance
is required. Would that necessitate using enablers or
equipment such as unmanned aerial vehicles? We note
and commend the exercise of flexibility to enable Force
Commanders to deploy troops as necessary in conflict
environments, but what more can be done to enhance
their capabilities for protecting civilians in those areas?

I would like to conclude by paying tribute to the
Force Commanders in the various United Nations
missions and their dedicated staff, who carry out
crucial work with commitment, often in challenging
circumstances, in pursuit of the Council's mandates.

