Mr. Schori (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, Czech Republic,
Hungary, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia - and the associated countries Cyprus, Malta
and Turkey align themselves with this statement.

The prospect of peace must return to the Middle
East. There is no alternative to a political solution. The
European Union reiterates today its deep concern at the
chain of violent events during the last months and
holds that it is the responsibility of the Israeli as well
as the Palestinian authorities to do their utmost to
prevent actions resulting in new victims. We call on
both parties to act with maximum restraint and to do
their utmost to prevent terrorist acts and the growth of
sentiments of revenge.

New talks on security must get underway. The
European Union appeals to the Government of Israel
and to the Palestinian Authority to re-engage
immediately in security cooperation in order to reverse
the spiral of violence.

The humanitarian situation in the Palestinian
territories is of great concern. The current economic
crisis is unacceptable and threatens the stability of the
region and the prospects for peace. Both parties have a
duty to minimize tensions between them. Improving
the economic situation in the occupied territories is an
important element in that effort. On 26 February the
European Union decided to make the funds in its
existing Cash Facility - €60 million - available as
grants to the Palestinian Authority. The funds will be
disbursed in the context of a concerted international
effort and on the condition that the Palestinian
Authority draw up a revised budget as a basis for
international support and take more effective measures
against corruption and towards more transparency. The
European Union urges other donors to increase their
contributions to help meet the severe challenges facing
the Palestinian economy.

In view of its devastating effects on the
Palestinian economy, and therefore on political
stability, the European Union stresses the importance
of immediately ending the withholding of revenue
payments due to the Palestinian Authority. Israel
should transfer at once those tax revenues to the
Palestinian Authority. The European Union also
reiterates the importance of ending the blockades in the
Palestinian areas so that the acute economic and
humanitarian crises can be brought to an end. Israel
must allow and facilitate access for humanitarian
personnel and goods to Palestinian territories.

The European Union notes the recent easing of
the closures on Hebron, Bethlehem, Tulkarem and
Qualquilya, and believes that more needs to be done to
lift the closures in the Palestinian territories. During a
recent visit to the region, a European Union delegation
led by the Swedish Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Ms. Anna Lindh, expressed to Prime Minister Sharon
and Minister for Foreign Affairs Peres, as well as to
President Arafat, the European Union's willingness to
help move the peace process forward. It was underlined
that no opportunity for a peaceful settlement should be
missed, despite the present crisis in the region. The
European Union also raised the issue of the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in the Palestinian
territories, and of possible assistance by the
international community. In addition, the issues of
closures and transfers of tax revenues were raised by
the European Union.

Prime Minister Sharon expressed understanding
for the European Union's concerns over the various
practices of collective punishment. The European
Union reads this as a promising first step.

On the Israeli-Palestinian track, the European
Union understands that much ground has been covered
in open and frank negotiations. The European Union is
convinced that the progress made on all major issues
during the last negotiations should form the basis for
future talks on permanent status. The Union also looks
forward to a prompt resumption of the negotiations
between Israel, on the one hand, and Syria and
Lebanon, on the other.

The European Union reaffirms its view that the
basis for negotiations and for a just and lasting pace
must be Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) and other relevant resolutions. It must also
include the principle of the inadmissibility of
acquisition of territory by war, the need for every State
in the area to be able to live in security, and the
principle of land for peace. The European Union calls
upon the parties to reaffirm their commitments to the
basic principles established within the framework of
Madrid, Oslo and subsequent agreements, in
accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions.

The European Union deplores all acts of violence.
In this context, the European Union reiterates its
strongly held opinion that Israel's policy on extra-
judicial killings is unacceptable and contrary to the rule
of law, and it urges Israel to cease this practice and
thus respect international law. Extrajudicial killings are
an obstacle to peace and could provoke further
violence.

The European Union recalls its recent declaration
in response to the two executions carried out by the
Palestinian Authority on 13 January, encouraging
President Arafat to consider a moratorium on the death
penalty and reiterating its view that the abolition of the
death penalty worldwide would contribute to the
enhancement of human dignity.

For months we have seen Palestinian and Israeli
casualties. The situation is intolerable, and both parties
must shoulder their responsibilities and bring the
senseless violence and human suffering to a halt, and
thus open up perspectives and give hope to Palestinians
and Israelis for a better life in dignity and security. The
lack of progress in the peace process, including on the
settlements issue, lies at the heart of the Palestinian
population's frustration.

The international community, including the
United Nations and its Secretary-General, can play an
important role in assisting the parties. The European
Union supports the idea that, as requested by Security
Council members in November of last year, the
Secretary-General should explore with the parties
arrangements for an observer mission.

The European Union reiterates its willingness to
contribute to advancing the Middle East peace process.

