Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Allow me to join
others in welcoming you, Mr. Minister, to the Council
and to thank you for chairing our debate. I also thank
Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his very thorough
briefing, as well as the Permanent Representative of
Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for
their statements. Portugal naturally associates itself
with the statement to be delivered later by Ambassador
Mayr-Harting on behalf of the European Union.

We are at the dawn of the defining moment of the
Israeli-Palestinian peace process. Tomorrow, the
parties will meet for the fifth time in Amman since the
beginning of January. Portugal commends King
Abdullah II and the Jordanian Government for their
endeavours in facilitating direct talks between Israelis
and Palestinians on the basis of the September Quartet
statement. We are encouraged by those developments,
and we urge both sides to continue to engage seriously
in this important process and to take concrete steps
towards the full and timely implementation of the
Quartet's 23 September statement in all its elements.

Portugal welcomes the submission of the
Palestinian proposals on borders and security by the
Palestinian negotiator to his Israeli counterpart. We
also take note that Israel has responded by presenting a
number of issues for discussion. We strongly encourage
Israel to take a step further and also submit its views
on borders and security in clear terms.

The creation of an independent and viable
Palestinian State is long overdue. As I have repeatedly
stated, the only solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict lies in a political and comprehensive
agreement based on two States living side by side in
peace and security. Portugal therefore fully supports
the Quartet process and efforts to reach an agreement
between the parties on all core issues on the basis of
the internationally endorsed parameters by the end of
2012, at the latest. If that is to succeed, the parties must
commit themselves seriously to negotiations, show
good faith and refrain from provocative actions that
undermine confidence in each other.

Last week, the Council was briefed by Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Valerie
Amos on the dire humanitarian situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories. As she made perfectly
clear, the humanitarian dimension of the Israeli
occupation is of the gravest concern. In Gaza, the
blockade has just been reinforced with the removal of
Karni crossing infrastructure, leaving Kerem
Shalom - which has considerably less capacity - as
the sole commercial crossing between Gaza and Israel.
We regret this development, and urge the Government
of Israel to fully implement resolution 1860 (2009) in
order to allow the reconstruction of the destroyed and
damaged infrastructure and the recovery of the Gaza
economy, thereby reducing the population's
dependence on international aid.

On its part, Hamas, as the de facto authority in
Gaza, must end all rocket attacks against Israel, which
we vehemently condemn. All parties must refrain from
actions that exacerbate tensions and threaten calm and
security in and around Gaza. Israel's right to security
and to protect its own citizens, which is
unquestionable, must not be secured at the cost of
unnecessary human suffering in Gaza.

In the West Bank, the situation in Area C and
East Jerusalem is most troubling. Here, settlement
expansion, increasing settler violence, stringent zoning
and planning regimes, evictions and demolitions,
restrictions on access and movement that deny
Palestinians essential services, and the use of their land
and resources are fostering the forced displacement of
Palestinian communities. As Valerie Amos also recalled
on Wednesday, in the West Bank 46 per cent of land is
off-limits to Palestinians, who are faced with a severely
constrained and shrinking living space in which to
sustain their livelihoods.
The human and political toll of these policies and
developments on the ground is absolutely devastating.
By increasingly expanding settlements, which are
illegal under international law, fragmenting the West
Bank and isolating East Jerusalem from other
Palestinian territory, Israel is actively destroying the
viability of a contiguous and sovereign Palestinian
State, and consequently the prospects for peace.
Pending a political agreement that solves all final
status issues, Israel must halt its illegal actions and
fully abide by its obligations under international law.

The peace we all envision for the Middle East is a
lasting and comprehensive one. This year will mark the
tenth anniversary of the Arab Peace Initiative. Its
premises and elements remain as valid today as they
were a decade ago. We call upon Israelis and Arabs,
alongside the Quartet efforts on the Israeli-Palestinian
track, to seriously engage on the other dimensions of
the Arab-Israeli conflict. The full implementation of
the Arab Peace Initiative would enable Israel's
integration into its regional environment and the
normalization of its relations with the Arab and
Muslim world, thus enabling a stable, peaceful and
prosperous future for all in the Middle East.

A year ago, the people of Tunisia took to the
streets to demand freedom and democracy, and set in
motion a wave that quickly changed the face of the
Arab world. As the past year has shown, political
transition and societal transformation are complex and
challenge-ridden, but we trust that the legitimate
aspirations of the people of Tunisia, Egypt, Libya and
Yemen will be fulfilled. It is essential that those
charged with implementing transition and
transformation do so on the basis of dialogue,
inclusiveness, equal rights for all citizens, and the rule
of law. Exclusion, repression and violence are simply
not the answer. They are never the answer.

In this context, Portugal remains gravely
concerned about the continuing violence and the daily
loss of life in Syria. Notwithstanding the deployment
of the observer mission of the League of Arab States,
the Syrian authorities have not altered their brutal
repression of the Syrian people, and continue with the
widespread and systematic violation of human rights.
Thus, the situation continues to spiral dangerously out
of control, with the risk of plunging Syria and the
region into a bloody sectarian conflict.

Portugal fully supports and commends the efforts
of the League of Arab States in seeking a solution to
the current crisis, and urges the Syrian authorities to
abide by their commitment to immediately and fully
implementing the Arab plan of action of 2 November
2011 and the League of Arab States proposals for a
peaceful transition in Syria.

