Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan) (spoke in Spanish): Iwould
like to welcome you to the United Nations, Madam
President, and to congratulate you on the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela's presidency of the Council for
the month of February.

(spoke in English)

I would like to begin by recalling the debate we had
in the Council exactly a year ago on a very similar topic
(see S/PV.7389). On that occasion, the-then Permanent
Representative of Austria, Ambassador Martin Sajdik,
made a statement on behalf of the Group of Friends
of the Rule of Law, of which Japan is a member. He
stated that we should reaffirm our commitment to
all the purposes and the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations - I repeat, all the purposes and
principles - and should not do so selectively. We
cannot pick and choose. I would like to echo his words
today. In that connection, I have noticed in past Council
debates that few members have mentioned the principle
of fulfilling one's obligations under the Charter,
expressed specifically in paragraph 2, Article 2.

In the space of just one month, the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea conducted its fourth nuclear
test and launched a ballistic missile, in clear and flagrant
violation of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Keeping the principle of fulfilling our obligations
under the Charter in mind, we can see that this is not
merely a violation of Council resolutions; it is also a
totally unacceptable challenge to the Charter itself.
Such striking examples show how important it is that
we take concrete action to condemn these violations. In
doing so, we maintain the authority and credibility of
the United Nations. I would like to take this occasion
to urge the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
to comply fully with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and with its international commitments,
including its obligations under the Charter.

I have been very encouraged today by the statements
made by several delegations so far on that specific
point. In that connection, I would like to reiterate
a point I made in this Chamber last week, when we
discussed general issues related to sanctions under the
Venezuelan presidency (see S/PV.7620). In the words
of the report issued last year by the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 1874 (2009),

"The Panel continues to observe Member
States' lack of implementation of the Security
Council resolutions, noting that inaction and low
reporting levels may be due to lack ofwill, technical
capacity and/or issues within their domestic legal
systems." (S/2015/131, annex)

I would like to take this opportunity to call on all
Member States, including all of us on the Council,
to fulfil our own obligations under Security Council
resolutions and the Charter of the United Nations. That
is an important basis of the rule of law.

I welcome the reference in the concept note
(S/2016/103, annex) to the importance of the principle of
the peaceful settlement of disputes. It is critical to settle
disputes by peaceful means, based on international law
and not by force or coercion. In its most visible form, the
rule of law is embodied in judicial organs. By applying
international law, judicial organs such as international
courts disentangle complicated disputes and offer
legal solutions. Everyone in this Chamber agrees that
judicial bodies are important, but I cannot help noticing
that Member States, including my own, devote a lot of
energy to electing the judges of those bodies. We should
also be very active in actually making use of them.

Take the International Court of Justice as an
example. For seven decades, the Court has played a
constructive role in the field of the peaceful settlement
of international disputes through its resolution of 150
cases. In that context, I would like to reiterate my
Government's plea for more Member States to accept
the Court's compulsoryjurisdiction. For Member States
that have not yet done so, I would like to remind them
of the existence of the Handbook of the International
Court of Justice, which is available on the Court's
website. The Handbook, which is co-authored by seven
member States led by Switzerland, including Japan, can
serve as a useful reference.

I would like to emphasize that the rule of law
should also be respected on the oceans and seas. The
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (ITLOS),
based in Hamburg, Germany, can be a very effective
legal mechanism to that end. I am pleased to see that 23
cases have been referred to ITLOS in its 20-year history,
including four disputes involving my country, Japan. At
the same time, I believe that ITLOS has large potential
due to its excellentjudges, capable staff members ofthe
Registry and biannual budget of more than €18 million.
I take this opportunity to call for active utilization of
the Tribunal to ensure the rule of law on the seas.

Finally, let me refer to the Security Council and its
relations with the International Criminal Court (ICC).
The ICC, the first permanent international criminal
court, is one of the most effective tools available to
the Council to end impunity, thereby contributing to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Council can do more to enhance cooperation and
communication with the ICC.

I would like to end my statement by reaffirming
Japan's determination to continue on its path, together
with the United Nations, so that all the purposes and
principles of the Charter are duly observed in the actual
world.

