The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda in which they request to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table; the representatives of the
other aforementioned countries took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/603, containing the nineteenth report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

I should also like to draw the attention of
members to document 5/2005/620, which contains a
letter dated 3 October 2005 from the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

(spoke in French)
"The Security Council takes note of the
special report of the Secretary-General
(S/2005/603) dated 26 September 2005, on the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). It
expresses its concern over the presence of foreign
armed groups, which continue to pose a serious
threat to stability in the eastern part of the
country.

"The Security Council deplores in this
regard the failure of the Forces democratiques
pour la liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) to proceed
with the disarmament and repatriation of their
combatants, and exhorts them to do so without
further delay and in accordance with the
declaration that they signed in Rome on 31 March
2005.

"The Security Council recognizes the
attached decision, taken on 16 September 2005
by the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi, acting within the
framework of the Tripartite Plus One
Commission, to set the deadline of 30 September
2005 for FDLR to disarm or otherwise to face
measures intended to compel them to do so.
FDLR can no longer remain as an armed group in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

"The Security Council demands that FDLR
seize this opportunity to proceed voluntarily with
their disarmament and return to Rwanda without
any delay or preconditions.

"The Security Council commends the
political and military pressure placed on FDLR
by the Congolese Government and MONUC.

"The Security Council welcomes the steps
taken by the Government of Rwanda, with the
support of the international community, to
peacefully repatriate FDLR members returning to
Rwanda, in accordance with the applicable norms
of international law and with respect for the
rights and freedoms of the human person. The
Council encourages the Government of Rwanda
to continue to give the widest publicity to its
commitments.

"The Security Council demands the full
cooperation of FDLR with the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda in Arusha,

particularly with regard to the arrest and transfer
of indictees who remain at large.

"Moreover, the Security Council notes with
concern the incursion of members of the Lord's
Resistance Army into the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and welcomes the intention of the
Congolese Armed Forces to disarm this group in
cooperation with MONUC and in accordance
with its mandate as set out in resolution 1565
(2004).

"Further, the Security Council calls upon all
armed groups in the Great Lakes region of Africa
to act without delay to lay down their arms and
join the processes of political transition under
way in the region.

"The Security Council calls upon the States
of the region to deepen their cooperation with a
view to putting an end to the activities of illegal
armed groups. It recalls its adherence to respect
for the sovereignty of all States and underlines
that any recourse to the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity of a State is
contrary to the purposes and principles set out in
the Charter of the United Nations."

(spoke in English)

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2005/46.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

