Mr. Kassem: Because of the lateness of the hour,
I will confine myself to replying to two of this
morning's interventions and one from this late meeting.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zimbabwe
said that Zimbabwe's presence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is an enactment of the mutual
defence agreement of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) and came about
following a direct plea from the sovereign Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Zimbabwe's initial military involvement in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was under the
pretext of the SADC mutual defence arrangements.
However, it is the nature of this presence today which
is of interest to the Panel. Is the Zimbabwean military
presence today an enactment of this mutual defence
arrangement, or has it evolved into something else as
the conflict level subsides? If Zimbabwe's presence in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a burden on
its limited resources, why does it continue? Why have
there have been no troop reductions to reflect the level
of the conflict?

The Minister went on to state that Zimbabwe's
activities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
legitimate, bilateral, commercial relations between two
sovereign countries. Zimbabwe makes no secret of the
fact that it finances its presence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo through its joint ventures with
the Congolese Government. Zimbabwe's commercial
activities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
based on arrangements made with the Congolese
Government in Kinshasa. That is an undeniable fact. Is
it legal? That is another matter.

In order to better understand this, we have to ask
ourselves the following questions. Were the conditions
under which this commercial activity was established
normal? Are these activities considered legal by the
often sidelined Congolese law? Does the nature of
these commercial activities reflect commonly accepted
bilateral commercial ties? In fair market terms, does
the value of Zimbabwean gains from commercial
activities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
reflect the size of its modest investments? The answer
to these questions is no.

Regarding the conditions of the agreements made,
the Panel would just like to recall the signing of the
contracts transferring the Kababencola Mining
Company (KMC) to the Zimbabwean businessman
John Bredenkamp. This took place at the Grand Hotel
in Kinshasa, where all the senior management officials
of Gecamines were present, as well as senior
Zimbabwean military officers. The Zimbabwean side,
which had prepared the contract, allowed no one to
leave before the contract was signed, unchanged. As to
whether Congolese law was respected with regard to
the Zimbabwean concession, the Panel only wishes to
refer to the Sengamines deal. The legality of the
Congolese Government directly negotiating and
granting concessions on behalf of the Societe miniere
de Bakwanga (MIBA) should be seriously
considered- assuming that the Congolese
Government has that right, as a partner in MIBA.
However, the Congolese Government did not consult
Sibeka, the other partner in MIBA, when it decided to
grant Sengamines the best concession lands.
Irrespective of its legality, how can this be considered
as commonly accepted commercial behaviour?

Regarding the value of the investments, the
addendum clearly outlines that the Zimbabwean role
offered neither capital nor land nor entrepreneurship.
This, then, leads us to the two most important and
relevant questions: first, would Zimbabwe's
commercial activities in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo be negatively affected if it had no military
presence in the country? Secondly, are Zimbabwe's
policies and actions in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo aimed at prolonging the conflict so as to ensure
that this military presence continues in order to
safeguard its commercial activities? The answer to both
questions is yes.

One needs only to look at the areas where
Zimbabwean troops are deployed to realize how
strategically located they are with regard to their
concessions. Zimbabwe's aid to the Forces pour la
defense de la democratic (FDD), which is documented
in the addendum, also gives a clear example of how
this country is actively taking steps to prolong the
conflict.

Finally, if the Government of Zimbabwe still
holds the same position regarding the legality of these
contracts and concessions, then it should be the first to
welcome a review of its commercial activities in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. A revision of these
contracts, under the auspices of a third party and in an
atmosphere of transparency, would reconfirm their
nature. This would enable both Zimbabwe and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to then engage in
sound, unquestionable and sustainable commercial
relations under fair market terms. This is a
development that would unarguably be to the benefit of
both the Congolese and Zimbabwean people.

Turning to an intervention made by the
representative of the United Republic of Tanzania, who
alleged that his Government has been cooperative with
the Panel, I would state that the Panel in fact did not
understand why the Tanzanian Government showed so
much hostility - I repeat, so much hostility - to the
Panel, irrespective of the fact that the Tanzanian
Government appointed low- to medium-level officials
to meet with the Panel. These officials were actively -
I repeat, actively - discouraged from disclosing
information to the Panel. As for his allegation that the
Panel has twice accused the Bank of Tanzania of being
involved in illicit smuggling of diamonds originating in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Panel had
taken note of the Tanzanian Government's position,
especially the point of view conveyed by the Governor
of the Bank of Tanzania, with whom it met.
Accordingly, further investigations were carried out
which have once again revealed that the initial
information presented remains valid. In the case of the
Bank of Tanzania, evidence acquired by the Panel has
shown that certain individuals working at the Bank
have actively been marketing diamonds originating in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo a from the
premises of the Bank. It has knowledge of at least three
deals concluded there which were destined for
Antwerp, Amsterdam and Johannesburg. As regards the
United Republic of Tanzania, at this point I will stop.

I did not really intend to respond to the
representative of Zambia. But I was really surprised
when he put to me these questions with regard to
cooperation or lack thereof. In the end he posed a very
surprising question: where was the lack of cooperation
when my Government provided transport to the Panel?
As far as I know, it is the United Nations that supplies
all the needs of the Panel - and nobody else, including
Zambia.

As for the lack of cooperation, I would just like to
say a few words. At its meeting in Lusaka, the Panel
was surprised that even what could be considered
public information, in the papers, was not given freely
to the Panel. Officials who attended the meetings were
either evasive or simply uncooperative. In some
instances, junior officials clearly indicated that they
were not authorized to disclose any information to the
Panel. It should also be noted that, although a meeting
with President Chiluba had been scheduled, the Panel
learned upon arrival in Lusaka that the meeting had
been unilaterally cancelled. It was only after the
Panel's complaint to Minister of State Eric Silwamba
about Zambia's lack of cooperation - and he was
surprised - that a meeting with President Chiluba was
hastily arranged at the last minute before we left.
Furthermore, additional information requested in
writing from the Zambian Government was received
after the completion of the addendum.

