Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): It is an honour for
me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July and to thank you for the opportunity afforded
me to address the Council at this meeting, which is
devoted to the situation concerning my country, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would like also to
extend the gratitude of the Congolese Government and
the Congolese people to all members of the Security
Council for their commitment to my country's cause
and their ongoing concern as they seek to ensure that
peace and stability are fully restored throughout all of
its territory.

My delegation took note of the content of the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)(S/2017/435). I
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, who has just briefed the Council thereon.
We have a few observations to make regarding the
analysis of a number of issues addressed in the report,
with a view to deepening the Council's understanding.
In that regard, I would particularly focus on issues
pertaining to the political situation, the security situation
and human rights violations in the Kasai region. I will
also briefly touch upon the Force transformation and
the strategic dialogue.

As regards the political situation, and as noted in
the report in paragraph 3, following a lack of flexibility
and of concessions on the part of the Rassemblement
des forces politiques et sociales de la Republique
democratique du Congo acquises au changement,
the appointment of the members of the Government
has been delayed. This same attitude also prevailed
during the signing of the specific arrangements on the
implementation of the agreement and led to a delay in
the establishment of the National Council for Oversight
of the Agreement and the Electoral Process.

As regards the latter issue, it is important to stress
that, as part of the forthcoming establishment of said
council, a preparatory meeting was held on Monday,
3 July, that brought together the members ofthe council,
including representatives of the Majorite pre'sidentielle,
the opposition groups that signed the agreement of
18 October, part ofthe Rassemblement-those affiliated
with Felix Tshisekedi and their allies having refused
to participate - and representatives of civil society.
Another meeting involving those same individuals will
be held shortly and will focus on the appointment by
consensus of the chair of said body, the validation of
members' mandates and their entry into office, and the
drawing up of internal rules of procedure.

As regards the elections, as noted in the report, the
process of updating the voter register appears to be well
under way. Thirteen of the country's 26 provinces have
been fully covered by the process. Efforts are ongoing in
11 others but have not yet begun in the provinces ofKasai
and Kasai Central because of the insecurity prevailing
there as a result of the activities of the Kamwina Nsapu
militia. Indeed, in those provinces certain officers of
the Independent National Electoral Commission were
singled out; a number of offices were set ablaze and
equipment was destroyed. Today a certain degree of
calm has returned, and the Commission has committed
to once again deploying equipment. According to
the schedule that it has established, operations could
commence in both provinces as early as 20 July.

Hence it is critical that displaced persons who
fled abroad and to other parts of the country owing to
insecurity return to their homes to participate in the
process. To that end, the Government invites the peoples
of the two provinces to demonstrate greater civic-
mindedness so as to enable the process to take place
smoothly. It also calls upon political stakeholders of all
stripes, civil society and members of the international
community to avoid the use of any rhetoric likely to
rekindle tensions so as to create an environment
conducive to restoring calm and tranquillity, all of
which are vital to the holding of elections.

To date, the Independent National Electoral
Commission has already registered nearly 33 million of
the 45 million expected voters throughout the country.

Going back to the concern that certain Council
members expressed about the organization of elections,
the Council will agree that we need all of the country's
provinces to participate. The fact is that we cannot
contemplate organizing a ballot as important as the
presidential election without including Kasai and Kasai
Central provinces, which represent more than 10 per
cent of our entire voting population. It goes without
saying that if an election were held without them it
could undermine the credibility of the result, which in
turn could lead to disorder and trouble.

On the security front, the Government is aware of
the worrying situation in the eastern part of the country
and in both Kasais. That is why it remains mobilized
and focused on acting, with the army's help, to restore
order, peace and security and to continue to work to
eradicate national and foreign armed groups. In the
case of the Kasai provinces generally, as the report
acknowledges, our army is working to restore order and
curb insecurity there. In that regard, I should mention
that a large number - almost 1,700 - of militiamen
have surrendered, with their weapons, and have
received reintegration kits from the Government, while
138 children from their ranks have been handed over to
UNICEF and MONUSCO for social integration.

In connection with the human rights violations
reported in those provinces, the President of the
Republic had already instructed the Minister of Justice
to take the necessary steps to expedite investigations so
that all the victims who have experienced atrocities in
these regions can see justice done. In that context, the

behaviour of the marginal elements of the army who
have committed atrocities against civilians in Mwanza
Lomba has been condemned by a military court, and it
is therefore not true to say, as some Council members
have done, that their violations have gone unpunished.
The military court is continuing its investigations in
order to punish all the guilty parties.

Similarly, we are proceeding with action on
the murder of the two United Nations experts. The
Government, which has been cooperating on the
matter with MONUSCO and the United Nations Joint
Human Rights Office, is determined to conduct the
case transparently and to punish the perpetrators of
the crime. In that spirit, we welcomed the request of
the United States Government, which is participating
in the investigations through the Federal Bureau of
Investigation. As I have told the Council previously, my
Government is also ready and open to working with the
Swedish Government ifit would like us to. The ongoing
investigations have enabled us to arrest 11 more
suspects, of whom eight have been identified as having
played a direct role in the killing of the experts.

With regard to some Council members' statements,
my delegation was surprised by the virulent reactions to
our forces of law and order. It is a fact that, as happens
in every army all over the world, some marginal
elements have committed abuses that we deplore and
condemn. My Government has taken the necessary
steps to ensure that they are punished. Consider
the violence that occurred in the Kasais, where the
Kamwina Nsapu militia attacked our security forces,
killing and beheading some of them and exhibiting
their heads like trophies. If that happened in Council
members' countries, how would their forces of law and
order react? When a country's armed forces sometimes
react violently in the face of even minor events, that
we all live through, how do Council members react?
What steps do they take? I think we should avoid
double standards on such issues. To bring closure to
this topic, I would like to assure the Council that justice
will be rendered for the United Nations experts as well
as for their four Congolese companions, whose bodies
have never been found. Ultimately, justice will finally
be rendered to all of our compatriots who have fallen
victim to the violence of the Kamwina Nsapu militia.

The report also mentions the mass graves that have
been found in those parts of the country. In that regard,
I should point out what happened just in some cases
investigated by ajoint mission carried out by MONUSCO
and the military prosecutor of the Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC) in the
commune of Nganza a Kananga, where MONUSCO
claimed to have identified seven mass graves. When the
first alleged mass grave was opened, they found one
body. About 100 metres away, in a second alleged mass
grave, the investigators found a l2-bore shotgun. In the
third, they found two headless bodies. In Tshimbulu
territory, an alleged mass grave had been dug near the
place where the two United Nations experts' bodies
were found. The joint MONUSCO/FARDC teams found
a motorcycle in it. We are not saying that mass graves
do not exist. It is up to those who say that they exist
to show them to us and for investigators to establish
their existence. Unfortunately, as the Council will have
realized, in the cases I referred to, which MONUSCO
announced with much fanfare, the report avoids saying
anything that would contradict it.

The deplorable situation of displaced persons is
not confined to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
To date, as the report clearly highlights, the number
of refugees in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
at the beginning of June was 467,473, most of them
from neighbouring countries mentioned in the report.
Besides these refugees, there are also many foreign
armed groups. The regional approach to the situation is
therefore important and should continue.

As the report acknowledges with regard to the
deployment of MONUSCO and its fulfilment of its
mandate, the drawdown of 3,600 peacekeepers that
is the subject of one of the provisions of resolution
2348 (2017) has not yet taken place. Nor has the
operationalization of the Intervention Brigade.
According to our information, that cannot happen until
the current troops are replaced by far more seasoned
troops with equipment that is better adapted to dealing
with asymmetric conflict.

I should not conclude without thanking the United
Nations for its commitment and dedication to my
country's cause, as well as reiterating our gratitude to
all the members of the Security Council.

