Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we thank Mr. Tom Koenigs, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, and Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, for their briefings. We also welcome the
presence at this meeting of Mr. Massimo D'Alema,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Italy.

Peru wishes to highlight the willingness of the
Afghan people and Government to find a path to peace
and national reconciliation that will enable them to
stabilize the institutional regime. In this way, the
Government can improve the conditions for security
and reaffirm its authority, protect human rights and
promote efforts to progressively reduce illicit crops
that are a source of violence, corruption and instability.
Peru supports the proposals of the Afghan Government
and welcomes the reiterated will of the international
community to cooperate in these tasks and to achieve
the goals set out in the Afghanistan Compact.

The report of the Secretary-General presents us
with some progress in the areas of the functioning of
the democratic system, of security and of coordination
for regional and international cooperation. It describes
the fragile nature of the process. Reality presents us
with a picture in which the political and social order
continues to face serious threats that endanger the
achievements gained so far. Some of them may be seen
as challenges to the process of ownership of
development plans in Afghanistan.

We can identify a number of challenges in
various critical areas in Afghanistan. For example,
there are problems due to a lack of technical capacity
or preparedness on the part of staff, problems with
paying salaries, problems of corruption and in
coordination efforts between the central Government
and the provinces, as well as between the cooperating
institutions. Furthermore, given the existence of long-
entrenched practices resulting from conflict and
misrule, there is a need to introduce respect for human
rights and the rule of law, professionalism and
impartiality in the activities of the State.

There is general recognition of the fact that
security problems caused by terrorist and other
extremist groups are of the greatest concern. We
therefore need a strategy that vigorously opposes such
groups while at the same time weakening the social
fabric that protects and sustains them. The briefings
that we have heard this morning underline the fact that
behind these problems lie drug trafficking and its
negative effects: growing corruption and crime in
general. The eradication of drug crops and support for
rural development are therefore more necessary than
ever in order to reverse such trends.

Peru believes that the support of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is essential if we
are to deal in a comprehensive manner with the serious
problem of drugs on the basis of shared responsibility,
under the leadership of the Government of Afghanistan
and with the cooperation of the international
community.
Security in Afghanistan must be seen primarily as
the responsibility of the citizens themselves. Protecting
civilians and their human rights must be at the heart of
security operations. The ownership of the process
belongs to the Afghan people; they must adopt policies
that protect political, civil, social and economic rights.
The Afghans themselves must give priority to ensuring
that the legislation and governmental actions guarantee
equal rights and opportunities without any distinctions.
Impunity must not be tolerated for human rights
violations, including, in particular, those that have a
negative impact on or threaten the full integration of
women, their involvement in Afghan society and their
enjoyment of their rights and opportunities as citizens.

Finally, we support the work of United Nations
Mission of Assistance in Afghanistan and the extension
of its mandate, and we join in the appeal to the
international community to redouble its efforts to
support, in a properly coordinated manner, all activities
aimed at ensuring stability in Afghanistan, improving
security conditions, strengthening the institutional
fabric and laying the foundations for sustainable
economic growth in productive and viable activities.

