Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): Three years ago in Tokyo,
we all agreed to achieve Afghanistan's self-reliance.
In the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, the
principle of mutual accountability between Afghanistan
and the international community was agreed. While
Japan appreciates the progress made in various areas
of priority, such as counter-corruption and electoral
reform, it is disappointing that key positions, such as
attorney general and defence minister, have not yet been
filled. In view of the spirit of mutual accountability,
I strongly hope that the Afghan Government will
undertake further efforts in that regard.

As described in the Secretary-General's latest
report (S/2015/942) on Afghanistan, Afghan security
forces continue to face challenges. Since the last open
debate in September (see S/PV.7526), we have seen a
series of high-profile security breaches, including the
one in Kunduz - the fifth largest city in Afghanistan.
Improving the security situation is the most important
prerequisite for the development of Afghanistan. It
is crucial that an Afghan-led, Afghan-owned peace
process be advanced. In that context, Japan welcomes
the positive outcome of the meeting held in Islamabad
in early December. I would like to call upon all
stakeholders to move the ultimate goal of peace and
reconciliation forward.

When I made a statement on Afghanistan at the
Security Council in September, I emphasized the
notion of self-reliance. My key word today is again self-
reliance. As the former Special Representative of the
Government of Japan for Afghanistan and Pakistan, I
believe that Afghanistan has great potential to realize
self-reliance. Allow me to elaborate by mentioning
three areas.

First, the agriculture sector is key to generating
jobs and income, with a View to building greater social
stability and significantly reducing crime. Dr. Tetsu
Nakamura, a Japanese medical doctor, launched an
irrigation project in the Gamberi Desert in Nangarhar
province in 2003. By utilizing centuries-old traditional
Japanese irrigation technology, combined with
Afghanistan's own traditional methods, his Green
Ground project succeeded in establishing a highly
effective irrigation system. With an investment of
approximately $24 million to date, the desert has been
transformed into fertile land in the span of 10 years,
The Government of Japan has been cooperating with
the Afghan Government and other organizations to
introduce the same irrigation system in other areas of
Afghanistan. Two days ago, on 19 December, Japan
announced an agriculture and irrigation project worth
approximately $13.5 million, covering such northern
provinces as Kunduz, Baghlan and Takhar. That is
one vivid example of Japan's commitment to exploring
Afghanistan's potential in agriculture with a view to
achieving self-reliance.

Secondly, enhanced regional cooperation, with
improved regional connectivity, will provide a stronger
foundation for economic growth and self-reliance.
Afghanistanis rich inagricultural andmineralresources,
but they are not fully accessed or utilized owing to
many obstacles. The underdeveloped transportation
infrastructure, both within and outside Afghanistan, is
one such obstacle. This year, the Government of Japan
and the Asian Development Bank jointly promoted
preliminary studies on improving interconnectivity
in the region. One such study focuses the feasibility
of a railway connecting western Afghanistan to
Turkmenistan, which will hopefully open the door to
new economic opportunities. Another obstacle is the
lack of appropriate border controls. When effectively
put in place, border controls greatly enhance regional
economic activity. They also help to address the illicit
drug trafficking problem and its linkage with terrorist
financing. In that regard, Japan has been steadily
supporting counter-narcotics measures in the region
for the past 10 years, in cooperation with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Afghanistan and
its neighbouring countries.
Thirdly, human resources can lay the foundation for
Afghanistan's economic development and self-reliance,
and can enhance the capacity of future Government
operations. To give just one example, more than 400
young Afghan Government officials have received
postgraduate education in Japan under the Japan
International Cooperation Agency's programme for the
promotion and enhancement of the Afghan capacity for
effective development.

As a member of the Security Council starting in
January, we are determined to continue our assistance
to Afghanistan so that the Afghan Government can
achieve peace, stability and self-reliance. As the
Afghan Government implements its commitments on
the basis of mutual accountability and makes a crucial
transition towards self-reliance, Japan stands ready to
offer its support in cooperation with the international
community.

Finally, I wish to extend my appreciation to Special
Representative Haysom and his team in Kabul for their
tireless efforts.

