Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me also
thank Under-Secretaries-General Pascoe and Malcorra
for their comprehensive briefings today, as well as the
Permanent Observer of the African Union (AU) and
Ambassador Duale, Permanent Representative of
Somalia, for being with us today.

The United States remains committed to several
goals in Somalia: first, supporting Somalia's
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) in its battle
against al-Shabaab and other Violent extremists;
secondly, bolstering the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM); thirdly, helping the TFG to
establish itself as a legitimate and stable Government
that can control its territory and provide basic services
to its citizens; fourthly, partnering with the
international community to ease the suffering of the
Somali people; and fifthly, battling the scourge of
piracy off the Somali coast.

The United States condemns in the strongest
possible terms the recent military offensives designed
to topple the TFG that were launched by al-Shabaab,
which the United States has designated as a foreign
terrorist organization. We are particularly concerned by
the recent influx of foreign fighters into Mogadishu's
already precarious security environment. Such
extremists aim to prolong the cycle of Violence and
poverty that has ravaged Somalia for almost two
decades. The international community must stand
united in its support for the TFG.

If the extremists are successful, we could lose yet
another generation of Somalis to war, disease and
desperate poverty. The people of Somalia have suffered
far too much for far too long. The international
community must support their efforts to improve
security and extend the reach of their Government
institutions, as well as provide life-saving humanitarian
assistance. Without our support, Somalia risks

09-3985]
becoming a lasting safe haven and training ground for
those plotting terrorist attacks around the world.

AMISOM. is playing an indispensable role in
helping to stabilize the security situation on the
ground. In particular, we salute the dedication of the
Ugandan and Burundian forces. But their bravery alone
is not enough. AMISOM. needs the support of the
United Nations and its Member States to achieve its
objectives. That is why the United States continues to
support the provision of a United Nations support
package to AMISOM, as approved by the Council in
resolution 1872 (2009).

My Government has also provided more than
$135 million in training, equipment and logistical
support to AMISOM. since the Mission's creation. But
more still must be done. We call on the States of the
African Union to consider sending more peacekeepers
to this vital Mission. We also call on United Nations
Member States to extend generous support for
AMISOM's activities.

We have to do more than support the TFG and
AMISOM. We must also bring immense pressure to
bear on those working to subvert the TFG and the
Djibouti process and to undermine efforts to stabilize
Somalia. It is no secret that al-Shabaab has been
bolstered by Al-Qaida operatives and by the hundreds
of foreign fighters who have been pouring into
Somalia. We must all do a better job of stemming the
flow of extremists, arms and financial support into
Somalia.

The United States is particularly concerned about
the financial, military, logistical and political support
that the Government of Eritrea is offering to al-
Shabaab and other extremists in Somalia. The United
States and others have tried repeatedly to engage the
Eritrean leadership, including with the aim to convince
them to stop, but to date the Eritreans have rebuffed
attempts to open a substantive dialogue. But even now
it is not too late. The United States calls on the
Government of Eritrea to seize this window of
opportunity to change course.

The United States is extremely concerned about
the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Somalia, as
described by Under-Secretary-General Pascoe here
today. To date, nearly 500,000 Somali refugees have
fled the country, and more than 1.5 million people have
been internally displaced. In January 2009, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

(FAO) reported that 3.2 million people needed
humanitarian assistance in Somalia, roughly 43 per
cent of the population.

To help meet these needs, the United States
Government has provided more than $149 million in
fiscal year 2009 for humanitarian assistance
programmes in Somalia, including more than
$9 million to support agriculture and food security,
economic and market systems, health and nutrition
protection and clean water, sanitation and improved
hygiene.

Security in Somalia properly tends to be the
international community's main focus - and it should
be, as the security situation severely exacerbates the
humanitarian crisis. But even so, the international
community must redouble its aid efforts to avoid a
wider humanitarian catastrophe.

We are also quite concerned about the large
influx of refugees into Kenya. Geography will continue
to make Kenya, along with Ethiopia, Djibouti and
Yemen, a primary destination for Somalis fleeing their
country. But we urgently need to expand refugee camp
capacity in Kenya. The three primary camps near the
border are terribly overcrowded, with more than
275,000 refugees crammed into a space designed for
90,000 people. The United States and others are
supporting the efforts of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to acquire
more land for new camps and to ease the burden that
Kenyan communities bear from hosting so many
refugees.

Finally, let me say a few words about piracy. As
we all know, piracy off shore is but a symptom of the
larger problems facing Somalia on shore. But even as
we work to cure the disease we must continue to treat
the symptoms. The international response to the piracy
problem has been impressive, but we still face
significant legal, logistical and political problems over
one key component of an effective deterrence strategy.
That is the prosecution of suspected pirates. My
Government believes that States victimized or affected
by piracy bear the primary responsibility for
prosecuting pirates. These States must step up and
shoulder their share of the burden of the prosecutions,
as France, the Netherlands and others have done. In the
rare cases in which a State truly cannot prosecute, we
applaud the willingness of regional States, such as
Kenya, to let themselves be considered as alternative
venues. But in such cases we believe that the affected
States should be responsible for helping to defray the
trial's costs.

In conclusion, let me say that all of us can see
that paying ransom perpetuates acts of piracy. The
United States does not offer concessions to hostage-
takers, whether they are driven by political or financial
motives, and we encourage other States to take a
similar position. We would, in particular, be interested
in forming a group of so-called non-concession States
to work together to help slow the rise of piracy off the
Somali coast.

The United States looks forward to continuing to
work with the United Nations and all Member States to
finally forge a stable, secure and more prosperous
Somalia.

